The Project Gutenberg EBook of David the Shepherd Boy, by Amy Steedman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: David the Shepherd Boy

Author: Amy Steedman

Release Date: May 16, 2008 [EBook #25486]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID THE SHEPHERD BOY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: "There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he
keepeth the sheep." 1. Sam. xvi. 11.]




DAVID THE SHEPHERD BOY

By AMY STEEDMAN


[Illustration]


THOMAS NELSON & SONS
NEW YORK




BOOKS IN THIS SERIES

  JOSEPH THE DREAMER
  THE BABE IN THE BULRUSHES
  DAVID THE SHEPHERD BOY
  THE CHILD JESUS
  THE GOOD PHYSICIAN
  THE GOOD SHEPHERD


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




The Story of David

[Illustration]


Up amongst the hills, perched like the nest of a bird on one of the long
low ridges, lies the little town of Bethlehem. It was but a small town
at the time this story begins, and there was nothing about it to make it
at all famous. It lay out of the beaten track, and any one wanting to
visit it must needs climb the long winding road that led from the plain
beneath, through olive groves and sheepfields, up to the city gate--a
steep, difficult road, leading nowhere but to the little town itself.

It was in these fields on the slope of the hills that David, the
shepherd boy of Bethlehem, spent his days watching his father's flocks.
That father, whose name was Jesse, was one of the chief men of the
town, and David was the youngest of all his sons.

There were seven big brothers at home, and it was no wonder Jesse was
proud of his sons. They were tall, splendid young men, all of them doing
men's work now, and taking very little notice of the youngest, who was
still only a small boy, chiefly useful in looking after the sheep.

But though David was but little thought of, no one could say that he did
not do his work well. There was not a more careful or watchful shepherd
on all the hills around Bethlehem. He knew each one of his sheep, and
never allowed one to stray. He always led them to the best pasture, and
found the coolest and freshest water for them to drink. Then, too, he
was as brave as a lion, and if any wild beast came lurking round hoping
to snatch a lamb away, David was up at once and would attack the
fiercest beast single-handed. Nothing could ever do any harm to his
flock.

Now it happened that one day while David was, as usual, out in the
fields that a sudden stir of excitement awoke in the little town of
Bethlehem. Men gathered round the city gate, and with anxious, fearful
eyes looked down the long white road that led up from the plain below.
And yet there seemed nothing there to make them look so terrified and
anxious. Only an old feeble man was slowly climbing up towards the town.
He was driving a heifer before him, and carrying what looked like a horn
in his hand.

[Illustration: An old feeble man was slowly climbing up towards the
town.]

But the people whispered together that the old man was none other than
Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, who carried God's messages. He must be
bringing a message to them, and who knew if it was good or evil. They
tried with uneasy minds to remember if they had been doing anything
wrong of late as they watched the old man drawing nearer and nearer.
Then at last the chief men of the town went out to meet him.

"Comest thou peaceably?" they asked anxiously.

The old man lifted his head and looked at them kindly as he echoed their
words.

"Peaceably," he answered at once; "I am come to sacrifice unto the
Lord."

A great sigh of relief went up from the people. The visit was a mark of
God's favour and not of His displeasure.

It was true, indeed, that Samuel had come to offer sacrifice, but he had
come also on a secret errand about which no man knew but himself. God
had bidden him take his horn of oil and anoint one of the sons of Jesse
to be king over His people instead of Saul, the present king, who had
displeased Him. But it was to be done secretly. Saul must not hear of
it, or his vengeance would be swift.

It was in Jesse's house that the feast of the sacrifice was prepared,
and Samuel ordered that all the sons of the house should pass before him
as they went to attend the sacrifice.

The first to come was Eliab, Jesse's eldest son, and when Samuel saw him
he felt sure that this was the man who was to be anointed king. He was a
splendid young man, tall and strong and handsome, looking almost as
kingly as Saul himself.

"Surely this is he," murmured Samuel to himself. But God's answer came
quickly. No, this was not the man. Samuel saw only the outward signs of
strength and beauty, but God saw deeper into the heart.

So the eldest son passed on, and one by one the six brothers followed,
all sons that a father might well be proud of. But God sent no sign to
show that any of them was the chosen king.

[Illustration: "Surely this is he," murmured Samuel to himself.]

Samuel was puzzled. What could it mean? Then he turned again to Jesse.

"Are here all thy children?" he asked.

Surprised at the question, Jesse suddenly remembered the little lad,
his youngest son, who was out in the fields tending the sheep. Was it
possible that Samuel had any use for him?

"Send and fetch him," ordered Samuel instantly, "for we will not sit
down till he comes hither."

So a messenger was sent in haste to bring David; and presently he came
hurrying in, and as soon as Samuel saw him he knew his search was ended.

He was only a little shepherd lad with the breath of the hills about
him, his golden hair tossed by the wind, his fair face flushed, and his
sunburned hand holding his shepherd's crook. But there was no doubt that
God had chosen him.

"Arise and anoint him, for this is he," said God's voice in Samuel's
heart.

Slowly, then, the old man rose and held the oil aloft and poured it upon
the boy's bowed head, while the rest of the company looked silently on.

They were puzzled to know what it all meant. Perhaps the elder brothers
were envious, and wondered why this mere child should be singled out for
special favour. But no one dared to question God's messenger.

Nothing further happened just then. Samuel returned as he had come by
the winding white road, and before long his visit was forgotten as the
people settled to their work again.

[Illustration: Saul tries to kill David]

Only David, out in the fields, thought more and more about what had
happened, and grew more and more certain that it had been a call from
God to do some special work for Him. The wonder of it filled his mind,
but it never interfered with his work.

There was little time for idle dreaming in the boy's life. He was as
watchful as ever in his care for his sheep and as courageous as ever in
guarding them from prowling beasts. Even in his leisure time he was busy
too, and there was not one of the sunny hours of daylight that he
wasted.

He loved music, and he taught himself to play on the harp, practising so
carefully and patiently that his fingers grew most wonderfully skilful.
Then he made songs to go to the music, some of the most beautiful songs
that ever have been made in all the world. Almost every child to-day
knows his beautiful song about the Good Shepherd: "The Lord is my
shepherd, I shall not want."

There was another thing, too, that he learned to do with the same care
and patient perseverance, and that was to use his shepherd's sling.
There was no boy in all Bethlehem who could shoot as straight as he
could. He never missed his mark.

It was no great thing, perhaps, to make music and aim straight, but it
was a great thing to do what lay nearest his hand with all his might.
Perhaps some day God would make use of his singing or have some work for
a boy who had a quick eye and a sure aim. Who could tell?

So David learned to do his very best, and before very long God's call
came to him.

[Illustration: Saul sat day after day in his darkened tent.]

Saul, the King of Israel, sat day after day in his darkened tent ill and
full of misery. No one dared to go near him, and his servants whispered
together, "It is an evil spirit from the Lord that troubles him."

Then some one suggested that perhaps music might help to cheer him and
drive the evil spirit from him.

"Let our lord now command thy servants to seek out a man who is a
cunning player on a harp," they said to the king, "and it shall come to
pass that, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, he shall play
with his hand, and thou shalt be well."

[Illustration: David drew magic music from his harp's strings.]

Saul listened to their words, and hope crept into his heart.

"Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him unto me," he
said eagerly.

Now the fame of David's playing and singing had spread even beyond
Bethlehem. "We must send for David, the son of Jesse," said the king's
servants at once. He was the very person they wanted. Not only could he
sing and play, but he was a good boy, brave and fearless, and best of
all, as the servants said, "The Lord is with him."

So the shepherd boy was brought to the king's darkened tent, ready to do
his bidding. Sitting there in the dim light, he drew such magic music
from his harp's strings, and sang such sweet songs, that the very song
of the birds seemed to be filling the tent. The king, as he listened,
seemed to feel the breath of the mountain fields, to hear the call of
the sheepfold and the murmur of the dancing streams. It acted like a
charm. The black misery was lifted from his heart, and the evil spirit
was put to flight by the song of the shepherd boy.

It was no wonder, then, that the king, for a time at least, loved the
boy with his bright face and sunny hair, and wanted to keep him as his
armour-bearer. But perhaps, as Saul grew well and had no further need of
the music, David was no longer wanted, and so he went back again to the
Bethlehem fields to look after his sheep.

God had made use of David's skill in music, and before very long another
call came to him. This time the need was for one who could aim straight,
who had a quick eye and a steady hand.

War had broken out. The fierce Philistines had come up with their great
armies to try and conquer the land. Every man in Israel who could fight
was called up to protect his country. Already David's three elder
brothers had joined Saul's army, which was preparing to fight the enemy.

[Illustration: Jesse sends David to the camp.]

On either side of a narrow valley, divided by a stream which ran along
over smooth stones, the two armies faced each other. There they were
encamped, like wild beasts ready to fly at each other's throats. At any
moment the fight might begin, and that stream be stained red with blood.
Only the Philistines were far the strongest, and the Israelites had but
little chance of victory.

This valley was seven or eight miles distant from the little town of
Bethlehem, and Jesse waited anxiously, day after day, for news of his
three sons. At last he could bear the anxiety no longer, and he
determined to send David to the camp to carry food to his brothers and
bring back news how they fared.

So, very early one morning, David set out on his errand. He had
carefully put his sheep under the care of another shepherd, and he took
with him parched corn and loaves of bread for his brothers, as well as
ten cheeses which his father was sending to the officers under whom they
served.

It was not long before the boy came within sight of the valley, and his
heart began to beat with excitement, for he saw that he had arrived just
as something was about to happen. The armies were drawn up in battle
array, and suddenly a great shout went up from both sides. It was the
battle-cry of the two armies which sounded in his ears.

There was no time now to carry food and gifts, so David quickly left his
load at the entrance to the camp and hurried on to search for his
brothers. He had learned to find his way about a camp, where for a
short time he had been Saul's armour-bearer. So now he went swiftly
among the soldiers, until at last he found his brothers. "Were they
well?" he eagerly asked them; "and what were they doing?"

[Illustration: Eagerly David began to ask them what it meant.]

But even while he spoke there was a stir among the Philistines, and all
eyes were turned to watch, all ears were strained to hear the enemy's
challenge, which rang out clearly across the narrow valley.

Out of the rank of the Philistines there had stepped a man so tall and
strong that he appeared to be a giant. He was more than nine feet high,
and the armour which he wore was so solid and heavy that it would have
crushed any ordinary man to the earth.

This was Goliath, the great champion of the Philistines. Every morning
and every evening he strode proudly out and defied the Israelites,
bidding them find a champion who would come and fight with him. Once
again his challenge rang out on the clear air,--

"Choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me. If he be able to
fight with me and to kill me, then will we be your servants; but if I
prevail against him and kill him, then shall ye be our servants and
serve us. I defy the armies of Israel this day. Give me a man that we
may fight together."

A great silence fell after the champion had shouted his last words of
defiance. There was no answer from the Israelites. No man had courage
enough to dream of accepting the challenge.

David looked round him in amazement, and his cheeks burned with shame.
What were the people doing to allow this boasting heathen Philistine to
defy the armies of the living God? Eagerly he turned to the men around
him and began to ask them what it meant. The soldiers answered him
shortly. No, there was no one who dared to go forth and fight Goliath.
The king had promised great rewards to any man who would kill the giant.
But no one had dared to try.

David's elder brothers heard his questions, and seeing how amazed he
was, they began to grow angry. Did he mean to reproach them? Perhaps he
thought of offering himself to fight the champion. It was time that this
shepherd boy should be put in his proper place. So his eldest brother
turned to him with a sneer.

[Illustration: While he kept his father's sheep he had often to defend
them from wild beasts.]

"Why camest thou hither?" he asked. "And with whom hast thou left those
few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride and the naughtiness of thy
heart, for thou hast come down that thou mightest see the battle."

It could not have been very easy to bear this taunt. But David had
learned to conquer himself before he set out to conquer giants. So he
answered quietly instead of flashing back an angry reply.

"What have I done?" he asked. "May I not ask a harmless question?"

There were many questions he still wished to ask, and presently the
soldiers began to repeat his words one to another, until at last the
report was spread that some one had been found ready and willing to
answer the challenge of the giant Philistine. And of course the news
soon reached the king's ear. Saul sent immediately and ordered that the
shepherd lad should be brought to him. He had quite forgotten about the
boy who had charmed away his black moods with the magic music of his
harp. And David had grown and changed since those days.

So now, when David stood before the king, Saul had no idea who he was,
and his one thought, as he looked at the slender youth, was that it was
madness to think of such a mere boy going out to give battle to the
great giant.

"Thou art not able to go against this Philistine," he said; "for thou
art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth."

But David answered eagerly. He did not boast, but spoke steadily and
wisely. True, he had not been trained as a soldier, but his courage and
his strength had both been already proved. And he went on to tell the
king that while he kept his father's sheep he had often to defend them
from wild beasts. Once he had fought with a lion and a bear
single-handed and had killed them both.

[Illustration: Saul puts his own armour on David.]

It was not in his own strength that he trusted. "The Lord that delivered
me out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw of the bear, He will
deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine," he ended triumphantly.

Faith in God was David's sure defence; and Saul as he listened bowed his
head in shame, for it was the faith which he himself had lost. It was
this faith, he knew, which might win the victory. It was an echo of the
confidence he had once felt when his whole trust had been in God, and he
recognized the true ring of the boy's courage.

"Go," he said, "and the Lord be with thee."

Then the king was eager to put his own armour on David, and he bade the
soldiers arm him with the royal sword and put a brass helmet on his
head. But David was not accustomed to wear heavy armour, and had never
been trained to use a sword. No, he would do his best with the only
weapon he thoroughly understood.

So putting on once more his shepherd's coat, he took his sling in his
hand, and as he crossed the brook at the foot of the valley he filled
his shepherd's bag with smooth stones and fitted one of them to his
sling. Then with springing steps he began to climb the opposite side.

The rage of Goliath was great when he saw the slender, fair-haired boy,
without either armour or sword, coming so boldly to meet him.

"Am I a dog," he shouted, "that thou comest to me with staves?"

[Illustration: David's fight with Goliath.]

"I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the armies
of Israel, whom thou hast defied," rang out the clear answer. "The Lord
saveth not with sword and spear; for the battle is the Lord's, and He
will give you into our hands."

The great giant lifted his spear, ready with one blow to end this
unequal fight. But David did not wait to come within reach of the spear.
Before Goliath came near, the boy stopped suddenly and sent a stone
whizzing through the air straight at the giant's head. The stone sank
into Goliath's forehead, and the great figure reeled and fell with a
mighty crash to the earth. Instantly David seized his sword and cut off
his head.

[Illustration: David seized his sword and cut off his head.]

So God's people were saved, and so again God made use of the shepherd
boy's training and skill, this time to win a great victory for His
people.

The fair-haired shepherd boy had done his duty faithfully in the fields
on the hillside at home, where he was but little thought of. He had
always tried to do his best, whether he was keeping the sheep or
practising with his sling or learning to play the harp. And now,
suddenly, the great opportunity had come and found him ready.

He had entered the camp an unnoticed country lad, carrying provisions to
his brothers. Now every soldier in the camp was shouting his name; the
king was ready to shower rewards and honors upon him. He was the hero of
the hour.

The pleasant days in the Bethlehem fields were now over for David. There
was no thought of allowing him to return to his work. No, the king
declared he must remain as a soldier in the army, ready to defend his
king and country. Though he was still a mere boy he was placed in
command and set over the men of war.

It was much more difficult work than looking after sheep, and as time
went on and dangers and difficulties beset him on every side, David must
often have longed for the old quiet days on the hillside. His path was
rough and dangerous now, and sad to say his feet often slipped and he
wandered far astray, but always he held fast to his faith in God, and
found his way back to the straight path.

As the years went by Samuel's promise was at last fulfilled, and David
was made king over God's chosen people. David had often forgotten God,
but God had never forgotten him.

What a change it was from the days when he wandered about the fields in
his sheepskin coat, often sleeping out under the stars, possessing only
his harp and his shepherd's sling.

Now he wore royal robes, and there was a crown of pure gold upon his
head. Instead of the starry sky for a roof, he now lived in a palace of
cedar wood.

And he knew surely that it was God who had taken care of him; that it
was God who had set the crown of gold upon his head, the seal to the
promise made in that long ago day when the old prophet had poured the
anointing oil upon the head of the wandering shepherd boy.

Looking back, he saw that he had made many mistakes, that his soul was
stained with many sins; but he knew, too, that God would listen when he
prayed, "Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow."

As a little shepherd lad he had cared far more for his sheep than his
own safety. He had always been ready to risk his life for them. So now,
when he became king, his people were just as precious to him as his
sheep had been. He cared for them with all his heart. He was prepared to
suffer himself rather than any hurt should come near them.

So perhaps he was, after all, not unworthy to stand as a type of the
great King, "great David's greater Son," the little Baby who was to be
born in the town of Bethlehem, the Good Shepherd who was to lay down His
life for His sheep.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of David the Shepherd Boy, by Amy Steedman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID THE SHEPHERD BOY ***

***** This file should be named 25486.txt or 25486.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/4/8/25486/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
