The Project Gutenberg Etext of Light, Life, and Love
by W. R. Inge

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg file.

Please do not remove this header information.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
view the eBook. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the information
needed to understand what they may and may not do with the eBook.
To encourage this, we have moved most of the information to the end,
rather than having it all here at the beginning.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get eBooks, and
further information, is included below.  We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541
Find out about how to make a donation at the bottom of this file.


Title: Light, Life, and Love

Author: W. R. Inge

Release Date: November, 2003  [Etext #4664]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on February 25, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English


The Project Gutenberg Etext of Light, Life, and Love
by W. R. Inge
******This file should be named 4664.txt or 4664.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, lllov11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, lllov10a.txt

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

The "legal small print" and other information about this book
may now be found at the end of this file.  Please read this
important information, as it gives you specific rights and
tells you about restrictions in how the file may be used.

***
This etext was produced by Charles Aldarondo.

LIGHT, LIFE, AND LOVE

Selections from the German Mystics of the Middle Ages

by

W. R. Inge

LONDON
Second Edition

1919






CONTENTS





INTRODUCTION
ECKHART
TAULER
MEDITATIONS ON THE SEVEN WORDS FROM THE CROSS
SUSO
RUYSBROEK
THEOLOGIA GERMANICA






INTRODUCTION

Sect. 1. THE PRECURSORS OF THE GERMAN MYSTICS





TO most English readers the "Imitation of Christ" is the
representative of mediaeval German mysticism. In reality, however,
this beautiful little treatise belongs to a period when that
movement had nearly spent itself. Thomas a Kempis, as Dr. Bigg has
said,[1] was only a semi-mystic. He tones down the most
characteristic doctrines of Eckhart, who is the great original
thinker of the German mystical school, and seems in some ways to
revert to an earlier type of devotional literature. The "Imitation"
may perhaps be described as an idealised picture of monastic piety,
drawn at a time when the life of the cloister no longer filled a
place of unchallenged usefulness in the social order of Europe. To
find German mysticism at its strongest we must go back a full
hundred years, and to understand its growth we must retrace our
steps as far as the great awakening of the thirteenth century--the
age of chivalry in religion--the age of St. Louis, of Francis and
Dominic, of Bonaventura and Thomas Aquinas. It was a vast revival,
bearing fruit in a new ardour of pity and charity, as well as in a
healthy freedom of thought. The Church, in recognising the new
charitable orders of Francis and Dominic, and the Christianised
Aristotelianism of the schoolmen, retained the loyalty and profited
by the zeal of the more sober reformers, but was unable to prevent
the diffusion of an independent critical spirit, in part provoked
and justified by real abuses. Discontent was aroused, not only by
the worldiness of the hierarchy, whose greed and luxurious living
were felt to be scandalous, but by the widespread economic distress
which prevailed over Western Europe at this period. The crusades
periodically swept off a large proportion of the able-bodied men, of
whom the majority never returned to their homes, and this helped to
swell the number of indigent women, who, having no male protectors,
were obliged to beg their bread. The better class of these female
mendicants soon formed themselves into uncloistered charitable
Orders, who were not forbidden to marry, and who devoted themselves
chiefly to the care of the sick. These Beguines and the
corresponding male associations of Beghards became very numerous in
Germany. Their religious views were of a definite type. Theirs was
an intensely inward religion, based on the longing of the soul for
immediate access to God. The more educated among them tended to
embrace a vague idealistic Pantheism. Mechthild of Magdeburg
(1212-1277), prophetess, poetess, Church reformer, quietist, was the
ablest of the Beguines. Her writings prove to us that the technical
terminology of German mysticism was in use before Eckhart,[2] and
also that the followers of what the "Theologia Germanica" calls the
False Light, who aspired to absorption in the Godhead, and despised
the imitation of the incarnate Christ, were already throwing
discredit on the movement. Mechthild's independence, and her
unsparing denunciations of corruption in high places, brought her
into conflict with the secular clergy. They tried to burn her
books--those religious love songs which had already endeared her to
German popular sentiment. It was then that she seemed to hear a
voice saying to her:

Lieb' meine, betrbe dich nicht zu sehr,

Die Wahrheit mag niemand verbrennen!

The rulers of the Church, unhappily, were not content with burning
books. Their hostility towards the unrecognised Orders became more
and more pronounced: the Beghards and Beguines were harried and
persecuted till most of them were driven to join the Franciscans or
Dominicans, carrying with them into those Orders the ferment of
their speculative mysticism. The more stubborn "Brethren and Sisters
of the Free Spirit" were burned in batches at Cologne and elsewhere.
Their fate in those times did not excite much pity, for many of the
victims were idle vagabonds of dissolute character, and the general
public probably thought that the licensed begging friars were enough
of a nuisance without the addition of these free lances.

The heretical mystical sects of the thirteenth century are very
interesting as illustrating the chief dangers of mysticism. Some of
these sectaries were Socialists or Communists of an extreme kind;
others were Rationalists, who taught that Jesus Christ was the son
of Joseph and a sinner like other men; others were Puritans, who
said that Church music was "nothing but a hellish noise" (nihil nisi
clamor inferni), and that the Pope was the magna meretrix of the
Apocalypse. The majority were Anti-Sacramentalists and Determinists;
and some were openly Antinomian, teaching that those who are led by
the Spirit can do no wrong. The followers of Amalric of Bena[3]
believed that the Holy Ghost had chosen their sect in which to
become incarnate; His presence among them was a continual guarantee
of sanctity and happiness. The "spiritual Franciscans" had dreams of
a more apocalyptic kind. They adopted the idea of an "eternal
Gospel," as expounded by Joachim of Floris, and believed that the
"third kingdom," that of the Spirit, was about to begin among
themselves. It was to abolish the secular Church and to inaugurate
the reign of true Christianity--i.e. "poverty" and asceticism.

Such are some of the results of what our eighteenth-century
ancestors knew and dreaded as "Enthusiasm"--that ferment of the
spirit which in certain epochs spreads from soul to soul like an
epidemic, breaking all the fetters of authority, despising tradition
and rejecting discipline in its eagerness to get rid of formalism
and unreality; a lawless, turbulent, unmanageable spirit, in which,
notwithstanding, is a potentiality for good far higher than any to
which the lukewarm "religion of all sensible men" can ever attain.
For mysticism is the raw material of all religion; and it is easier
to discipline the enthusiast than to breathe enthusiasm into the
disciplinarian.

Meanwhile, the Church looked with favour upon the orthodox mystical
school, of which Richard and Hugo of St. Victor, Bonaventura, and
Albertus Magnus were among the greatest names. These men were
working out in their own fashion the psychology of the contemplative
life, showing how we may ascend through "cogitation, meditation, and
speculation" to "contemplation," and how we may pass successively
through jubilus, ebrietas spiritus, spiritualis jucunditas, and
liquefactio, till we attain raptus or ecstasy. The writings of the
scholastic mystics are so overweighted with this pseudo-science,
with its wire-drawn distinctions and meaningless classifications,
that very few readers have now the patience to dig out their
numerous beauties. They are, however, still the classics of mystical
theology in the Roman Church, so far as that science has not
degenerated into mere miracle-mongering.

Sect. 2. MEISTER ECKHART

It was in 1260, when Mechthild of Magdeburg was at the height of her
activity, that Meister Eckhart, next to Plotinus the greatest
philosopher-mystic, was born at Hocheim in Thuringia. It seems that
his family was in a good position, but nothing is known of his early
years. He entered the Dominican Order as a youth, perhaps at
sixteen, the earliest age at which novices were admitted into that
Order. The course of instruction among the Dominicans was as
follows:--After two years, during which the novice laid the
foundations of a good general education, he devoted the next two
years to grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic, and then the same amount
of time to what was called the Quadrivium, which consisted of
"arithmetic, mathematics, astronomy, and music." Theology, the queen
of the sciences, occupied three years; and at the end of the course,
at the age of twenty-five, the brothers were ordained priests. We
find Eckhart, towards the end of the century, Prior of Erfurt and
Vicar of Thuringia, then Lector Biblicus at Paris, then Provincial
Prior of Saxony. In 1307 the master of the Order appointed him
Vicar-General for Bohemia, and in 1311 he returned to Paris. We find
him next preaching busily at Strassburg,[4] and after a few more
years, at Cologne, where the persecution of the Brethren of the Free
Spirit was just then at its height. At Strassburg there were no less
than seven convents of Dominican nuns, for since 1267 the Order had
resumed the supervision of female convents, which it had renounced a
short time after its foundation. Many of Eckhart's discourses were
addressed to these congregations of devout women, who indeed were to
a large extent the backbone of the mystical movement, and it is
impossible not to see that the devotional treatises of the school
are strongly coloured by feminine sentiment. A curious poem, written
by a Dominican nun of this period, celebrates the merits of three
preachers, the third of whom is a Master Eckhart, "who speaks to us
about Nothingness. He who understands him not, in him has never
shone the light divine." These nuns seem to have been fed with the
strong meat of Eckhart's mystical philosophy; in the more popular
sermons he tried to be intelligible to all. It was not very long
after he took up his residence at Cologne that he was himself
attacked for heresy. In 1327 he read before his own Order a
retractation of "any errors which might be found" (si quid errorum
repertum fuerit) in his writings, but withdrew nothing that he had
actually said, and protested that he believed himself to be
orthodox. He died a few months later, and it was not till 1329 that
a Papal bull was issued, enumerating seventeen heretical and eleven
objectionable doctrines in his writings.

This bull is interesting as showing what were the points in
Eckhart's teaching which in the fourteenth century were considered
dangerous. They also indicate very accurately what are the real
errors into which speculative mysticism is liable to fall, and how
thinkers of this school may most plausibly be misrepresented by
those who differ from them. After expressing his sorrow that "a
certain Teuton named Ekardus, doctor, ut fertur, sacrae paginae, has
wished to know more than he should," and has sown tares and thistles
and other weeds in the field of the Church, the Pope specifies the
following erroneous statements as appearing in Eckhart's
writings[5]:--1. "God created the world as soon as God was. 2. In
every work, bad as well as good, the glory of God is equally
manifested. 3. A man who prays for any particular thing prays for an
evil and prays ill, for he prays for the negation of good and the
negation of God, and that God may be denied to him.[6] 4. God is
honoured in those who have renounced everything, even holiness and
the kingdom of heaven. 5. We are transformed totally into God, even
as in the Sacrament the bread is converted into the Body of Christ.
Unum, non simile. 6. Whatever God the Father gave to His
only-begotten Son in His human nature, He has given it all to me. 7.
Whatever the Holy Scripture says about Christ is verified in every
good and godlike man. 8. External action is not, properly speaking,
good nor divine; God, properly speaking, only works in us internal
actions. 9. God is one, in every way and according to every reason,
so that it is not possible to find any plurality in Him, either in
the intellect or outside it; for he who sees two, or sees any
distinction, does not see God; for God is one, outside number and
above number, for one cannot be put with anything else, but follows
it; therefore in God Himself no distinction can be or be understood.
10. All the creatures are absolutely nothing: I say not that they
are small or something, but that they are absolutely nothing." All
these statements are declared to have been found in his writings. It
is also "objected against the said Ekardus" that he taught the
following two articles in these words:--1. "There is something in
the soul, which is uncreated and uncreatable: if the whole soul were
such, it would be uncreated and uncreatable: and this is the
intelligence.[7] 2. God is not good or better or best: I speak ill
when I call God good; it is as if I called white black."[8] The bull
declares all the propositions above quoted to be heretical, with the
exception of the three which I have numbered 8-10, and these "have
an ill sound" and are "very rash," even if they might be so
supplemented and explained as to bear an orthodox sense.

This condemnation led to a long neglect of Eckhart's writings. He
was almost forgotten till Franz Pfeiffer in 1857 collected and
edited his scattered treatises and endeavoured to distinguish those
which were genuine from those which were spurious. Since Pfeiffer's
edition fresh discoveries have been made, notably in 1880, when
Denifle found at Erfurt several important fragments in Latin, which
in his opinion show a closer dependence on the scholastic theology,
and particularly on St Thomas Aquinas, than Protestant scholars,
such as Preger, had been willing to allow. But the attempt to prove
Eckhart a mere scholastic is a failure; the audacities of his German
discourses cannot be explained as an accommodation to the tastes of
a peculiar audience. For good or evil Eckhart is an original and
independent thinker, whose theology is confined by no trammels of
authority.

Sect. 3. ECKHART'S RELIGIOUS PHILOSOPHY

The Godhead, according to Eckhart, is the universal and eternal
Unity comprehending and transcending all diversity. "The Divine
nature is Rest," he says in one of the German discourses; and in the
Latin fragments we find: "God rests in Himself, and makes all things
rest in Him." The three Persons of the Trinity, however, are not
mere modes or accidents,[9] but represent a real distinction within
the Godhead. God is unchangeable, and at the same time an
"everlasting process." The creatures are "absolutely nothing"; but
at the same time "God without them would not be God," for God is
love, and must objectify Himself; He is goodness, and must impart
Himself. As the picture in the mind of the painter, as the poem in
the mind of the poet, so was all creation in the mind of God from
all eternity, in uncreated simplicity. The ideal world was not
created in time; "the Father spake Himself and all the creatures in
His Son"; "they exist in the eternal Now"[10]--"a
becoming without a becoming, change without change." "The Word of
God the Father is the substance of all that exists, the life of all
that lives, the principle and cause of life." Of creation he says:
"We must not falsely imagine that God stood waiting for something to
happen, that He might create the world. For so soon as He was God,
so soon as He begat His coeternal and coequal Son, He created the
world." So Spinoza says: "God has always been before the creatures,
without even existing before them. He precedes them not by an
interval of time, but by a fixed eternity." This is not the same as
saying that the world of sense had no beginning; it is possible that
Eckhart did not mean to go further than the orthodox scholastic
mystic, Albertus Magnus, who says: "God created things from
eternity, but the things were not created from eternity." St
Augustine (Conf. xi. 30) bids objectors to "understand that there
can be no time without creatures, and cease to talk nonsense."
Eckhart also tries to distinguish between the "interior" and the
"exterior" action of God. God, he says, is in all things, not as
Nature, not as Person, but as Being. He is everywhere, undivided;
yet the creatures participate in Him according to their measure.[11]
The three Persons of the Trinity have impressed their image upon the
creatures, yet it is only their "nothingness" that keeps them
separate creatures. Most of this comes from the Neoplatonists, and
much of it through the pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, a
Platonising Christian of the fifth century, whose writings were
believed in the Middle Ages to proceed from St Paul's Athenian
convert. It would, however, be easy to find parallels in St
Augustine's writings to most of the phases quoted in this paragraph.
The practical consequences will be considered presently.

The creatures are a way from God; they are also a way to Him. "In
Christ," he says, "all the creatures are one man, and that man is
God." Grace, which is a real self-unfolding of God in the soul, can
make us "what God is by Nature"--one of Eckhart's audacious phrases,
which are not really so unorthodox as they sound. The following
prayer, which appears in one of his discourses, may perhaps be
defended as asking no more than our Lord prayed for (John xvii.) for
His disciples, but it lays him open to the charge, which the Pope's
bull did not fail to urge against him, that he made the servant
equal to his Lord. "Grant that I, by Thy grace, may be united to Thy
Nature, as Thy Son is eternally one in Thy Nature, and that grace
may become my nature."

The ethical aim is to be rid of "creatureliness," and so to be
united to God. In Eckhart's system, as in that of Plotinus,
speculation is never divorced from ethics. On our side the process
is a negative one. All our knowledge must be reduced to
not-knowledge; our reason and will, as well as our lower faculties,
must transcend themselves, must die to live. We must detach
ourselves absolutely "even from God," he says. This state of
spiritual nudity he calls "poverty." Then, when our house is empty
of all else, God can dwell there: "He begets His Son in us." This
last phrase has always been a favourite with the mystics. St Paul
uses very similar language, and the Epistle to Diognetus, written in
the second century, speaks of Christ as, "being ever born anew in
the hearts of the saints." Very characteristic, too, is the doctrine
that complete detachment from the creatures is the way to union with
God. Jacob Bhme has arrived independently at the same conclusion as
Eckhart. "The scholar said to his master: How may I come to the
supersensual life, that I may see God and hear Him speak? The master
said: When thou canst throw thyself but for a moment into that place
where no creature dwelleth, then thou hearest what God speaketh. The
scholar asked: Is that near or far off? The master replied: It is in
thee, and if thou canst for a while cease from all thy thinking and
willing, thou shalt hear unspeakable words of God. The scholar said:
How can I hear, when I stand still from thinking and willing? The
master answered: When thou standest still from the thinking and
willing of self, the eternal hearing, seeing, and speaking will be
revealed to thee, and so God heareth and seeth through thee."

In St Thomas Aquinas it is "the will enlightened by reason" which
unites us to God. But there are two sorts of reason. The passive
reason is the faculty which rises through discursive thinking to
knowledge. The active reason is a much higher faculty, which exists
by participation in the divine mind, "as the air is light by
participation in the sunshine." When this active reason is regarded
as the standard of moral action, it is called by Aquinas
synteresis.[12] Eckhart was at first content with this teaching of
St Thomas, whom he always cites with great reverence; but the whole
tendency of his thinking was to leave the unprofitable
classification of faculties in which the Victorine School almost
revelled, and to concentrate his attention on the union of the soul
with God. And therefore in his more developed teaching,[13] the
"spark" which is the point of contact between the soul and its Maker
is something higher than the faculties, being "uncreated." He seems
to waver about identifying the "spark" with the "active reason," but
inclines on the whole to regard it as something even higher still.
"There is something in the soul," he says, "which is so akin to God
that it is one with Him and not merely united with Him." And again:
"There is a force in the soul; and not only a force, but something
more, a being; and not only a being, but something more; it is so
pure and high and noble in itself that no creature can come there,
and God alone can dwelt there. Yea, verily, and even God cannot come
there with a form; He can only come with His simple divine nature."
And in the startling passage often quoted against him, a passage
which illustrates admirably his affinity to one side of Hegelianism,
we read: "The eye with which I see God is the same eye with which He
sees me. Mine eye and God's eye are one eye and one sight and one
knowledge and one love."

I do not defend these passages as orthodox; but before exclaiming
"rank Pantheism!" we ought to recollect that for Eckhart the being
of God is quite different from His personality. Eckhart never taught
that the Persons of the Holy Trinity become, after the mystical
Union, the "Form" of the human soul. It is the impersonal light of
the divine nature which transforms our nature; human personality is
neither lost nor converted into divine personality. Moreover, the
divine spark at the centre of the soul is not the soul nor the
personality. "The soul," he says in one place, using a figure which
recurs in the "Theologia Germanica," "has two faces. One is turned
towards this world and towards the body, the other towards God." The
complete dominion of the "spark" over the soul is an unrealised
ideal.[14]

The truth which he values is that, as Mr Upton[15] has well
expressed it, "there is a certain self-revelation of the eternal and
infinite One to the finite soul, and therefore an indestructible
basis for religious ideas and beliefs as distinguished from what is
called scientific knowledge. . . . This immanent universal principle
does not pertain to, and is not the property of any individual mind,
but belongs to that uncreated and eternal nature of God which lies
deeper than all those differences which separate individual minds
from each other, and is indeed that incarnation of the Eternal, who
though He is present in every finite thing, is still not broken up
into individualities, but remains one and the same eternal
substance, one and the same unifying principle, immanently and
indivisibly present in every one of the countless plurality of
finite individuals." It might further be urged that neither God nor
man can be understood in independence of each other. A recent writer
on ethics,[16] not too well disposed towards Christianity, is, I
think, right in saying: "To the popular mind, which assumes God and
man to be two different realities, each given in independence of the
other, . . . the identification of man's love of God with God's love
of Himself has always been a paradox and a stumbling-block. But it
is not too much to say that until it has been seen to be no paradox,
but a simple and fundamental truth, the masterpieces of the world's
religious literature must remain a sealed book to us."

Eckhart certainly believed himself to have escaped the pitfall of
Pantheism; but he often expressed himself in such an unguarded way
that the charge may be brought against him with some show of reason.

Love, Eckhart teaches, is the principle of all virtues; it is God
Himself. Next to it in dignity comes humility. The beauty of the
soul, he says in the true Platonic vein, is to be well ordered, with
the higher faculties above the lower, each in its proper place. The
will should be supreme over the understanding, the understanding
over the senses. Whatever we will earnestly, that we have, and no
one can hinder us from attaining that detachment from the creatures
in which our blessedness consists.

Evil, from the highest standpoint, is only a means for realising the
eternal aim of God in creation; all will ultimately be overruled for
good. Nevertheless, we can frustrate the good will of God towards
us, and it is this, and not the thought of any insult against
Himself, that makes God grieve for our sins. It would not be worth
while to give any more quotations on this subject, for Eckhart is
not more successful than other philosophers in propounding a
consistent and intelligible theory of the place of evil in the
universe.

Eckhart is well aware of the two chief pitfalls into which the
mystic is liable to fall--dreamy inactivity and Antinomianism. The
sects of the Free Spirit seem to have afforded a good object-lesson
in both these errors, as some of the Gnostic sects did in the second
century. Eckhart's teaching here is sound and good. Freedom from
law, he says, belongs only to the "spark," not to the faculties of
the soul, and no man can live always on the highest plane.
Contemplation is, in a sense, a means to activity; works of charity
are its proper fruit. "If a man were in an ecstasy like that of St
Paul, when he was caught up into the third heaven, and knew of a
poor man who needed his help, he ought to leave his ecstasy and help
the needy." Suso[17] tells us how God punished him for disregarding
this duty. True contemplation considers Reality (or Being) in its
manifestations as well as in its origin. If this is remembered,
there need be no conflict between social morality and the inner
life. Eckhart recognises[18] that it is a harder and a nobler task
to preserve detachment in a crowd than in a cell; the little daily
sacrifices of family life are often a greater trial than
self-imposed mortifications. "We need not destroy any little good in
ourselves for the sake of a better, but we should strive to grasp
every truth in its highest meaning, for no one good contradicts
another." "Love God, and do as you like, say the Free Spirits. Yes;
but as long as you like anything contrary to God's will, you do not
love Him."

There is much more of the same kind in Eckhart's sermons--as good
and sensible doctrine as one could find anywhere. But what was the
practical effect of his teaching as a whole? It is generally the
case that the really weak points of any religious movement are
exposed with a cruel logicality most exasperating to the leaders by
the second generation of its adherents. The dangerous side of the
Eckhartian mysticism is painfully exhibited in the life of his
spiritual daughter, "Schwester Katrei," the saint of the later
Beguines. Katrei is a rather shadowy person; but for our present
purpose it does not much matter whether the story of her life has
been embroidered or not. Her memory was revered for such sayings and
doings as these which follow. On one occasion she exclaimed:
"Congratulate me; I have become God!" and on another she declared
that "not even the desire of heaven should tempt a good man towards
activity." It was her ambition to forget who were her parents, to be
indifferent whether she received absolution and partook of the Holy
Communion or not; and she finally realised her ambition by falling
into a cataleptic state in which she was supposed to be dead, and
was carried out for burial. Her confessor, perceiving that she was
not really dead, awoke her: "Art thou satisfied?" "I am satisfied at
last," said Katrei: she was now "dead all through," as she wished to
be.

Are we to conclude that the logical outcome of mysticism is this
strange reproduction, in Teutonic Europe, of Indian Yogism? Many who
have studied the subject have satisfied themselves that Schwester
Katrei is the truly consistent mystic. They have come to the
conclusion that the real attraction of mysticism is a pining for
deliverance from this fretful, anxious, exacting, individual life,
and a yearning for absorption into the great Abyss where all
distinctions are merged in the Infinite. According to this view,
mysticism in its purest form should be studied in the ancient
religious literature of India, which teaches us how all this world
of colour and diversity, of sharp outlines and conflicting forces,
may be lost and swallowed up in the "white radiance," or black
darkness (it does not really matter which we call it) of an empty
Infinite.

The present writer is convinced that this is not the truth about
mysticism. Eckhart may have encouraged Schwester Katrei in her
attempt to substitute the living death of the blank trance for the
dying life of Christian charity; but none the less she caricatured
and stultified his teaching. And I think it is possible to lay our
finger on the place where she and so many others went wrong. The
aspiration of mysticism is to find the unity which underlies all
diversity, or, in religious language, to see God face to face. From
the Many to the One is always the path of the mystic. Plotinus, the
father of all mystical philosophy in Europe (unless, as he himself
would have wished, we give that honour to Plato), mapped out the
upward road as follows:--At the bottom of the hill is the sphere of
the "merely many"--of material objects viewed in disconnection,
dull, and spiritless. This is a world which has no real existence;
it may best be called "not-being" ("ein lauteres Nichts," as Eckhart
says), and as the indeterminate, it can only be apprehended by a
corresponding indeterminateness in the soul. The soul, however,
always adds some form and determination to the abstract formlessness
of the "merely many." Next, we rise to, or project for ourselves,
the world of "the one and the many." This is the sphere in which our
consciousness normally moves. We are conscious of an overruling
Mind, but the creatures still seem external to and partially
independent of it. Such is the temporal order as we know it. Above
this is the intelligible world, the eternal order, "the one-many,"
das ewige Nu, the world in which God's will is done perfectly and
all reflects the divine mind. Highest of all is "the One," the,
Absolute, the Godhead, of whom nothing can be predicated, because He
is above all distinctions. This Neoplatonic Absolute is the Godhead
of whom Eckhart says: "God never looked upon deed," and of whom
Angelus Silesius sings:

  "Und sieh, er ist nicht Wille,
  Er ist ein' ewige Stille."

Plotinus taught that the One, being superessential, can only be
apprehended in ecstasy, when thought, which still distinguishes
itself from its object, is transcended, and knower and known become
one. As Tennyson's Ancient Sage says:

  "If thou would'st hear the Nameless, and descend
  Into the Temple-cave of thine own self,
  There, brooding by the central altar, thou
  May'st haply learn the Nameless hath a voice,
  By which thou wilt abide, if thou be wise;
  For knowledge is the swallow on the lake,
  That sees and stirs the surface-shadow there
  But never yet hath dipt into the Abysm."

In the same way Eckhart taught that no creature can apprehend the
Godhead, and, therefore, that the spark in the centre of the soul
(this doctrine, too, is found in Plotinus) must be verily divine.
The logic of the theory is inexorable. If only like can know like,
we cannot know God except by a faculty which is itself divine. The
real question is whether God, as an object of knowledge and worship
for finite beings, is the absolute Godhead, who transcends all
distinctions. The mediaeval mystics held that this "flight of the
alone to the alone," as Plotinus calls it, is possible to men, and
that in it consists our highest blessedness. They were attracted
towards this view by several influences. First, there was the
tradition of Dionysius, to whom (e.g.) the author of the "Theologia
Germanica" appeals as an authority for the possibility of "beholding
the hidden things of God by utter abandonment of thyself, and of
entering into union with Him who is above all existence, and all
knowledge." Secondly, there was what a modern writer has called "the
attraction of the Abyss," the longing which some persons feel very
strongly to merge their individuality in a larger and better whole,
to get rid not only of selfishness but of self for ever. "Leave
nothing of myself in me," is Crashaw's prayer in his wonderful poem
on St Teresa. Thirdly, we may mention the awe and respect long paid
to ecstatic trances, the pathological nature of which was not
understood. The blank trance was a real experience; and as it could
be induced by a long course of ascetical exercises and fervid
devotions, it was naturally regarded as the crowning reward of
sanctity on earth. Nor would it be at all safe to reject the
evidence, which is very copious,[19] that the "dreamy state" may
issue in permanent spiritual gain. The methodical cultivation of it,
which is at the bottom of most of the strange austerities of the
ascetics, was not only (though it was partly) practised in the hope
of enjoying those spiritual raptures which are described as being
far more intense than any pleasures of sense[20]: it was the hope of
stirring to its depths the subconscious mind and permeating the
whole with the hidden energy of the divine Spirit that led to the
desire for visions and trances. Lastly, I think we must give a place
to the intellectual attraction of an uncompromising monistic theory
of the universe. Spiritualistic monism, when it is consistent with
itself, will always lean to semi-pantheistic mysticism rather than
to such a compromise with pluralism as Lotze and his numerous
followers in this country imagine to be possible.

But it is possible to go a long way with the mystics and yet to
maintain that under no conditions whatever can a finite being escape
from the limitations of his finitude and see God or the world or
himself "with the same eye with which God sees" all things. The old
Hebrew belief, that to see the face of God is death, expresses the
truth under a mythical form. That the human mind, while still "in
the body pent," may obtain glimpses of the eternal order, and enjoy
foretastes of the bliss of heaven, is a belief which I, at least,
see no reason to reject. It involves no rash presumption, and is not
contrary to what may be readily believed about the state of immortal
spirits passing through a mortal life. But the explanation of the
blank trance as a temporary transit into the Absolute must be set
down as a pure delusion. It involves a conception of the divine
"Rest" which in his best moments Eckhart himself repudiates. "The
Rest of the Godhead," he says, "is not in that He is the source of
being, but in that He is the consummation of all being." This
profound saying expresses the truth, which he seems often to forget,
that the world-process must have a real value in God's sight--that
it is not a mere polarisation of the white radiance of eternity
broken up by the imperfection of our vision. Whatever theories we
may hold about Absolute Being, or an Absolute that is above Being,
we must make room for the Will, and for Time, which is the "form" of
the will, and for the creatures who inhabit time and space, as
having for us the value of reality. Nor shall we, if we are to
escape scepticism, be willing to admit that these appearances have
no sure relation to ultimate reality. We must not try to uncreate
the world in order to find God. We were created out of nothing, but
we cannot return to nothing, to find our Creator there. The still,
small voice is best listened for amid the discordant harmony of life
and death.

The search for God is no exception to the mysterious law of human
nature, that we cannot get anything worth having--neither holiness
nor happiness nor wisdom--by trying for it directly. It must be
given us through something else. The recluse who lives like
Parnell's "Hermit":

"Prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise,"

is not only a poor sort of saint, but he will offer a poor sort of
prayers and praises. He will miss real holiness for the same reason
that makes the pleasure-seeker miss real happiness. We must lose
ourselves in some worthy interest in order to find again both a
better self and an object higher than that which we sought. This the
German mystics in a sense knew well. There is a noble sentence of
Suso to the effect that "he who realises the inward in the outward,
to him the inward becomes more inward than to him who only
recognises the inward in the inward." Moreover, the recognition that
"God manifests Himself and worketh more in one creature than
another" ("Theologia Germanica"), involves a denial of the
nihilistic view that all the creatures are "ein lauteres
Nichts."[21] It would be easy to find such passages in all the
fourteenth-century mystics, but it cannot be denied that on the
whole their religion is too self-centred. There are not many maxims
so fundamentally wrong-headed and un-Christian as Suso's advice to
"live as if you were the only person in the world."[22] The life of
the cloistered saint may be abundantly justified--for the spiritual
activity of some of them has been of far greater service to mankind
than the fussy benevolence of many "practical" busybodies--but the
idea of social service, whether in the school of Martha or of Mary,
ought surely never to be absent. The image of Christ as the Lover of
the individual soul rather than as the Bridegroom of the Church was
too dear to these lonely men and women. Unconsciously, they looked
to their personal devotions to compensate them for the human loves
which they had forsworn. The raptures of Divine Love, which they
regarded as signal favours bestowed upon them, were not very
wholesome in themselves, and diverted their thoughts from the needs
of their fellow-men. They also led to most painful reactions, in
which the poor contemplative believed himself abandoned by God and
became a pray to terrible depression and melancholy. These fits of
wretchedness came indeed to be recognised as God's punishment for
selfishness in devotion and for too great desire for the sweetness
of communing with God, and so arose the doctrine of "disinterested
love," which was more and more emphasised in the later mysticism,
especially by the French Quietists.

I have spoken quite candidly of the defects of Eckhart's mystical
Christianity. As a religious philosophy it does not keep clear of
the fallacy that an ascent though the unreal can lead to reality.
"To suppose, as the mystic does, that the finite search has of
itself no Being at all, is illusory, is Maya, is itself nothing,
this is also to deprive the Absolute of even its poor value as a
contrasting goal. For a goal that is a goal of no real process has
as little value as it has content."[23] But, as Prof. Royce says,
mysticism furnishes us with the means of correcting itself. It
supplies an obvious reductio ad absurdum of the theory with which it
set out, that "Immediacy is the one test of reality," and is itself
forced to give the world of diversity a real value as manifesting in
different degrees the nature of God. Those who are acquainted with
the sacred books of the East will recognise that here is the
decisive departure from real Pantheism. And it may be fairly claimed
for the German mystics that though their speculative teaching
sometimes seems to echo too ominously the apathetic detachment of
the Indian sage, their lives and example, and their practical
exhortations, preached a truer and a larger philosophy. Eckhart, as
we have seen, was a busy preacher as well as a keen student, and
some of the younger members of his school were even more occupied in
pastoral work. If the tree is to be judged by its fruits, mysticism
can give a very good account of itself to the Marthas as well as the
Marys of this world.

Sect. 4. THE GERMAN MYSTICS AS GUIDES TO HOLINESS

THIS little volume is a contribution to a "Library of Devotion," and
in the body of the work the reader will be seldom troubled by any
abstruse philosophising. I have thought it necessary to give, in
this Introduction, a short account of Eckhart's system, but the
extracts which follow are taken mainly from his successors, in whom
the speculative tendency is weaker and less original, while the
religious element is stronger and more attractive. It is, after all,
as guides to holiness that these mystics are chiefly important to
us. This side of their life's work can never be out of date, for the
deeper currents of human nature change but little; the language of
the heart is readily understood everywhere and at all times. The
differences between Catholic and Protestant are hardly felt in the
keen air of these high summits. It was Luther himself who discovered
the "Theologia Germanica" and said of it that, "next to the Bible
and St Augustine, no book hath ever come into my hands whence I have
learnt or would wish to learn more of what God and Christ and man
and all things are. I thank God that I have heard and found my God
in the German tongue, as I have not yet found Him in Latin, Greek,
or Hebrew." The theology of these mystics takes us straight back to
the Johannine doctrine of Christ as the all-pervading Word of God,
by whom all things were made and in whom all things hold together.
He is not far from any one of us if we will but seek Him where He is
to be found--in the innermost sanctuary of our personal life. In
personal religion this means that no part of revelation is to be
regarded as past, isolated, or external. "We should mark and know of
a very truth," says the author of the "Theologia Germanica," "that
all manner of virtue and goodness, and even the eternal Good which
is God Himself, can never make a man virtuous, good, or happy, so
long as it is outside the soul." In the same spirit Jacob Bhme, 250
years later, says: "If the sacrifice of Christ is to avail for me,
it must be wrought in me." Or, as his English admirer, William Law,
puts it: "Christ given for us is neither more nor less than Christ
given into us. He is in no other sense our full, perfect, and
sufficient Atonement than as His nature and spirit are born and
formed in us." The whole process of redemption must in a sense be
reenacted in the inner life of every Christian. And as Christ
emptied Himself for our sakes, so must we empty ourselves of all
self-seeking. "When the creature claimeth for its own anything good,
such as life, knowledge, or power, and in short whatever we commonly
call good, as if it were that, or possessed that--it goeth astray."
Sin is nothing else but self-assertion, self-will. "Be assured,"
says the "Theologia Germanica," "that he who helpeth a man to his
own will, helpeth him to the worst that he can." He, therefore, who
is "simply and wholly bereft of self" is delivered from sin, and God
alone reigns in his inmost soul. Concerning the highest part or
faculty of the soul, the author of this little treatise follows
Eckhart, but cautiously. "The True Light," he says, "is that eternal
Light which is God; or else it is a created light, but yet Divine,
which is called grace." In either case, "where God dwells in a godly
man, in such a man somewhat appertaineth to God which is His own,
and belongs to Him only and not to the creature." This doctrine of
divine immanence, for which there is ample warrant in the New
Testament, is the real kernel of German mysticism. It is a doctrine
which, when rightly used, may make this world a foretaste of heaven,
but alas! the "False Light" is always trying to counterfeit the
true. In the imitation of the suffering life of Christ lies the only
means of escaping the deceptions of the Evil One. "The False Light
dreameth itself to be God, and sinless"; but "none is without sin;
if any is without consciousness of sin, he must be either Christ or
the Evil Spirit."

Very characteristic is the teaching of all these writers about
rewards and punishments. Without in any way impugning the Church
doctrine of future retribution, they yet agree with Benjamin
Whichcote, the Cambridge Platonist, that "heaven is first a temper,
then a place"; while of hell there is much to recall the noble
sentence of Juliana of Norwich, the fourteenth-century visionary,
"to me was showed no harder hell than sin." "Nothing burneth in hell
but self-will," is a saying in the "Theologia Germanica."[24] They
insist that the difference between heaven and hell is not that one
is a place of enjoyment, the other of torment; it is that in the one
we are with Christ, in the other without Him. "The Christlike life
is not chosen," to quote the "Theologia Germanica" once more, "in
order to serve any end, or to get anything by it, but for love of
its nobleness, and because God loveth and esteemeth it so highly. He
who doth not take it up for love, hath none of it at all; he may
dream indeed that he hath put it on, but he is deceived. Christ did
not lead such a life as this for the sake of reward, but out of
love, and love maketh such a life light, and taketh away all its
hardships, so that it becometh sweet and is gladly endured." The
truly religious man is always more concerned about what God will do
in him than what He will do to him; in his intense desire for the
purification of his motives he almost wishes that heaven and hell
were blotted out, that he might serve God for Himself alone.

Sect. 5. WRITERS OF THE SCHOOL OF ECKHART--TAULER

Such are the main characteristics of the religious teachings which
we find in the German mystics. Among the successors of Eckhart, from
whose writings the following extracts are taken, the most notable
names are those of Tauler, Suso, and Ruysbroek. From Tauler I have
taken very little, because a volume of selections from his sermons
has already appeared in this series.[25] Accordingly, it will only
be necessary to mention a very few facts about his life.

John Tauler was born at Strassburg about 1300, and studied at the
Dominican convents of Strassburg and Cologne. At both places he
doubtless heard the sermons of Eckhart. In 1329 the great interdict
began at Strassburg, and was stoutly resisted by many of the clergy.
It is a disputed point whether Tauler himself obeyed the Papal
decree or not. His uneventful life, which was devoted to study,
preaching, and pastoral work, came to an end in 1361. Like Eckhart,
he had a favourite "spiritual daughter," Margaret Ebner, who won a
great reputation as a visionary.

Sect. 6. SUSO

Henry Suso was born in 1295 and died in 1365. His autobiography was
published not long before his death. He is the poet of the band. The
romance of saintship is depicted by him with a strange vividness
which alternately attracts and repels, or even disgusts, the modern
reader. The whole-hearted devotion of the "Servitor" to the "Divine
Wisdom," the tender beauty of the visions and conversations, and the
occasional naveté of the narrative, which shows that the saint
remained very human throughout, make Suso's books delightful
reading; but the accounts of the horrible macerations to which he
subjected himself for many years shock our moral sense almost as
much as our sensibilities; we do not now believe that God takes
pleasure in sufferings inflicted in His honour. Moreover, the erotic
symbolism of the visions is occasionally unpleasant: we are no
longer in the company of such sane and healthy people as Eckhart and
Tauler. The half-sensuous pleasure of ecstasy was evidently a
temptation to Suso, and the violent alternations of rapture and
misery which he experienced suggest a neurotic and ill-balanced
temperament.[26]

On this subject--the pathological side of mysticism--a few remarks
will not be out of place, for there has been much discussion of it
lately. A great deal of nonsense has been written on the connexion
between religion and neuroticism. To quote Professor James' vigorous
protest, "medical materialism finishes up St Paul by calling his
vision on the road to Damascus a discharging lesion of the occipital
cortex, he being an epileptic. It snuffs out St Teresa as an
hysteric, St Francis of Assisi as an hereditary degenerate. George
Fox's discontent with the shams of his age, and his pining for
spiritual veracity, it treats as a symptom of a disordered colon.
Carlyle's organ-tones of misery it accounts for by a gastro-duodenal
catarrh. All such mental over-tensions, it says, are, when you come
to the bottom of the matter, mere affairs of diathesis
(auto-intoxications most probably), due to the perverted action of
various glands which physiology will yet discover."[27] Now, even if
it were true that most religious geniuses, like most other geniuses,
have been "psychopaths" of one kind or another, this fact in no way
disposes of the value of their intuitions and experiences. Nearly
all the great benefactors of humanity have been persons of
one-sided, and therefore ill-balanced, characters. Even Maudsley
admits that "Nature may find an incomplete mind a more suitable
instrument for a particular purpose. It is the work that is done,
and the quality in the worker by which it is done, that is alone of
moment; and it may be no great matter from a cosmical standpoint, if
in other qualities of character he (the genius) was singularly
defective."[28] Except in the character of our Lord Himself, there
are visible imperfections in the record of every great saint; but
that is no reason for allowing such traces of human infirmity to
discredit what is pure and good in their work. More particularly, it
would be a great pity to let our minds dwell on the favourite
materialistic theory that saintliness, especially as cultivated and
venerated by Catholicism, has its basis in "perverted sexuality."
There is enough plausibility in the theory to make it mischievous.
The allegorical interpretation of the Book of Canticles was in truth
the source of, or at least the model for, a vast amount of
unwholesome and repulsive pietism. Not a word need be said for such
a paltry narrative of endearments and sickly compliments as the
"Revelations of the Nun Gertrude," in the thirteenth century. Nor
are we concerned to deny that the artificially induced ecstasy,
which is desired on account of the intense pleasure which is said to
accompany it, nearly always contains elements the recognition of
which would shock and distress the contemplatives themselves.[29]
There are, however, other elements, of a less insidious kind, which
make the ecstatic trance seem desirable. These are, according to
Professor Leuba, the calming of the restless intellect by the
concentration of the mind on one object; the longing for a support
and comfort more perfect than man can give; and, thirdly, the
consecration and strengthening of the will, which is often a
permanent effect of the trance. These are legitimate objects of
desire, and in many of the mystics they are much more prominent than
any tendencies which might be considered morbid. As regards the
larger question, about the alleged pathological character of all
distinctively religious exaltation, I believe that no greater
mistake could be made than to suppose that the religious life
flourishes best in unnatural circumstances. Religion, from a
biological standpoint, I take to be the expression of the racial
will to live; its function (from this point of view) is the
preservation and development of humanity on the highest possible
level. If this is true, a simple, healthy, natural life must be the
most favourable for religious excellence--and this I believe to be
the case. Poor Suso certainly did not lead a healthy or natural
life. But in his case, though the suppressed natural instincts
obviously overflow into the religious consciousness and in part
determine the forms which his devotion assumes, we can never forget
that we are in the company of a poet and a saint who will lift us,
if we can follow him, into a very high region of the spiritual life,
an altitude which he has himself climbed with bleeding feet.

The simple confidence which at the end of the dialogue he expresses
in the value of his work is, I think, amply justified. "Whoever will
read these writings of mine in a right spirit, can hardly fail to be
stirred to the depths of his soul, either to fervent love, or to new
light, or to hunger and thirst for God, or to hatred and loathing
for his sins, or to that spiritual aspiration by which the soul is
renewed in grace."

Sect. 7. RUYSBROEK

[Note: the Ruysbroek selection has not been reproduced in this
electronic edition. An electronic text of a larger collection of
Ruysbroek's works may be available.]

Sect. 8. THEOLOGIA GERMANICA

The "Theologia Germanica," an isolated treatise of no great length
by an unknown author, was written towards the end of the fourteenth
century by one of the Gottesfreunde, a widespread association of
pious souls in Germany. He is said to have been "a priest and warden
of the house of the Teutonic Order at Frankfort." His book is both
the latest and one of the most important productions of the German
mystical school founded by Eckhart. The author is a deeply religious
philosopher, as much interested in speculative mysticism as Eckhart
himself, but as thoroughly penetrated with devout feeling as Thomas
 Kempis. The treatise should be read by all, as one of the very
best devotional works in any language. My only reason for not
translating it in full here is that a good English translation
already exists,[30] so that it seemed unnecessary to offer a new one
to the public. I have therefore only translated a few characteristic
passages, which are very far from exhausting its beauties, and a few
of the more striking aphorisms, which indicate the main points in
the religious philosophy of the writer.

Sect. 9. MODERN MYSTICISM

The revival of interest in the old mystical writers is not
surprising when we consider the whole trend of modern thought. Among
recent philosophers--though Lotze, perhaps the greatest name among
them, is unsympathetic, in consequence of his over-rigid theory of
personality--the great psychologist Fechner, whose religious
philosophy is not so well known in this country as it deserves to
be, has with some justice been called a mystic. And our own greatest
living metaphysician, Mr F.H. Bradley, has expounded the dialectic
of speculative mysticism with unequalled power, though with a bias
against Christianity. Another significant fact is the great
popularity, all over Europe, of Maeterlinck's mystical works, "Le
Trésor des Humbles," "La Sagesse et la Destinée," and "Le
Temple Enseveli."

The growing science of psychology has begun to turn its attention
seriously to the study of the religious faculty. Several able men
have set themselves to collect material which may form the basis of
an inductive science. Personal experiences, communicated by many
persons of both sexes and of various ages, occupations, and levels
of culture, have been brought together and tabulated. It is claimed
that important facts have already been established, particularly in
connexion with the phenomena of conversion, by this method. The
results have certainly been more than enough to justify confidence
in the soundness of the method, and hope that the new science may
have a great future before it. Towards mysticism, recent writers on
the psychology of religion have been less favourable than the pure
metaphysicians. While the latter have shown a tendency towards
Pantheism and Determinism, which makes them sympathise with the
general trend of speculative mysticism, psychology seems just at
present to lean towards a pluralistic metaphysic and a belief in
free-will or even in chance. This attitude is especially noticeable
in the now famous Gifford Lectures of Professor William James[31]
and in the recent volume of essays written at Oxford.[32] But even
if the rising tide of neo-Kantianism should cause the speculative
mystics to be regarded with disfavour, nothing can prevent the
religion of the twentieth century from being mystical in type. The
strongest wish of a vast number of earnest men and women to-day is
for a basis of religious belief which shall rest, not upon tradition
or external authority or historical evidence, but upon the
ascertainable facts of human experience. The craving for immediacy,
which we have seen to be characteristic of all mysticism, now takes
the form of a desire to establish the validity of the
God-consciousness as a normal part of the healthy inner life. We may
perhaps venture to predict that the Christian biologist of the
future will turn the Pauline Christology into his own dialect
somewhat after the following fashion:--"The function of religion in
the human race is closely analogous to, if not identical with, that
of instinct in the lower animals. Religion is the racial will to
live; not, however, to live anyhow and at all costs, but to live as
human beings, conforming as far as possible to the highest type of
humanity. Religion, therefore, acts as a higher instinct, inhibiting
all self-destroying and race-destroying impulses in the interest of
a larger self than the individual life." To turn this statement into
theological form it is only necessary to claim that the "perfect
man" which the religious instinct is trying to form is "the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ," that that perfect humanity
was once realised in the historical Christ, and that the higher
instinct within us--ourselves, yet not ourselves--which makes for
life and righteousness, and is the source of all the good that we
can think, say, or do, may (in virtue of that historical
incarnation) be justly called the indwelling Christ. This is all
that the Christian mystic needs.

Sect. 10. SPECIMENS OF MODERN MYSTICISM

I conclude this introductory essay with a few extracts from recent
American books on the psychology of religion. It is interesting to
find some of the strangest experiences of the cloister reproduced
under the very different conditions of modern American life. The
quotations will serve to show how far Tauler and the "Theologia
Germanica" are from being out of date.

"The thing which impressed me most" (says a correspondent of
Professor William James)[33] "was learning the fact that we must be
in absolutely constant relation or mental touch with that essence of
life which permeates all and which we call God. This is almost
unrecognisable unless we live into it ourselves actually--that is,
by a constant turning to the very innermost, deepest consciousness
of our real selves or of God in us, for illumination from within,
just as we turn to the sun for light, warmth, and invigoration
without. When you do this consciously, realising that to turn inward
to the light within you is to live in the presence of God or of your
Divine self, you soon discover the unreality of the objects to which
you have hitherto been turning and which have engrossed you
without."

The next quotation comes from a small book by one of the "New
Thought" or "Mind Cure" school in America. The enormous sale of the
volume testifies to the popularity of the teaching which it
contains.[34]

"Intuition is an inner spiritual sense through which man is opened
to the direct revelation and knowledge of God, the secret of nature
and life, and through which he is brought into conscious unity and
fellowship with God, and made to realise his own deific nature and
supremacy of being as the son of God. Spiritual supremacy and
illumination thus realised through the development and perfection of
intuition under divine inspiration gives the perfect inner vision
and direct insight into the character, properties, and purpose of
all things to which the attention and interest are directed. It is,
we repeat, a spiritual sense opening inwardly, as the physical
senses open outwardly; and because it has the capacity to perceive,
grasp, and know the truth at first hand, independent of all external
sources of information, we call it intuition. All inspired teaching
and spiritual revelations are based upon the recognition of this
spiritual faculty of the soul and its power to receive and
appropriate them. Conscious unity of man in spirit and purpose with
the Father, born out of his supreme desire and trust, opens his soul
through this inner sense to immediate aspiration and enlightenment
from the divine omniscience, and the co-operative energy of the
divine omnipotence, under which he becomes a seer and a master. On
this higher plane of realised spiritual life in the flesh the mind
acts with unfettered freedom and unbiassed vision, grasping truth at
first hand, independent of all external sources of information.
Approaching all beings and things from the divine side, they are
seen in the light of the divine omniscience.[35] God's purpose in
them, and so the truth concerning them, as it rests in the mind of
God, are thus revealed by direct illumination from the divine mind,
to which the soul is opened inwardly through this spiritual sense we
call intuition."

The practice of meditation "without images," as the mediaeval
mystics called it, is specially recommended. "Many will receive
great help, and many will be entirely healed by a practice somewhat
after the following nature:--With a mind at peace, and with a heart
going out in love to all, go into the quiet of your own interior
self, holding the thought, I am one with the Infinite Spirit of
Life, the life of my life. I now open my body, in which disease has
gotten a foothold, I open it fully to the inflowing tide of this
infinite life, and it now, even now, is pouring in and coursing
through my body, and the healing process is going on." "If you would
find the highest, the fullest, and the richest life that not only
this world but that any world can know, then do away with the sense
of the separateness of your life from the life of God. Hold to the
thought of your oneness. In the degree that you do this, you will
find yourself realising it more and more, and as this life of
realisation is lived, you will find that no good thing will be
withheld, for all things are included in this."[36]

This modern mysticism is very much entangled with theories about the
cure of bodily disease by suggestion; and it is fair to warn those
who are unacquainted with the books of this sect that they will find
much fantastic superstition mixed with a stimulating faith in the
inner light as the voice of God.

But whatever may be the course of this particular movement there can
be no doubt that the Americans, like ourselves, are only at the
beginning of a great revival of mystical religion. The movement will
probably follow the same course as the mediaeval movement in
Germany, with which this little book is concerned. It will have its
philosophical supportees, who will press their speculation to the
verge of Pantheism, perhaps reviving the Logos-cosmology of the
Christian Alexandrians under the form of the pan-psychism of Lotze
and Fechner. It will have its evangelists like Tauler, who will
carry to our crowded town populations the glad tidings that the
kingdom of God is not here or there, but within the hearts of all
who will seek for it within them. It will assuredly attract some to
a life of solitary contemplation; while others, intellectually
weaker or less serious, will follow the various theosophical and
theurgical delusions which, from the days of Iamblichus downward,
have dogged the heels of mysticism. For the "False Light" against
which the "Theologia Germanica" warns us is as dangerous as ever; we
may even live to see some new "Brethren of the Free Spirit" turning
their liberty into a cloak of licentiousness. If so, the world will
soon whistle back the disciplinarian with his traditions of the
elders; prophesying will once more be suppressed and discredited,
and a new crystallising process will begin. But before that time
comes some changes may possibly take place in the external
proportions of Christian orthodoxy. The appearance of a vigorous
body of faith, standing firmly on its own feet, may even have the
effect of relegating to the sphere of pious opinion some tenets
which have hitherto "seemed to be pillars."

For these periodical returns to the "fresh springs" of religion
never leave the tradition exactly where it was before. The German
movement of the fourteenth century made the Reformation inevitable,
and our own age may be inaugurating a change no less momentous,
which will restore in the twentieth century some of the features of
Apostolic Christianity.






LIGHT, LIFE AND LOVE

ECKHART





GOD

GOD is nameless, for no man can either say or understand aught about
Him. If I say, God is good, it is not true; nay more; I am good, God
is not good. I may even say, I am better than God; for whatever is
good, may become better, and whatever may become better, may become
best. Now God is not good, for He cannot become better. And if He
cannot become better, He cannot become best, for these three things,
good, better, and best, are far from God, since He is above all. If
I also say, God is wise, it is not true; I am wiser than He. If I
also say, God is a Being, it is not true; He is transcendent Being
and superessential Nothingness. Concerning this St Augustine says:
the best thing that man can say about God is to be able to be silent
about Him, from the wisdom of his inner judgement. Therefore be
silent and prate not about God, for whenever thou dost prate about
God, thou liest, and committest sin. If thou wilt be without sin,
prate not about God. Thou canst understand nought about God, for He
is above all understanding. A master saith: If I had a God whom I
could understand, I would never hold Him to be God. (318)[37]

God is not only a Father of all good things, as being their First
Cause and Creator, but He is also their Mother, since He remains
with the creatures which have from Him their being and existence,
and maintains them continually in their being. If God did not abide
with and in the creatures, they must necessarily have fallen back,
so soon as they were created, into the nothingness out of which they
were created. (610)

REST ONLY IN GOD

IF I had everything that I could desire, and my finger ached, I
should not have everything, for I should have a pain in my finger,
and so long as that remained, I should not enjoy full comfort. Bread
is comfortable for men, when they are hungry; but when they are
thirsty, they find no more comfort in bread than in a stone. So it
is with clothes, they are welcome to men, when they are cold; but
when they are too hot, clothes give them no comfort. And so it is
with all the creatures. The comfort which they promise is only on
the surface, like froth, and it always carries with it a want. But
God's comfort is clear and has nothing wanting: it is full and
complete, and God is constrained to give it thee, for He cannot
cease till He have given thee Himself. (300)

It is only in God that are collected and united all the perfections,
which in the creatures are sundered and divided. (324)

Yet all the fulness of the creatures can as little express God, as a
drop of water can express the sea. (173)

GOD IS ALWAYS READY

NO one ought to think that it is difficult to come to Him, though it
sounds difficult and is really difficult at the beginning, and in
separating oneself from and dying to all things. But when a man has
once entered upon it, no life is lighter or happier or more
desirable; for God is very zealous to be at all times with man, and
teaches him that He will bring him to Himself if man will but
follow. Man never desires anything so earnestly as God desires to
bring a man to Himself, that he may know Him. God is always ready,
but we are very unready; God is near to us, but we are far from Him;
God is within, but we are without; God is at home, but we are
strangers. The prophet saith: God guideth the redeemed through a
narrow way into the broad road, so that they come into the wide and
broad place; that is to say, into true freedom of the spirit, when
one has become a spirit with God. May God help us to follow this
course, that He may bring us to Himself. Amen. (223)

GRACE

THE masters say: That is young, which is near its beginning.
Intelligence is the youngest faculty in man: the first thing to
break out from the soul is intelligence, the next is will, the other
faculties follow. Now he saith: Young man, I say unto thee, arise.
The soul in itself is a simple work; what God works in the simple
light of the soul is more beautiful and more delightful than all the
other works which He works in all creatures. But foolish people take
evil for good and good for evil. But to him who rightly understands,
the one work which God works in the soul is better and nobler and
higher than all the world. Through that light comes grace. Grace
never comes in the intelligence or in the will. If it could come in
the intelligence or in the will, the intelligence and the will would
have to transcend themselves. On this a master says: There is
something secret about it; and thereby he means the spark of the
soul, which alone can apprehend God. The true union between God and
the soul takes place in the little spark, which is called the spirit
of the soul. Grace unites not to any work. It is an indwelling and a
living together of the soul in God. (255)

Every gift of God makes the soul ready to receive a new gift,
greater than itself. (15)

Yea, since God has never given any gift, in order that man might
rest in the possession of the gift, but gives every gift that He has
given in heaven and on earth, in order that He might be able to give
one gift, which is Himself, so with this gift of grace, and with all
His gifts He will make us ready for the one gift, which is Himself.
(569)

No man is so boorish or stupid or awkward, that he cannot, by God's
grace, unite his will wholly and entirely with God's will. And
nothing more is necessary than that he should say with earnest
longing: O Lord, show me Thy dearest will, and strengthen me to do
it. And God does it, as sure as He lives, and gives him grace in
ever richer fulness, till he comes to perfection, as He gave to the
woman at Jacob's well. Look you, the most ignorant and the lowest of
you all can obtain this from God, before he leaves this church, yea,
before I finish this sermon, as sure as God lives and I am a man.
(187)

O almighty and merciful Creator and good Lord, be merciful to me for
my poor sins, and help me that I may overcome all temptations and
shameful lusts, and may be able to avoid utterly, in thought and
deed, what Thou forbiddest, and give me grace to do and to hold all
that Thou hast commanded. Help me to believe, to hope, and to love,
and in every way to live as Thou willest, as much as Thou willest,
and what Thou willest. (415)

THE WILL

THEN is the will perfect, when it has gone out of itself, and is
formed in the will of God. The more this is so, the more perfect and
true is the will, and in such a will thou canst do all things. (553)

SURRENDER OF THE WILL

YOU should know, that that which God gives to those men who seek to
do His will with all their might, is the best. Of this thou mayest
be as sure, as thou art sure that God lives, that the very best must
necessarily be, and that in no other way could anything better
happen. Even if something else seems better, it would not be so good
for thee, for God wills this and not another way, and this way must
be the best for thee. Whether it be sickness or poverty or hunger or
thirst, or whatever it be, that God hangs over thee or does not hang
over thee--whatever God gives or gives not, that is all what is best
for thee; whether it be devotion or inwardness, or the lack of these
which grieves thee--only set thyself right in this, that thou
desirest the glory of God in all things, and then whatever He does
to thee, that is the best.

Now thou mayest perchance say: How can I tell whether it is the will
of God or not? If it were not the will of God, it would not happen.
Thou couldst have neither sickness nor anything else unless God
willed it. But know that it is God's will that thou shouldst have so
much pleasure and satisfaction therein, that thou shouldst feel no
pain as pain; thou shouldst take it from God as the very best thing,
for it must of necessity be the very best thing for thee. Therefore
I may even wish for it and desire it, and nothing would become me
better than so to do.

If there were a man whom I were particularly anxious to please, and
if I knew for certain that he liked me better in a grey cloak than
in any other, there is no doubt that however good another cloak
might be, I should be fonder of the grey than of all the rest. And
if there were anyone whom I would gladly please, I should do nothing
else in word or deed than what I knew that he liked.

Ah, now consider how your love shows itself! If you loved God, of a
surety nothing would give you greater pleasure than what pleases Him
best, and that whereby His will may be most fully done. And, however
great thy pain or hardship may be, if thou hast not as great
pleasure in it as in comfort or fulness, it is wrong.

We say every day in prayer to our Father, Thy will be done. And yet
when His will is done, we grumble at it, and find no pleasure in His
will. If our prayers were sincere, we should certainly think His
will, and what He does, to be the best, and that the very best had
happened to us. (134)

Those who accept all that the Lord send, as the very best, remain
always in perfect peace, for in them God's will has become their
will. This is incomparably better than for our will to become God's
will. For when thy will becomes God's will--if thou art sick, thou
wishest not to be well contrary to God's will, but thou wishest that
it were God's will that thou shouldest be well. And so in other
things. But when God's will becomes thy will--then thou art sick: in
God's name; thy friend dies: in God's name! (55)

SUFFERING

MEN who love God are so far from complaining of their sufferings,
that their complaint and their suffering is rather because the
suffering which God's will has assigned them is so small. All their
blessedness is to suffer by God's will, and not to have suffered
something, for this is the loss of suffering. This is why I said,
Blessed are they who are willing to suffer for righteousness, not,
Blessed are they who have suffered. (434)

All that a man bears for God's sake, God makes light and sweet for
him. (45)

If all was right with you, your sufferings would no longer be
suffering, but love and comfort. (442)

If God could have given to men anything more noble than suffering,
He would have redeemed mankind with it: otherwise, you must say that
my Father was my enemy, if he knew of anything nobler than
suffering. (338)

True suffering is a mother of all the virtues. (338)

SIN

DEADLY sin is a death of the soul. To die is to lose life. But God
is the life of the soul; since then deadly sin separates us from
God, it is a death of the soul.

Deadly sin is also an unrest of the heart. Everything can rest only
in its proper place. But the natural place of the soul is God; as St
Augustine says, Lord, thou hast made us for Thyself, and our heart
is restless till it finds rest in Thee. But deadly sin separates us
from God; therefore it is an unrest of the heart. Deadly sin is also
a sickness of the faculties, when a man can never stand up alone for
the weight of his sins, nor ever resist falling into sin. Therefore
deadly sin is a sickness of the faculties. Deadly sin is also a
blindness of the sense, in that it suffers not a man to know the
shortness of the pleasures of lust, nor the length of the punishment
in hell, nor the eternity of joys in heaven. Deadly sin is also a
death of all graces; for as soon as a deadly sin takes place, a man
becomes bare of all graces. (217)

Every creature must of necessity abide in God; if we fall out of the
hands of his mercy, we fall into the hands of His justice. We must
ever abide in Him. What madness then is it to wish not to be with
Him, without whom thou canst not be! (169)

CONTENTMENT

A GREAT teacher once told a story in his preaching about a man who
for eight years besought God to show him a man who would make known
to him the way of truth. While he was in this state of anxiety there
came a voice from God and spake to him: Go in front of the church,
and there shalt thou find a man who will make known to thee the way
of truth. He went, and found a poor man whose feet were chapped and
full of dirt, and all his clothes were hardly worth
twopence-halfpenny. He greeted this poor man and said to him, God
give thee a good morning. The poor man answered, I never had a bad
morning. The other said, God give thee happiness. How answerest thou
that? The poor man answered, I was never unhappy. The first then
said, God send thee blessedness. How answerest thou that? I was
never unblessed, was the answer. Lastly the questioner said, God
give thee health! Now enlighten me, for I cannot understand it. And
the poor man replied, When thou saidst to me, may God give thee a
good morning, I said I never had a bad morning. If I am hungry, I
praise God for it; if I am cold, I praise God for it; if I am
distressful and despised, I praise God for it; and that is why I
never had a bad morning. When thou askedst God to give me happiness,
I answered that I had never been unhappy; for what God gives or
ordains for me, whether it be His love or suffering, sour or sweet,
I take it all from God as being the best, and that is why I was
never unhappy. Thou saidst further, May God make thee blessed, and I
said, I was never unblessed, for I have given up my will so entirely
to God's will, that what God wills, that I also will, and that is
why I was never unblessed, because I willed alone God's will. Ah!
dear fellow, replied the man; but if God should will to throw thee
into hell, what wouldst thou say then? He replied, Throw me into
hell! Then I would resist Him. But even if He threw me into hell, I
should still have two arms wherewith to embrace Him. One arm is true
humility, which I should place under Him, and with the arm of love I
should embrace Him. And he concluded, I would rather be in hell and
possess God, than in the kingdom of heaven without Him. (623)

DETACHMENT

THE man who has submitted his will and purposes entirely to God,
carries God with him in all his works and in all circumstances.
Therein can no man hinder him, for he neither aims at nor enjoys
anything else, save God. God is united with Him in all his purposes
and designs. Even as no manifoldness can dissipate God, so nothing
can dissipate such a man, or destroy his unity. Man, therefore,
should take God with him in all things; God should be always present
to his mind and will and affections. The same disposition that thou
hast in church or in thy cell, thou shouldst keep and maintain in a
crowd, and amid the unrest and manifoldness of the world.

Some people pride themselves on their detachment from mankind, and
are glad to be alone or in church; and therein lies their peace. But
he who is truly in the right state, is so in all circumstances, and
among all persons; he who is not in a good state, it is not right
with him in all places and among all persons. He who is as he should
be has God with him in truth, in all places and among all persons,
in the street as well as in the church; and then no man can hinder
him. (547)

It is often much harder for a man to be alone in a crowd than in the
desert; and it is often harder to leave a small thing than a great,
and to practise a small work than one which people consider very
great. (565)

PRAYER

GOOD and earnest prayer is a golden ladder which reaches up to
heaven, and by which man ascends to God.

The man who will pray aright should ask for nothing except what may
promote God's honour and glory, his own profit and the advantage of
his neighbours. When we ask for temporal things we should always
add, if it be God's will and if it be for my soul's health. But when
we pray for virtues, we need add no qualification, for these are
God's own working. (359)

LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOUR

IT is a hard thing to practise this universal love, and to love our
neighbours as ourselves, as our Lord commanded us. But if you will
understand it rightly, there is a greater reward attached to this
command, than to any other. The commandment seems hard, but the
reward is precious indeed. (135)

LOVE

HE who has found this way of love, seeketh no other. He who turns on
this pivot is in such wise a prisoner that his foot and hand and
mouth and eyes and heart, and all his human faculties, belong to
God. And, therefore, thou canst overcome thy flesh in no better way,
so that it may not shame thee, than by love. This is why it is
written, Love is as strong as death, as hard as hell. Death
separates the soul from the body, but love separates all things from
the soul. She suffers nought to come near her, that is not God nor
God-like. Happy is he who is thus imprisoned; the more thou art a
prisoner, the more wilt thou be freed. That we may be so imprisoned,
and so freed, may He help us, Who Himself is Love. (30)

THE UNION WITH GOD

THE union of the soul with God is far more inward than that of the
soul and body. (566)

Now I might ask, how stands it with the soul that is lost in God?
Does the soul find herself or not? To this will I answer as it
appears to me, that the soul finds herself in the point, where every
rational being understands itself with itself. Although it sinks and
sinks in the eternity of the Divine Essence, yet it can never reach
the ground. Therefore God has left a little point wherein the soul
turns back upon itself and finds itself, and knows itself to be a
creature. (387)

God alone must work in thee without hindrance, that He may bring to
perfection His likeness in thee. So thou mayest understand with Him,
and love with Him. This is the essence of perfection. (471)

THE LAST JUDGMENT

PEOPLE say of the last day, that God shall give judgment. This is
true. But it is not true as people imagine. Every man pronounces his
own sentence; as he shows himself here in his essence, so will he
remain everlastingly. (471)

PRECEPT AND PRACTICE

BETTER one life-master than a thousand reading-masters (wger wre
ein lebemeister denne tûsent lesemeister). If I sought a master
in the scriptures, I should seek him in Paris and in the high
schools of high learning. But if I wished to ask questions about the
perfect life, that he could not tell me. Where then must I go?
Nowhere at all save to an utterly simple nature; he could answer my
question. (599)

RELICS

MY people, why seek ye after dead bones? Why seek ye not after
living holiness, which might give you everlasting life? The dead can
neither give nor take away. (599)

SAYINGS OF ECKHART

MASTER ECKHART saith: He who is always alone, he is worthy of God;
and he who is always at home, to him is God present; and be who
abides always in a present now, in him doth God beget His Son
without ceasing. (600)

Master Eckhart saith: I will never pray to God to give Himself to
me: I will pray Him to make me purer. If I were purer, God must give
Himself to me, of His own nature, and sink into me. (601)

Master Eckhart was asked, what were the greatest goods, that God had
done to him. He said, there are three. The first is, that the lusts
and desires of the flesh have been taken away from me. The second
is, that the Divine Light shines and gives me light in all my
doings. The third is, that I am daily renewed in virtue, grace and
holiness. (602)






TAULER





OUR AIM

THINK, and think earnestly, how great, how unutterable will be the
joy and blessedness, the glory and honour of those who shall see
clearly and without veil the gladsome and beauteous face of God, how
they will enjoy the best and highest good, which is God Himself. For
in Him is included all pleasure, might, joy, and all beauty, so that
the blessed in God will possess everything that is good and
desirable, with everlasting joy and security, without fear lest they
should ever be parted from Him. (138)[38]

CONSEQUENCES OF THE FALL

FROM the time when the first man gave a ready ear to the words of
the enemy, mankind have been deaf, so that none of us can hear or
understand the loving utterances of the eternal Word. Something has
happened to the ears of man, which has stopped up his ears, so that
he cannot hear the loving Word; and he has also been so blinded,
that he has become stupid, and does not know himself. If he wished
to speak of his own inner life, he could not do it; he knows not
where he is, nor what is his state. (91)

How can it be that the noble reason, the inner eye, is so blinded
that it cannot see the true light? This great shame has come about,
because a thick coarse skin and a thick fur has been drawn over him,
even the love and the opinion of the creatures, whether it be the
man himself or something that belongs to him; hence man has become
blind and deaf, in whatever position he may be, worldly or
spiritual. Yes, that is his guilt, that many a thick skin is drawn
over him, as thick as an ox's forehead, and it has so covered up his
inner man, that neither God nor himself can get inside; it has grown
into him. (92)

THE FALL

THROUGH two things man fell in Paradise--through pride, and through
inordinate affection. Therefore we too must return by two things,
that nature may recover her power: we must first sink our nature and
bring it down under God and under all men in deep humility, against
whom it had exalted itself in pride. We must also manfully die to
all inordinate lusts. (1)

LIFE A BATTLE

NOTHING in the world is so necessary for man as to be constantly
assailed; for in fighting he learns to know himself. As grace is
necessary to a man, so also is fighting. Virtue begins in fighting,
and is developed in fighting. In every state to which a man is
called, inward and outward, he must of necessity be assailed. A high
Master said: As little as meat can remain without salt and yet not
become corrupt, so little can a man remain without fighting. (104)

A man should in the first place act as when a town is besieged, and
it is certain that the besieging army is stronger than the town.
When the town is weakest, men take the very greatest care to guard
and defend the town; if they neglected to do so, they would lose the
town, and with it their lives and properties. So should every man
do: he should be most careful to find out in what things the evil
spirit most often besets him--that is, on what side the man is
weakest, and to what kind of errors and failings he is most prone,
and should manfully defend himself at those points.

Next, turn thyself earnestly away from sin; for I tell you of a
truth, by whatever temptation a man is assailed, if he turns not
from it heartily, but stands in it vacillating, he has no
wholehearted desire to leave his sins by God's will, and without
doubt the evil spirit is close upon him, who may make him fall into
endless perdition.

Know of a truth, that if thou wouldst truly overcome the evil
spirit, this can only be done by a complete manful turning away from
sin. Say then with all thy heart: Oh, everlasting God, help me and
give me Thy Divine grace to be my help, for it is my steadfast
desire never again to commit any deadly sin against Thy Divine will
and Thine honour. So with thy good will and intention thou entirely
overcomest the evil spirit, so that he must fly from thee ashamed.

Understand, however, that it is a miserable and pitiable thing for a
reasonable man to let himself be overcome by the evil spirit, and in
consequence of his attacks to fall voluntarily into grievous and
deadly sin, whereby man loses the grace of God. A reasonable man,
who allows himself voluntarily to be overcome by the evil spirit, is
like a well-armed man who voluntarily lets a fly bite him to death.
For man has many great and strong weapons, wherewith he may well and
manfully withstand the evil spirit--the holy faith, the blessed
sacrament, the holy word of God, the model and example of all good
and holy men, the prayers of holy Church, and other great supports
against the power of the evil spirit, whose power is much less than
that of a fly against a great bear. If a man will manfully and
boldly withstand the evil spirit, the evil one can gain no advantage
against his free will.

Turn, therefore, manfully and earnestly from your sins, and watch
diligently and earnestly; for I tell you of a truth, that when you
have come to the next world, if you have not withstood the evil
spirit, and if you are found there without repentance and sorrow,
you will be a mockery to all the devils and to yourself, and you
will be eternally punished and tormented. And it will then be a
greater woe to you, that you have followed the evil spirit, than all
the external pains that you must endure eternally for your sins.

Thirdly, a man should diligently attend to his inner Ground, that
there shall be nothing in it save God alone, and His eternal glory.
For alas! there are many men, both lay and clerical, who live
falsely beneath a fair show, and imagine that they can deceive the
everlasting God. No, in truth, thou deceivest thyself, and losest
the day of grace, and the favour of God, and makest thyself guilty
towards God, in that He gives the evil spirits power over thee, so
that thou canst do no good work. Therefore, watch while it is day,
that the hour of darkness and God's disfavour may not overtake thee,
and take heed that in thy inner ground God may dwell, and nought
besides. (75)

Even as each man in his baptism is placed under the charge of a
special angel, who is with him always and never leaves him, and
protects him waking and sleeping in all his ways and in all his
works, so every man has a special devil, who continually opposes him
and exercises him without ceasing. But if the man were wise and
diligent, the opposition of the devil and his exercises would be
much more profitable to him than the aid of the good angel; for if
there were no struggle, there could be no victory. (139)

SIN

WHEN a man has had the fair net of his soul torn by sin, he must
patch and mend it by a humble, repentant return to the grace and
mercy of God. He must act like one who wishes to make a crooked
stick straight: he bends the stick further back than it ought to go,
and by being thus bent back it becomes straight again. So must a man
do to his own nature. He must bend himself under all things which
belong to God, and break himself right off, inwardly and outwardly,
from all things which are not God.

Every deadly sin causes the precious blood of Christ to be shed
afresh. Jesus Christ is spiritually crucified many times every day.
(75)

FISHING FOR SOULS

THE fisherman throws his hook, that he may catch the fish; but the
fish itself takes the hook. When the fish takes the hook, the
fisherman is sure of the fish, and draws it to him. Even so, God has
thrown His hook and His net into all the world, before our feet,
before our eyes, before our minds, and He would gladly draw us
securely to Himself by means of all His creatures. By pleasurable
things He draws us on; by painful things He drives us on. He who
will not be drawn, is in fault; for he has not taken God's hook, nor
will he be caught in God's net. If he came therein, beyond doubt he
would be caught by God and would be drawn by God. It is not God's
fault if we will not be drawn; we should grasp the hand held out to
us. If a man were in a deep pool, and one tried to help him and pull
him out, would he not gladly grasp his hand and allow himself to be
pulled out? (42)

Where two things are so related to each other, that one may receive
something for the other, there must be something in common between
them. If they had nothing in common, there must be a middle term
between them, which has something in common both with the higher,
from which it may receive, and with the lower, to which it may
impart. Now God hath created all things, and especially mankind,
immediately for Himself. He created man for His pleasure. But by
sin, human nature was so far estranged from God, that it was
impossible for a man to attain to that, for which he was made. Now
Aristotle says that God and Nature are not unprofitable
workers--that is, what they work at, they carry to its end. Now God
created man that He might have pleasure in him. If then God's work
in creating mankind was not to be unprofitable, when they were so
far estranged from God by sin, that they could not receive that by
which they might return and attain the enjoyment of eternal
happiness, a Mediator was necessary between us and God, one who has
something in common with us and our natures, and also shares in the
nature of God. In order that on the one side, He might in Himself
destroy our sickness, which was a cause of all our sins, and also
destroy all our sins, to which our weakness has brought us; and on
the other side that He might include in Himself all the treasure of
grace and of God's honour, that He might be able to give us grace
richly, and forgiveness of our sins, and eternal glory hereafter,
this could only be, if the Son of God became man. (90)

Yea, the highest God and Lord of all lords, the Son of God, in His
deep love felt pity for us poor, sinful men, condemned to the flames
of hell. Though He was in the form of God, He thought it not robbery
(as St Paul says) to be equal with God, and He annihilated Himself,
and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made like any other
man, being found in fashion as a man. He humbled Himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. (117)

THE EFFICACY OF DIVINE GRACE

ALL works which men and all creatures can ever work even to the end
of the world, without the grace of God--all of them together,
however great they may be, are an absolute nothing, as compared with
the smallest work which God has worked in men by His grace. As much
as God is better than all His creatures, so much better are His
works than all the works, or wisdom, or designs, which all men could
devise. Even the smallest drop of grace is better than all earthly
riches that are beneath the sun. Yea, a drop of grace is more noble
than all angels and all souls, and all the natural things that God
has made. And yet grace is given more richly by God to the soul than
any earthly gift. It is given more richly than brooks of water, than
the breath of the air, than the brightness of the sun; for spiritual
things are far finer and nobler than earthly things. The whole
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, give grace to the soul, and
flow immediately into it; even the highest angel, in spite of his
great nobility, cannot do this. Grace looses us from the snares of
many temptations; it relieves us from the heavy burden of worldly
cares, and carries the spirit up to heaven, the land of spirits. It
kills the worm of conscience, which makes sins alive. Grace is a
very powerful thing. The man, to whom cometh but a little drop of
the light of grace, to him all that is not God becomes as bitter as
gall upon the tongue. (86)

Grace makes, contrary to nature, all sorrows sweet, and brings it
about that a man no longer feels any relish for things which
formerly gave him great pleasure and delight. On the other hand,
what formerly disgusted him, now delights him and is the desire of
his heart--for instance, weakness, sorrow, inwardness, humility,
self-abandonment, and detachment from all the creatures. All this is
in the highest degree dear to him, when this visitation of the Holy
Ghost, grace, has in truth come to him. Then the sick man, that is
to say the external man, with all his faculties is plunged
completely into the pool of water, even as the sick man who had been
for thirty-eight years by the pool at Jerusalem, and there washes
himself thoroughly in the exalted, noble, precious blood of Christ
Jesus. For grace in manifold ways bathes the soul in the wounds and
blood of the holy Lamb, Jesus Christ. (22)

PRAYER

THE essence of prayer is the ascent of the mind to God, as holy
teachers tell us. Therefore every good man, when he wishes to pray,
ought to collect his outer senses into himself, and look into his
mind, to see whether it be really turned to God. He who wishes that
his prayers may be truly heard, must keep himself turned away from
all temporal and external things, and all that is not Divine,
whether it be friend or joy (Freund oder Freude), and all vanities,
whether they be clothes or ornaments, and from everything of which
God is not the true beginning and ending, and from everything that
does not belong to Him. He must cut off his words and his conduct,
his manners and his demeanour, from all irregularity, inward or
outward. Dream not that that can be a true prayer, when a man only
babbles outwardly with his mouth, and reads many psalms, gabbling
them rapidly and hastily, while his mind wanders this way and that,
backwards and forwards. Much rather must the true prayer be, as St
Peter tells us, "one-minded"[39]that is, the mind must cleave to
God alone, and a man must look with the face of his soul turned
directly towards God, with a gentle, willing dependence on Him. (80)

If thy prayer has these conditions, thou mayst with true humility
fall at the feet of God, and pray for the gentle succour of God;
thou mayest knock at His fatherly heart, and ask for breadthat is,
for love. If a man had all the food in the world, and had not bread,
his food would be neither eatable, nor pleasant, nor useful. So it
is with all things, without the Love of God. Knock also at the door
through which we must go--namely, Christ Jesus. At this door, the
praying man must knock for three ends, if he wishes to be really
admitted. First he must knock devoutly, at the broken heart and the
open side, and enter in with all devotion, and in recognition of his
unfathomable poverty and nothingness, as poor Lazarus did at the
rich man's gate, and ask for crumbs of His grace. Then again, he
should knock at the door of the holy open wounds of His holy hands,
and pray for true Divine knowledge, that it may enlighten him and
exalt him. Finally, knock at the door of His holy feet, and pray for
true Divine love, which may unite thee with Him, and immerse and
cover thee in Him. (57)






MEDITATIONS ON THE SEVEN WORDS FROM THE CROSS





[From a devotional treatise on the Passion of Christ, published in a
Latin translation, by Surius, in 1548, and wrongly ascribed by him
to Tauler. The author was an unknown German of the fourteenth
century.]

THE FIRST WORD

NOW, O my soul, and all ye who have been redeemed by the precious
blood of Christ, come, and let us go with inward compassion and
fervent devotion to the blessed palm-tree of the Cross, which is
laden with the fairest fruit. Let us pass like the bee from flower
to flower, for all are full of honey. Let us consider and ponder
with the greatest care the sacred words of Christ, which He spoke
upon the Cross; for everything that comes From this blessed Tree is
wholesome and good. In the Cross of our Lord and Saviour are centred
all our salvation, all our health, all our life, all our glory; and,
"if we suffer with Him," saith the Apostle, "we shall also reign
with Him." That we may not be found ungrateful for these inestimable
benefits, let us call upon heaven and earth, and all that in them
is, to join us in praising and blessing and giving thanks to God.
Let us invite them to come and look upon this wondrous sight, and
say: "Magnify the Lord with me, for He hath done marvellous things.
O praise and bless the Lord with me, for great is His mercy toward
us." Come up with me, I pray you, ye angelic spirits, to Mount
Calvary, and see your King Solomon on His throne, wearing the diadem
wherewith His mother has crowned Him. Let us weep in the presence of
the Lord who made us, the Lord our God. O all mankind, and all ye
who are members of Christ, behold your Redeemer as He hangs on high;
behold and weep. See if any sorrow is like unto His sorrow.
Acknowledge the heinousness of your sins, which needed such
satisfaction. Go to every part of His body; you will find only
wounds and blood. Cry to Him with lamentations and say, "O Jesus,
our redemption, our love, our desire, what mercy has overcome Thee,
that Thou shouldest bear our sins, and endure a cruel death, to
rescue us from everlasting death?" And Thou, O God, the almighty
Father of heaven, look down from Thy sanctuary upon Thine innocent
Son Joseph, sold and given over unjustly to the hands of bloody men,
to suffer a shameful death. See whether this be Thy Son's coat or
not. Of a truth an evil beast hath devoured Him. The blood of our
sins is sprinkled over His garments, and all the coverings of His
good name are defiled by it. See how Thy holy Child has been
condemned with the wicked, how Thy royal Son has been crowned with
thorns. Behold His innocent hands, which have known no sin, dripping
with blood; behold His sacred feet, which have never turned aside
from the path of justice, pierced through by a cruel nail; behold
His defenceless side smitten with a sharp spear; behold His fair
face, which the angels desire to look upon, marred and shorn of all
its beauty; behold His blessed heart, which no impure thought ever
stained, weighed down with inward sorrow. Behold, O loving Father,
Thy sweet Son, stretched out upon the harp of the Cross, and harping
blessings on Thee with all His members. Wherefore, O my God, I pray
Thee to forgive me, for the sake of Thy Son's Passion, all the sins
that I have committed in my members. O merciful Father, look on Thy
only-begotten Son, that Thou mayst have compassion on Thy servant.
Whenever that red blood of Thy Son speaks in Thy sight, do Thou wash
me from every stain of sin. Whenever Thou beholdest the wounds of
this Thy Son, open to me the bosom of Thy fatherly compassion.
Behold, O tender Father, how Thy obedient Son does not cry, "Bind my
hands and my feet, that I may not rebel against Thee," but how of
His own will He extends His hands and feet, and gladly allows them
to be pierced with nails. Look down, I pray Thee, not on the brazen
serpent hanging on a pole for the salvation of Israel, but on Thine
only Son hanging on the Cross for the salvation of all men. It is
not Moses who now stretches out his hand to heaven, that the thunder
and lightning and the other plagues may cease, but it is Thy beloved
Son, who lovingly stretches out His bleeding arms to Thee, that Thy
wrath may depart from the human race. Aaron and Hur are not now
holding up the hands of Moses that he may pray more unweariedly for
Israel; but hard and cruel nails have fastened the hands of Thy only
Son to the Cross, that He may wait with long-suffering for our
repentance, and receive us back into His grace, and that He may not
turn away in wrath from our prayers. This is that faithful David,
who now strings tight the harp-strings of His body, and makes sweet
melody before Thee, singing to Thee the sweetest song that has been
ever sung to Thee: "Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do." This is that High Priest, who by His own blood has entered into
the Holy of Holies, to offer Himself as a peace-offering for the
sins of the whole world. This is that innocent Lamb, who has washed
us in His own precious blood, who, Himself without spot of sin, has
taken away the sins of the world. Therefore from the storehouse of
His Passion I borrow the price of my debt, and I count out before
Thee all its merits, to pay what I owe Thee. For He has done all in
my nature, and for my sake. O merciful Father, if Thou weighest all
my sins on one side of the balance, and in the other scale the
Passion of Thy Son, the last will outweigh the first. For what sin
can be so great, that the innocent blood of Thy Son has not washed
it out? What pride, or disobedience, or lust, is so unchecked or so
rebellious, that such lowliness, obedience, and poverty cannot
abolish it? O merciful Father, accept the deeds of Thy beloved Son,
and forgive the errors of Thy wicked servant. For the innocent blood
of our brother Abel crieth to Thee from the Cross, not for
vengeance, but for grace and mercy, saying, "Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do."

THE SECOND WORD

NOW the thieves who were crucified with Jesus reviled Him. But after
a while, the one who hung on the right side of Christ, when he saw
His great patience and long-suffering, wherewith He so lovingly
prayed to His Father for those who cast reproaches upon Him and
cruelly tortured Him, became entirely changed, and began to be moved
with very great sorrow and repentance for his sins. And he showed
this outwardly, when he rebuked his fellow-thief, who continued to
revile Christ, saying: "Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in
the same condemnation?" "Although" (he would say) "thou art so
obstinate as not to fear men, and thinkest nought of thy bodily
pain, yet surely thou must fear God, in the last moments of thy
life--God, who hath power to destroy both thy body and soul in hell.
And though we suffer the same punishment with Him, our deserts are
very different. We, indeed, suffer justly, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds, but this man hath done nothing amiss." He, who
but lately was a blasphemer, is now a confessor and preacher, he
distinguishes good from evil, blaming the sinner, and excusing the
innocent: the unbelieving thief has become the confessor of almighty
God. O good Jesus, this sudden change is wrought by Thy right hand,
at which he hung. Thy right hand touched him inwardly, and forthwith
he is changed into another man. O Lord, in this Thou hast declared
Thy patience, out of a stone Thou hast raised up a child unto
Abraham. Verily, the penitent thief received the light of faith
solely from that bright light on the candlestick of the Cross, which
shone there in the darkness and scattered the shades of night. But
what does this signify, save that our Lord Jesus, out of the
greatness of His goodness, looked upon him with the eyes of His
mercy, although He found no merit in him, except what it pleased Him
out of His goodness to bestow? For as God gives to His elect, out of
His goodness alone, what no one has a right to demand, so out of His
justice He gives to the wicked what they deserve. For this cause
David says: "He saved me because He desired me." And this is why the
thief, before the Lord touched his heart with the beams of His grace
and love, joined the other thief in reviling Christ, thus showing
first what his own character was, and afterwards what was wrought in
him by grace. At first he acted like the other, being, like him, a
child of wrath; but when the precious blood of Christ was shed as
the price of our redemption and paid to the Father for our debt,
then the thief asked God to give him an alms for his good, and at
once received it. For how can one alms diminish that inexhaustible
treasure? How could our tender Lord, whose property is always to
have mercy, have refused his request? Indeed He gave him more than
he asked. Yet how could the thief escape the glow of the fire which
was burning so near him? Truly this was the fire, which the Father
had sent down from heaven to earth, which had long smouldered, but
now, kindled anew, and fed by the wood of the Cross, and sprinkled
with the oil of mercy, and fanned, as it were, by the reproaches and
blasphemies of the Jews, sent up its flames to heaven, by which that
thief was quite kindled and set on fire, and his love became as
strong as death, so that he said: "I indeed suffer no grievous
penalty, for it is less than I deserve; but that this innocent One,
who has done no wrong, should be so tortured, contrary to justice
and righteousness, this, truly, adds grievous sorrow to my sorrow."
O splendid faith of this thief! He contemned all the punishment that
might be inflicted on him: he feared not the rage of the people, who
were barking like mad dogs against Jesus: he cared not for the chief
priests: he feared not the executioners with their weapons and
instruments of torture; but in the presence of them all, with a
fearless heart he confessed that Christ was the true Son of God, and
Lord of the whole world: and at the same time he confounded the Jews
by confessing that He had done nothing amiss, and therefore that
they had crucified Him unjustly. O wondrous faith! O mighty
constancy! O amazing love of this poor thief, love that cast out all
fear! He was indeed well drunken with that new wine which in the
wine-press of the Cross had been pressed out of that sweet cluster,
Jesus Christ, and therefore he confessed Christ without shame before
all the people. At the very beginning of the Passion, the apostles
and disciples had forsaken Christ and fled; even St Peter,
frightened by the voice of one maidservant, had denied Christ. But
this poor thief did not forsake Him even in death, but confessed Him
to be the Lord of heaven in the presence of all those armed men. Who
can do justice to the merits of this man? Who taught him so quickly
that faith of his, and his clear knowledge of all the virtues, save
the very Wisdom of the Father, Jesus Christ, who hung near him on
the Cross? Him whom the Jews could not or would not know, in spite
of the promises made to the patriarchs, the fulfilment of
prophecies, the teaching of the Scriptures, and the interpretation
of allegories, this poor thief learned to know by repentance. He
confessed Christ to be the Son of God, though he saw Him full of
misery, want, and torment, and dying from natural weakness. He
confessed Him at a time when the apostles, who had seen His mighty
works, denied Him. The nails were holding his hands and feet fixed
to the cross; he had nothing free about him, except his heart and
his tongue; yet he gave to God all that he could give to Him, and,
in the words of Scripture, "with his heart he believed unto
righteousness, and with his tongue he made confession of Christ unto
salvation." O infinite and unsearchable mercy of God! For what
manner of man was he when he was sent to the cross, and what when he
left it? (Not that it was his own cross, that wrought this change,
but the power of Christ crucified.) He came to the cross stained
with the blood of his fellow-man; he was taken down from it cleansed
by the blood of Christ. He came to the cross still savage and full
of rage, and while he was upon it he became so meek and pitiful that
he lamented for the sufferings of another more than for his own. One
member only was left to him, and at the eleventh hour he came to
work in God's vineyard, and yet so eagerly did he labour that he was
the first to finish his work and receive his reward. Indeed he
behaved like a just man; for he first accused himself and confessed
his sins, saying, "and we, indeed, justly, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds." Secondly, he excused Christ, and confessed
that He was the Just One when he said "but this Man hath done
nothing amiss." Thirdly, he showed brotherly love, for he said,
"dost not thou fear God?" Fourthly, with all his members, or at
least with all that he could offer, and with loving eyes and a
devout heart and a humble spirit, he turned himself to Christ and
prayed earnestly, "Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy
Kingdom." How great was the justice and humility and resignation
which he showed in this prayer, for he asked only for a little
remembrance of himself, acknowledging that he was not worthy to ask
for anything great. Nor did he pray for the safety of his body, for
he gladly desired to die for his sins. It was more pleasant for him
to die with Christ than to live any longer. Nor did he pray that our
Lord would deliver him from the pains of hell, or of purgatory, nor
did he ask for the kingdom of heaven; but he resigned himself
entirely to the will of God, and offered himself altogether to
Christ, to do what He would with him. In his humility he prayed for
nothing except for grace and mercy, for which David also prayed when
he said, "Deal with Thy servant according to Thy mercy." And
therefore, because he had prayed humbly and wisely, the Eternal
Wisdom, Who reads the hearts of all who pray, heard his prayer, and,
opening wide the rich storehouse of His grace, bestowed upon him
much more than he had dared to ask. O marvellous goodness of God!
How plainly dost Thou declare in this, that Thou desirest not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live.
Now Thou hast manifested and fulfilled what Thou didst promise
aforetime by Thy prophet: "When the wicked man shall mourn for his
sins, I will remember his iniquity no more." Thou didst not impose
upon him many years of severe penance, nor many sufferings in
purgatory for the expiation of his sins; but just as if Thou hadst
quite forgotten his crimes, and couldst see nothing in him but
virtue, Thou didst say: "This day shalt thou be with Me in
paradise." O immeasurable compassion of God! Our tender Lord forgot
all the countless crimes which that poor thief had done, and forgave
him when he repented, and gave so great and splendid a reward to the
good which there was in him, small indeed though it was. Our loving
God is very rich; He needs not our gifts; but He seeks for a heart
which turns to Him with lowliness and resignation, such a heart as
He found in this poor thief. For He says Himself: "turn to Me, and I
will turn to you." And so when this thief so courageously and
effectively turned to God, his prayer was at once not only accepted
but answered. For our Lord did not reject his prayer, or say to him:
"See how I hang here in torment, and I behold before My eyes My
mother in sore affliction, and I have not yet spoken one word to
her, so that to hear thee now would not be just." No, our Lord said
nothing of this kind to the thief. Rather, He heard his prayer at
once, and made answer in that sweet word, "Amen, I say unto thee,
this day shalt thou be with Me in paradise." O tender goodness, O
marvellous mercy of God! O great wisdom of the thief! He saw that
the treasures of Christ were wide open, and were being scattered
abroad. Who then should forbid him to take as much as would pay what
he owed to his Lord? And O the accursed hardness of the impenitent
thief, whom neither the rebuke of his associate, nor the patience of
Christ, nor the many signs of love and mercy that shone forth in
Christ, could melt or convert! He saw that alms were plentiful at
the rich man's gate, that more was given than was asked for, and yet
he was too proud and obstinate to ask. He saw that life and the
kingdom of heaven were being granted, and yet he would not bend his
heart to wish for them: therefore he shall not have them. He loved
better revilings and curses, and they shall come unto him, and that
for all eternity. These new first-fruits of the grape, which our
Lord gathered on the wood of the Cross from our barren soil, by much
sweat of His brow and much watering with His own precious blood, He
sent with great joy as a precious gift to His heavenly Father, by
His celestial messengers the holy angels. But if there is joy among
the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, how must they
rejoice and exult at the salvation of this thief, of whom they had
almost despaired? We can picture to ourselves with what joy the
Father of heaven received these first-fruits of the harvest of His
Son's Passion. But Christ Himself, though He felt some joy at the
thief's conversion, was still more afflicted thereby, for by His
wisdom He foresaw that this thief would be the cause of perdition to
many, who would resolve to pass their whole lives in sin, hoping to
obtain pardon and grace at the moment of death. Truly a most foolish
hope, for nowhere in the Scriptures do we read that it has so
happened to any man. In truth, they who seek after God only when
they must, will not, it is to be feared, find Him near them in their
time of need. In the meantime, none can trust too much in God, and
no one has ever been forsaken by Him, who has turned to Him with his
whole heart, and leant upon Him with loving confidence.

THE THIRD WORD

THERE stood also by the Cross of Jesus His most holy and ever-virgin
mother Mary; not in order that His sufferings might thereby be
lessened, but that they might be greatly augmented. For if any
creature could have given consolation to the Lord while He hung on
the Cross, no one could have done it so fitly as His blessed mother.
But since it was God's will that Christ should die the most bitter
of deaths, and end His Passion without any comfort or relief, but
with true resignation, His mother's presence brought Him no
consolation, but rather added to His sufferings, for her sufferings
were thereby added to His, and this added yet more to His
affliction. Who then, O good Jesus can discover by meditation how
great was Thy inward grief, for Thou knowest the hearts of all, when
Thou sawest all the body of Thy holy mother tortured by inward
compassion, even as Thou wast tortured on the Cross, and her tender
heart and maternal breast pierced with the sword of sharp sorrow,
her face pale as death, telling the anguish of her soul, and almost
dead, yet unable to die. When Thou beheldest her hot tears, flowing
down abundantly like sweet rivers upon her gracious cheeks, and over
all her face, all witnesses to Thee that she shared in Thy sorrow
and love; when Thou heardest her sad laments, forced from her by the
weight of her affliction; when Thou sawest that same tender mother,
melted away with the heat of love, her strength quite failing her,
worn out and exhausted by the pains of Thy Passion, which wasted her
away; all this, truly, was a new affliction to Thee on the Cross; it
was itself a new Cross. For Thou alone, by the spear of, Thy pity,
didst explore the weight and grievousness of her woes, which to men
are beyond comprehension. All this, indeed, greatly increased the
pain of Thy Passion, because Thou wast crucified not only in Thy own
body, but in Thy mother's heart; for her Cross was Thy Cross, and
Thine was hers. O how bitter was Thy Passion, sweet Jesus! Great
indeed was Thy outward suffering, but far more grievous was Thy
inward suffering, which Thy heart experienced at Thy mother's
anguish. It was now, beyond doubt, that the sword of sorrow pierced
her through, for the queen of martyrs was terribly and mortally
wounded in that part which is impassible--that is, the soul; she
bore the death of the Cross in that part which could not die,
suffering all the more her grievous inward death, as outward death
departed further from her. Who, O most loving mother, can recount or
conceive in his mind the immeasurable sorrows of thy soul, or thine
inward woes? Him whom thou didst bring forth without pain, as a
blessed mother free from the curse of our first mother Eve, who
instead of the pains of labour wast filled with joy of spirit, and
who for thy refreshment didst listen to the sweet songs of the
angels as they praised thy Son, thou hast now seen slain before
thine eyes with the greatest cruelty and tyranny. How manifold was
that sorrow of thine, which thou wast permitted to escape at His
birth, when thou sawest thy blessed and only Son hanging in such
torment on the Cross, in the presence of a cruel and furious crowd,
who showered upon Him all the insults and contumely and shame that
they could think of; when thou sawest Him whom thou didst bear in
thy pure womb without feeling the burden, so barbarously stretched
on the Cross, and pierced with nails; when thou sawest His sacred
arms, with which He had so many times lovingly embraced thee,
stretched out so that He could not move them, and covered with red
blood, His adorable head pierced with sharp thorns, and His whole
body one streaming wound, while thou wast not able to staunch or
anoint any of those wounds. What must thy grief have been when thou
sawest Him whom thou hadst so often laid on thy virgin bosom that He
might rest, without anything on which to lean His sacred head; and
Him whom thou hadst nourished with the milk of thy holy breasts, now
vexed with vinegar and gall. O how thy maternal heart was oppressed
when thou beheldest with thy pure eyes that fair face so piteously
marred, so that there was no beauty in it, and nothing by which He
could be distinguished. How did the wave of affliction beat against
and overflow and overwhelm thy soul! Truly, if even a devout man
cannot without unspeakable sorrow and pity revolve in his mind the
Passion of thy Son, what must have been thy Cross, thy affliction,
who wast His mother and sawest it all with thine eyes? If to many
friends of God and to many who love Him, thy Son's Passion is as
grievous as if they suffered it themselves, if by inward pity they
are crucified with thy Son, how terribly, even unto death, must thou
have been crucified inwardly, when thou didst not only ponder and
search into the outward and inward pains of thy Son in thy devout
heart, but sawest them with thy bodily eyes? For never did any
mother love her child as thou lovedst thy Son. And if St Paul, who
loved so much, could say, out of his ardent love and deep pity for
thy Son, "I am crucified with Christ; and I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus," how much more wert thou crucified with
Him, and didst inwardly receive all His wounds, being made, in a
manner, an image and likeness of thy crucified Son?

THE FOURTH WORD

ABOUT the ninth hour our Lord Jesus cried with a loud voice, "My
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" He cried with a loud voice,
that He might be easily heard by all, and also that by this wondrous
word He might shake off from our souls the sleep of sloth, and cause
them to wonder and marvel at the immeasurable goodness of God to us.
Therefore He saith, "My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" For
the sake of vile sinners, for evil and thankless servants, for
sinful and disobedient deceivers, Thou hast forsaken Thy beloved Son
and most obedient Child. That Thy enemies, who are vessels of wrath,
might be changed into children of adoption, Thou hast slain Thine
own Son, and given Him over to death like one guilty. "O my God,
why, I pray Thee, hast Thou forsaken me?" For the very cause why men
ought to praise and give thanks to Thee, and love Thee with an
everlasting love; because Thou hast delivered Thy dear Son to death
for their redemption, and sacrificed Him willingly, for this reason
they will find ground for blasphemy and reproach against Thee,
saying, "He saith He is the Son of God. Let God deliver Him now if
He will have Him." Why, O my God, hast Thou willed to spend so
precious a treasure for such vile and counterfeit goods? Besides,
this word may be understood to have been spoken by Christ against
those who seek to diminish the glory of His Passion, by saying that
it was not really so bitter and terrible, owing to the great support
and comfort which He drew from His Godhead. Let those who speak and
think thus know that they renew His Passion and crucify Him afresh.
It was to prove the error of such men that our Lord cried with a
loud voice, and said, "My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?"
It is as if He had said these words to His own Divine nature, with
which He formed one Person--for the Godhead of the Father and of the
Son is all one--wondering, Himself, at His own love, which had so
cast Him down and worn Him out and humbled Him, and that He who
brings help to all mankind should have forsaken Himself, and offered
Himself to suffer every kind of pain, impelled thereto by conquering
love alone. Again, we should not be wrong, if we were to interpret
this word which Christ spoke out of the exceeding bitterness of His
sorrow in the following way--namely, that His spirit and inward man,
taking upon itself the severe judgment of God upon all sinners, and
at the same time discerning clearly and feeling and measuring in
Himself the intolerable weight of His Passion, on this account cried
out in a sorrowful voice to His Father, and complained tenderly to
Him because He had been cast into these dreadful torments; as if the
goodness of His Father had become so embittered against the sins of
men, that in the ardour of His justice He had quite forgotten the
inseparable union between His passible humanity and His impassible
Godhead, and therefore in the zealousness of His justice had quite
given up His passible nature to the cruelty and malice of fierce
men, that they might waste it away and destroy it. For this reason,
therefore, He said, "My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?"
This word has besides an inward meaning, according to which Christ,
in His sensitive parts, complained to His Father that He had been
forsaken by Him. For as many as contend for His honour, and endure
patiently the troubles of this world, our merciful God so moderates
and tempers their crosses and afflictions by the inpouring of His
divine consolation, that by His sensible grace He makes their
crosses hardly felt; but He left His own beloved Son quite without
any comfort, and so deprived Him of all consolation and light, that
He endured as much in His human nature as had been ordained by the
Eternal Wisdom, according to the strictness of justice, as much as
was needed to atone for so many sins. And indeed our salvation was
the more nobly and perfectly achieved, in that it was done and
finished without any light at all, in absolute resignation and
abandonment. For a chief cause of the Passion was to show clearly
how great was the injury and insult brought upon His most high
Godhead by the sins of the human race. Now as the knowledge of
Christ was greater and more acute than that of all other beings, in
heaven or in earth, so much the greater and heavier was His sorrow
and agony. Nay more--what is more wonderful than anything--whatever
afflictions have been endured by all the saints, as members of
Christ, existed much more abundantly in Christ their Head; and this
I wish to be understood according to the spirit and reasonably. For
all the saints have suffered no more than flowed in upon them
through Christ, joined to them as His members, who communicated to
them His own afflictions. For He took upon Himself the afflictions
of all the saints, out of His great love for His members, and
wondrous pity, and He suffered far greater internal anguish than any
of the saints, nay, more even than the blessed Virgin, His mother,
felt her own sharp sorrow and sickness of heart. For if an earthly
father loves his child so much, that in fatherly pity he takes upon
himself the sorrows of his child, and grieves for them as if he
suffered them himself, what must have been Christ's Cross and
compassion for the affliction of His members, and above all, of
those who suffered for His name's sake? Truly He bore witness to His
members, how much He suffered from their afflictions, and how great
was His inward pity for their sufferings, when He took all their
debt upon Himself, and abolished all the penalties which they had
merited, so that they might depart free. The same is most amply
proved by the words which He spoke to St Paul, when He said, "Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" For the persecution which Saul had
stirred up against the disciples, the members of the Lord, was not
less grievous to Him than if He had suffered it Himself. Therefore
He says to His friends and members, "He who touches you, touches the
apple of Mine eye." For is there anything suffered by the members,
which the Head does not suffer with them, He whose nature is
goodness, and whose property is always to have mercy and to forgive?

THE FIFTH WORD

OUR most tender Lord was so worn out and parched by the extreme
bitterness of His pain and suffering, and by the great loss of
blood, that He cried, "I thirst." A little word, but full of
mysteries.

In the first place it may be understood literally. For it is natural
for those who are at the point of death to feel thirst, and to
desire to drink. But how great was the drouth felt by Him who is the
fountain of living water, but who was now worn out and parched by
the heat of His ardent love, when he could truly say, "I am poured
out like water," and "My strength is dried up like a potsherd." For
not only did He shed all His own blood, and pour out moisture by
tears, but the very marrow of His bones, and all His heart's blood,
were consumed for our sakes by the heat and flame of love. Therefore
He said rightly, "I thirst."

But, secondly, the word may be understood spiritually, as if Christ
said to all men, "I thirst for your salvation." Hence St Bernard
says: "Jesus cried, I thirst, not, I grieve. O Lord, what dost Thou
thirst for? For your faith, your joy. I thirst because of the
torments of your souls, far more than for My own bodily sufferings.
Have pity on yourselves, if not on Me." And again, "O good Jesus,
Thou wearest the crown of thorns; Thou art silent about Thy Cross
and wounds, yet Thou criest out, I thirst. For what, then, dost Thou
thirst? Truly, for the redemption of mankind only, and for the
felicity of the human race." This thirst of Christ was a hundred
times more keen and intense than His natural thirst. And, besides,
He had another sort of thirst--that is to say, a thirst to suffer
more, and to prove to us still more clearly His immeasurable love,
as if He said to man, "See how I am worn out and exhausted for thy
salvation. See how terrible are the pains and anguish which I
endure. The fierce cruelty of man has almost brought Me to nothing;
the sinners of earth have drunk out all My blood, and yet I thirst.
Not yet is My heart satisfied, nor My desire accomplished, nor the
fire of My love quenched. For if it were possible for Me, and
according to My Father's will, that I should be crucified again a
thousand times for your salvation and conversion, or that I should
hang here, in all this pain and anguish, till the day of judgment, I
would gladly do it, to prove to you the immeasurable love which I
bear you in My heart, and to soften your stony hearts and rouse you
to love Me in return. This is why I hang here so thirsty by the
fountain of your hearts, that I may watch the pious souls who come
hither to draw from the deep well of My Passion. Therefore, the
maiden to whom I shall say, 'Give Me to drink a little water out of
the pitcher of thy conscience'--the water of devotion, pity, tears,
and mutual love--and who shall let down to Me her pitcher, and shall
say, 'Drink, my Lord; and for Thy camels also--that is, Thy
servants, who carry Thee about daily on their bodies, and who by
night and day are held bound fast by Thy yoke, I will draw the water
of brotherly love'--that is the maiden whom the Lord hath prepared
for the Son of My Lord, even the bride of the Word of God, united to
My humanity. And she shall be counted worthy to enter, like a bride
with her bridegroom, into the chamber of eternal rest, when the
Bridegroom invites her, saying, 'Come, My blessed bride, inherit the
Kingdom of My Father. For I was thirsty, and thou gavest Me drink.'"

Thirdly, we may apply this word to the Father, as if Christ said to
His Father: "Father, I have declared Thy name to mankind; I have
finished the work which Thou gavest Me to do; and in Thy service I
have spent My whole body as Thine instrument. Behold, I am all worn
out and exhausted; and yet I still thirst to do and suffer more for
Thine honour. This is why I hang here, extended to the furthest
breadth of love, for I long to be an everlasting sacrifice, a sweet
savour to Thee, and at the same time an eternal atonement and
salvation to mankind." Thus, too, might this strong Samson have
said: "O Lord, Thou hast put into the hand of Thy servant this very
great salvation and victory, and yet behold, I die of thirst." As if
He would say: "Father, I have accomplished Thy gracious will; I have
finished the work of man's salvation, as Thou didst demand; and yet
I still thirst; for the sins by which Thou art offended are
infinite. And so I desire that the love and merits of My Passion, by
which Thou wilt be appeased, may be infinite too. And as I now offer
myself as a peace-offering and a living sacrifice for the salvation
of all men, so through Me may all men appease Thee, by offering Me
to Thee as a peace-offering to Thine eternal glory, in memory of My
Passion, and to make good all their shortcomings." O how acceptable
to the Father must this desire of love have been! For what was this
thirst but a sweet and pleasant refreshment to the Father, and at
the same time the blessed renovation of mankind? Or what other
language does this burning throat speak to us, save that of Christ's
burning love, without measure and without limit, out of which He did
all His works? This truly is the most noble sacrifice of our
redemption, this is that peace-offering which will be offered even
to the last day, by all good men, to the Holy Ghost, to the highest
Father, in memory of the Son, to the eternal glory of the adorable
Trinity, and to the fruit of salvation for mankind. Here, certainly,
is the inexhaustible storehouse of our reconciliation, which never
fails, for it is greater than all the debts of the world. This is
that immeasurable love, which is higher than the heavens, for it has
repaired the ruin of the angels; deeper than hell, for it has freed
souls from hell; wider and broader than the earth, for it is without
end and incomprehensible by any created understanding. O how keen
and intense was this thirst of our Lord! For not only did He then
say once, "I thirst," but even now He says in our hearts
continually, "I thirst; woman, give me to drink." So great, so
mighty, is that thirst, that He asks drink not only from the
children of Israel, but from the Samaritans. To each one He
complaineth of His thirst. But for what dost Thou thirst, O good
Jesus? "My meat and drink," saith He, "is that men should do My
Father's will. Now this is the will of My Father, even your
sanctification and salvation, that you may sanctify your souls by
walking in My precepts, by doing works of repentance, by adorning
yourselves with all virtues, in order that, like a bride adorned for
her husband, you may be worthy to be present at My supper in My
Father's kingdom, and to sleep with Me as My elect bride, in the
chamber of My Father's heart." O how Christ longs to bring all men
thither! This is the meaning of His words: "Where I am there shall
also My servant be"; and again: "Father, I will that they may be one
even as We are one." O, how incomprehensible is this thirst of
Christ! What toil and labour He endured for thirty and three years,
for the sake of it! For this His very heart's blood was poured out.
See what our tender Lord says to His Father: "The zeal of Thine
house hath even eaten Me." Truly, He would have submitted to be
crucified a thousand times, rather than allow one soul to perish
through any fault of His. O how this inward thirst tormented Him,
when He thought that He had done all that He could, and even a
hundredfold more than He need have done, and yet that so few had
turned to Him, and been won by Him. His whole body was now worn out;
all His blood was shed; nothing remained for Him to do; and
therefore He was constrained to confess, "It is finished"; and yet
by all His labours, afflictions, and sufferings, He had brought no
richer harvest to the Father than this. Truly, this was the most
bitter of all His sorrows, that after so hard a battle His victory
had not been more glorious, and that He returned a conqueror to His
Father with so few spoils. Therefore, all those who do not refresh
Him by performing His will, and doing all that is pleasing and
honourable to Him, and withstanding all that reason tells them to be
displeasing to Him, will one day hear Him say, "I was thirsty, and
ye gave Me no drink. Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire."

Fourthly, there is yet another inward meaning of this word--namely,
that Christ spoke it out of the love which inwardly draws Him
towards all men, thus making known to us His ardent love, and
opening His own heart, as a delightful couch, on which we may feed
pleasantly, and inviting us to it, saying, "I thirst for you." For
as the liquid which we drink is sent down pleasantly through the
throat into the body, and so passes into the substance and nature of
our body, so Christ out of the ardent thirst of His love, takes
spiritual pleasure in drinking in all men into Himself, swallowing
them, as it were, and incorporating them into Himself, and bringing
them into the secret chamber of His loving heart. Therefore He says:
"I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
Me"--all men, that is, who allow themselves to be drawn by Me, and
submit to Me as obedient instruments, suffering Me to do with them
according to My gracious will. But those who resist Him quench not
His thirst, but give Him a bitter draught instead, even the deeds of
their own self-will. These, when our Lord tasteth them, He
straightway rejects.

THE SIXTH WORD

WHEN Christ had tasted the draught of vinegar and gall, He spoke the
sixth word: "It is finished." Thereby He signified that by His
Passion had been fulfilled all the prophecies, types, mysteries,
scriptures, sacrifices, and promises, which had been predicted and
written about Him. This is that true Son of God, for whom the Father
of heaven made ready a supper in the kingdom of His eternal
blessedness; and He sent His servant--that is the human nature of
Christ, coming in the form of a servant, to call them that were
bidden to the wedding. For Christ, when He took human nature upon
Him, was not only a servant but a servant of servants, and served
all of us for thirty and three years with great toil and suffering.
Indeed, He spent His whole life in bidding all men to His supper. It
was for this that He preached, and wrought miracles, and travelled
from place to place, and proclaimed that the kingdom of heaven was
at hand, and that all should be prepared for it. But they would not
come. And when the Father of the household heard this, He said to
His Servant: "Compel them to come in, that My house may be filled."
Then that Servant thought within Himself: "How shall I be able
without violence to compel these men to come, that rebellion may be
avoided and yet that their privilege and power of free will may
remain unimpaired? For if I compel them to come by iron chains, and
blows, and whips, I shall have asses and not men." Then He said to
Himself: "I perceive that man is so constituted as to be prone to
love. Therefore I will show him such love as shall pass all his
understanding, love than which no other love can be greater. If man
will observe this, he will be so caught in its toils, that he will
not be able to escape its heat and flame, and will be constrained to
turn to God, and love Him in return. For, turn where he will, he
will always be met by the immeasurable benefits, the infinite
goodness, and the wonderful love of God; and at the same time he
will feel more and more compelled to return love for love, till he
will be no more able to resist it, and will be gently constrained to
follow." When this was done, Jesus Christ, this faithful and wise
Servant, said to His Lord and Father, "It is finished. I have
finished the work which Thou gavest Me to do. What more could I have
done, and have not done it? I have no member left that is not weary
and worn with toil and pain. My veins are dry, My blood is shed; My
marrow is spent, My throat is hoarse with crying. Such love have I
shown to man, that his heart cannot be human, cannot even be stony,
or the heart of a brute beast, but must be quite devilish and
desperate, if it be not moved by the thought of these things."

Moreover, this word of our Lord Jesus is a word of sorrow, not of
joy. He spoke it not as if He had now escaped from all His
suffering. No; when He said, "It is finished," He meant all that had
been ordained and decreed by the eternal Truth for Him to suffer.
Besides, all the sufferings which had been inflicted upon Him by
degrees and singly, He now endures together with immeasurable
anguish. Who can have such a heart of adamant as not to be moved by
such torment as this? How short were the words which our Lord Jesus
spoke on the Cross, yet how full of sacramental mysteries! Now were
fulfilled the words of Exodus: "And all things were finished which
belonged to the sacrifice of the Lord."

Moreover by this word our Lord declared the glorious victory of the
Passion, and how the old enemy, the jealous serpent, was overcome
and thrown down; for this was the cause for which He suffered. For
this He had taken upon Himself the garment of human nature, that He
might vanquish and confound the enemy, by the same weapons wherewith
the enemy boasted that he had conquered man. This was the chief
purpose of His Passion, and now He confesses that it is finished. O
how wonderful are the mysteries, and the victories, included in this
little but deep word: "It is finished!" All that the eternal Wisdom
had decreed, all that strict justice had demanded for each man, all
that love had asked for, all the promises made to the fathers, all
the mysteries, types, ceremonies in Scripture, all that was meet and
necessary for our redemption, all that was needed to wipe out our
debts, all that must repair our negligences, all that was glorious
and loving for the exhibition of this splendid love, all that we
could desire, for our spiritual instruction--in a word, all that was
good and fitting for the celebration of the glorious triumph of our
redemption, all is included in that one word, "It is finished."
What, then, remains for Him, but to finish and perfect His life in
this glorious conflict; and, because nothing remains for Him to do,
to commend His precious soul into His Father's hands, seeing that He
has fought the good fight, and finished His course in all holiness?
It is meet, then, that He should obtain the crown of glory which His
heavenly Father will give Him on the day of His exaltation.

Lastly, by this word Christ offered up all His toil, sorrow, and
affliction for all the elect, as the Apostle saith: "Who in the days
of His flesh offered up prayer and supplications with strong crying
and tears unto Him who was able to save Him from death, and was
heard in that He feared. For if the blood of bulls and of goats and
the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the
purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered Himself without spot to God,
purge our conscience from dead works to serve the living God?"

THE SEVENTH WORD

OUR Lord Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and said, "Father,
into Thy hands I commend My Spirit." O all ye who love our Lord
Jesus Christ, come, I beseech you, and let us watch, with all
devotion and pity, His passing away. Let us see what must have been
His sorrow and agony and torment, when His glorious soul was now at
last forced to pass out of His worthy and most sacred body, in which
for thirty and three years it had rested so sweetly, peacefully,
joyfully, and holily, even as two lovers on one bed. How hard was it
for them to be rent asunder, between whom no disagreement had ever
arisen, no strife, or quarrel, or treachery. How unspeakably
grievous was that Cross, when His sacred body was compelled to part
with so faithful a friend, so gentle an occupant, so loving a
teacher and master; and how great was the sorrow with which His
glorious and pure soul was torn away from so faithful a servant,
which had ever served obediently, never sparing any trouble, never
shrinking from cold or heat or hunger or thirst; always enduring
labour and sorrow in gentleness and patience. O how great was this
affliction! For, as the philosopher says: "Of all terrible things
death is the most terrible, on account of the natural and mutual
affection, which is very great, between soul and body." How much
greater must have been the anguish and sorrow, when the most holy
soul and body of Christ were sundered, between which there had
always been such wonderful harmony and love. Therefore, with inward
pity and anxious sorrow, let us meditate on this sad parting; for
the death of Christ is our life.

Let us meditate devoutly how His sacred body, the instrument of our
salvation, was steeped in anguish, when all His members, as if to
bid a last farewell, were bowing themselves down to die! Who can
look without remorse and sorrow and pity upon the most gracious face
of Christ, and behold how it is changed into the pallor and likeness
of death; how tears still flow from His dimmed eyes; how His sacred
head is bent; how all His members prove to us, by signs and motions,
the love which they can no longer show by deeds. Let us pity Him, I
pray you, for He is our own flesh and blood, and it is for our sins,
not His own, that He is shamefully slain. O ye who up till now have
passed by the Cross of Jesus with tepid or cold hearts, and whom all
these torments and tears, and His blood shed like water, have not
been able to soften; now at last let this loud voice, this terrible
cry, rend and pierce your hearts through and through. Let that voice
which shook the heaven and the earth and hell with fear, which rent
the rocks and laid open ancient graves, now soften your stony
hearts, and lay bare the old sepulchres of your conscience, full of
dead men's bones--that is to say, of wicked deeds, and call again
into life your departed spirits. For this is the voice which once
cried: "Adam, where art thou; and what hast thou done?" This is the
voice which brought Lazarus from Hades, saying, "Lazarus, come
forth: arise from the grave of sin, and let them free thee from thy
grave-clothes." Truly it was not so much the grievousness of His
sufferings, as the greatness of our sins, which made our Lord utter
this cry. He cried also, to show that He had the dominion over life
and death, over the living and the dead. For though he was quite
worn out, and destitute of strength, and though He had borne the
bitter pangs of death so long, beyond the power of man, yet He would
not allow Death to put forth its power against Him, until it pleased
Him.

With a loud voice He cried, that earthly men, who care only for the
things of earth, might quake with fear and trembling, and to cause
them to meditate and see how naked and helpless the Lord of lords
departed from this life. With a terrible voice He cried, to stir up
all those who live in wantonness, and who have grown old in their
defilement, and send forth a foul savour, like dead dogs, so that at
last these miserable men may rise from their lusts and pleasures and
sensual delights, and see how the Son of God, who was never strained
with any spot of defilement, went forth to His Father; and with what
toil and pain and anguish He departed from the light of day, and
what He had to suffer before He reached his Father's Kingdom. He
also cried with a loud voice, that He might inflame the lukewarm and
slothful to devotion and love.

Moreover He cried with a loud voice as a sign of the glorious
victory which He had gained, when after a single combat with His
strong and cruel enemy, and having descended into the arena--the
battlefield of this world--He had routed him on Mount Calvary and
stripped him bare of his spoils. This victory, this glorious
triumph, Christ proclaimed with a loud voice, and thus departing
from the battlefield triumphant and victorious, He departed to the
place of all delights, to the heart and breast of God, His Father,
commending to it, as to a safe refuge, both Himself and all His own,
with the words, "Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit."

We may learn from these words that the eternal Word, our Lord Jesus
Christ, had been let down like a fishing-hook or great net, by the
Father of heaven, into the great sea of this world, that He might
catch not fish but men. Hear how He says: "My word, that goeth forth
out of My mouth shall not return unto Me void, but shall execute
that which I please, and shall prosper in the thing whereto I send
it." And this net is drawn by the Father out of the salt sea, to the
peaceful shore of His fatherly heart, full of the elect, of works of
charity, of repentance, patience, humility, obedience, spiritual
exercises, merits and virtues. For Christ drew unto Himself all the
afflictions and good deeds of the good; just as St Paul says, "I
live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me." Even so, Christ lives in
all the good, and all who have been willing and obedient instruments
in the hands of Christ. In all such Christ lives and suffers and
works. For whatever good there is in all men, is all God's work.
Therefore Christ, feeling His Father drawing Him, gathered together
in Himself in a wonderful manner all the elect with all their works,
and commended them to His Father, saying, "My Father, these are
Thine; these are the spoils which I have won by My conquest, by the
sword of the Cross; these are the vessels which I have purchased
with My precious blood; these are the fruits of My labours. Keep in
Thine own name those whom Thou hast given Me. I pray not that Thou
shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep
them from the evil." Thus did Christ commend Himself and all His own
into His Father's hands. Come therefore, O faithful and devout soul,
and contemplate with great earnestness the coming in and the going
out of thy Lord Jesus; follow Him with love and longing, even to the
chamber and bed of joy, which He has prepared for thee in thy
Father's heart. Happy would he be, who could now be dissolved with
Christ, and die with the thief, and hear from the lips of the Lord
that comfortable word, "This day shalt thou be with Me in paradise."
And though this is not granted to us, yet whatever we can here gain
by labours and watchings and fastings and prayers, let us commend it
all with Christ to the Father; let us pour it back again into the
fountain, whence it flowed forth for us; and let nothing be left in
us of empty self-satisfaction, no seeking after human praise or
honour or reward. But whatever our God hath been willing to do in
us, let us return it back into His own hands and say, "We are
nothing of ourselves. It is He who made us, and not we ourselves.
All good was made by Him, and without Him was not anything made.
When therefore He taketh with Him what He made Himself, we are
absolutely nothing."

Lastly, Christ commended His soul into His Father's hands, to show
us how the souls of good and holy men mount up after Him to the
bosom of the eternal Father, who must otherwise have gone down to
hell; for it is He who has opened to us the way of life, and His
sacred soul, by making the journey safe and free from danger, has
been our guide into the kingdom of heaven.






SUSO





SUSO AND HIS SPIRITUAL DAUGHTER

AFTER this, certain very high thoughts arose in the mind of the
servitor's spiritual daughter, concerning which she asked him
whether she might put questions to him. He replied, Yea verily:
since thou hast been led through the proper exercises, it is
permitted to thy spiritual intelligence to enquire about high
things. Ask then whatever thou wilt. She said: Tell me, father, what
is God, and how He is both One and Three? The servitor replied,
These be indeed high questions. As to the first, What is God, you
must know that all the Doctors who ever lived cannot explain it, for
He is above all sense and reason. Yet if a man is diligent, and does
not relax his efforts, he gains some knowledge of God, though very
far off. Yet in this knowledge of God consists our eternal life and
man's supreme happiness. In this way, in former times, certain
worthy philosophers searched for God, and especially that great
thinker Aristotle, who tried to discover the Author of Nature from
the order of nature and its course. He sought earnestly, and he was
convinced from the well-ordered course of nature that there must of
necessity be one Prince and Lord of the whole universe--He whom we
call God. About this God and Lord we know this much, that He is an
immortal Substance, eternal, without before or after, simple, bare,
unchangeable, an incorporeal and essential Spirit, whose substance
is life and energy, whose most penetrating intelligence knows all
things in and by itself, whose essence in itself is an abyss of
pleasures and joys, and who is to Himself, and to all who shall
enjoy Him in a future life, a supernatural, ineffable, and most
sweet happiness. The maiden, when she heard this, looked up, and
said: These things are sweet to tell and sweet to hear, for they
rouse the heart, and lift the spirit up far beyond itself.
Therefore, father, tell me more about these things. The servitor
said: The Divine Essence, about which we speak, is an intelligible
or intellectual Substance of such a kind, that it cannot be seen in
itself by mortal eyes; but it can be discerned in its effects, even
as we recognise a fine artist by his works. As the Apostle teaches
us, "The invisible things of God from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made." For the
creatures are a kind of mirror, in which God shines. This knowledge
is called speculation, by which we contemplate the great Architect
of the world in His works. Come now, look upward and about thee,
through all the quarters of the universe, and see how wide and high
the beautiful heaven is, how swift its motion, and how marvellously
its Creator has adorned it with the seven planets, and with the
countless multitude of the twinkling stars. Consider what
fruitfulness, what riches, the sun bestows upon the earth, when in
summer it sheds abroad its rays unclouded! See how the leaves and
grass shoot up, and the flowers smile, and the woods and plains
resound with the sweet song of nightingales and other birds; how all
the little animals, after being imprisoned by grim winter, come
forth rejoicing, and pair; and how men and women, both old and
young, rejoice and are merry. O Almighty God, if Thou art so lovable
and so pleasant in Thy creatures, how happy and blessed, how full of
all joy and beauty, must Thou be in Thyself? But further, my
daughter, contemplate the elements themselves--Earth, Water, Air,
and Fire, with all the wonderful things which they contain in
infinite variety--men, beasts, birds, fishes, and sea-monsters. And
all of these give praise and honour to the unfathomable immensity
that is in Thee. Who is it, Lord, who preserves all these things,
who nourishes them? It is Thou who providest for all, each in his
own way, for great and small, rich and poor. Thou, O God, doest
this; Thou alone art God indeed! Behold, my daughter, thou hast now
found the God whom thou hast sought so long. Look up, then, with
shining eyes, with radiant face and exulting heart, behold Him and
embrace Him with the outstretched arms of thy soul and mind, and
give thanks to Him as the one and supreme Lord of all creatures. By
gazing on this mirror, there springs up speedily, in one of loving
and pious disposition, an inward jubilation of the heart; for by
this is meant a joy which no tongue can tell, though it pours with
might through heart and soul. Alas, I now feel within me, that I
must open for thee the closed mouth of my soul; and I am compelled,
for the glory of God, to tell thee certain secrets, which I never
yet told to any one. A certain Dominican, well known to me, at the
beginning of his course used to receive from God twice every day,
morning and evening, for ten years, an outpouring of grace like
this, which lasted about as long as it would take to say the "Vigils
of the Dead" twice over.[40] At these times he was so entirely
absorbed in God, the eternal Wisdom, that he would not speak of it.
Sometimes he would converse with God as with a friend, not with the
mouth, but mentally; at other times he would utter piteous sighs to
Him; at other times he would weep copiously, or smile silently. He
often seemed to himself to be flying in the air, and swimming
between time and eternity in the depth of the Divine wonders, which
no man can fathom. And his heart became so full from this, that he
would sometimes lay his hand upon it as it beat heavily, saying,
"Alas, my heart, what labours will befall thee to-day?" One day it
seemed to him that the heart of his heavenly Father was, in a
spiritual and indescribable manner, pressed tenderly, and with
nothing between, against his heart; and that the Father's
heart--that is, the eternal Wisdom, spoke inwardly to his heart
without forms.[41] Then he began to exclaim joyously in spiritual
jubilation: Behold, now, Thou whom I most fervently love, thus do I
lay bare my heart to Thee, and in simplicity and nakedness of all
created things I embrace Thy formless Godhead! O God, most excellent
of all friends! Earthly friends must needs endure to be distinct and
separate from those whom they love; but Thou, O fathomless sweetness
of all true love, meltest into the heart of Thy beloved, and pourest
Thyself fully into the essence of his soul, that nothing of Thee
remains outside, but Thou art joined and united most lovingly with
Thy beloved.

To this the maiden replied: Truly it is a great grace, when anyone
is thus caught up into God. But I should like to be informed,
whether this is the most perfect kind of union or not? The servitor
answered: No, it is not the most perfect, but a preliminary, gently
drawing a man on, that he may arrive at an essential way of being
carried up into God. The maiden asked him what he meant by essential
and non-essential. He answered: I call that man essential or
habitual (so to speak), who by the good and persevering practice of
all the virtues, has arrived at the point of finding the practice of
them in their highest perfection pleasant to him, even as the
brightness of the sun remains constant in the sun. But I call him
non-essential, in whom the brightness of the virtues shines in an
unstable and imperfect way like the brightness of the moon. That
full delight of grace which I described is so sweet to the spirit of
the non-essential man, that he would be glad always to have it. When
he has it, he rejoices; when he is deprived of it, he grieves
inordinately; and when it smiles upon him, he is reluctant to pass
to doing other things, even things that are pleasing to God; as I
will show you by an example. The servitor of the Divine Wisdom was
once walking in the chapter-house, and his heart was full of
heavenly jubilation, when the porter called him out to see a woman
who wished to confess to him. He was unwilling to interrupt his
inward delight, and received the porter harshly, bidding him tell
the woman that she must find some one else to confess to, for he did
not wish to hear her confession just then. She, however, being
oppressed with the burden of her sins, said that she felt specially
drawn to seek comfort from him, and that she would confess to no one
else. And when he still refused to go out, she began to weep most
sadly, and going into a corner, lamented greatly. Meanwhile, God
quickly withdrew from the servitor the delights of grace, and his
heart became as hard as flint. And when he desired to know the cause
of this, God answered him inwardly: Even as thou hast driven away
uncomforted that poor woman, so have I withdrawn from thee my Divine
comfort. The servitor groaned deeply and beat his breast, and
hurried to the door, and as he did not find the woman there, was
much distressed. The porter, however, looked about for her
everywhere, and when he found her, still weeping, bade her return to
the door. When she came, the servitor received her gently, and
comforted her sorrowing heart. Then he went back from her to the
chapter-house, and immediately God was with him, with His Divine
consolations, as before.

Then said the maiden: It must be easy for him to bear sufferings, to
whom God gives such jubilation and internal joys. And yet, said the
servitor, all had to be paid for afterward with great suffering.
However, at last, when all this had passed away, and God's appointed
time had come, the same grace of jubilation was restored to him, and
remained with him almost continuously both at home and abroad, in
company and alone. Often in the bath or at table the same grace was
with him; but it was now internal, and did show itself outside.

Then the maiden said: My father, I have now learned what God is; but
I am also eager to know where He is. Thou shalt hear, said the
servitor. The opinion of the theologians is that God is in no
particular place, but that He is everywhere, and all in all. The
same doctors say that we come to know a thing through its name. Now
one doctor says that Being is the first name of God. Turn your eyes,
therefore, to Being in its pure and naked simplicity, and take no
notice of this or that substance which can be torn asunder into
parts and separated; but consider Being in itself, unmixed with any
Not-Being. Whatever is nothing, is the negation of what is; and what
is, is the negation of what is not. A thing which has yet to be, or
which once was, is not now in actual being. Moreover, we cannot know
mixed being or not-being unless we take into account that which is
all-being. This Being is not the being of this or that creature; for
all particular being is mixed with something extraneous, whereby it
can receive something new into itself. Therefore the nameless Divine
Being must be in itself a Being that is all-being, and that sustains
all particular things by its presence.

It shows the strange blindness of man's reason, that it cannot
examine into that which it contemplates before everything, and
without which it cannot perceive anything. Just as, when the eye is
bent on noticing various colours, it does not observe the light
which enables it to see all these objects, and even if it looks at
the light it does not observe it; so it is with the eye of the soul.
When it looks at this or that particular substance, it takes no heed
of the being, which is everywhere one, absolute and simple, and by
the virtue and goodness of which it can apprehend all other things.
Hence the wise Aristotle says, that the eye of our intelligence,
owing to its weakness, is affected towards that being which is
itself the most manifest of all things, as the eye of a bat or owl
is towards the bright rays of the sun. For particular substances
distract and dazzle the mind, so that it cannot behold the Divine
darkness, which is the clearest light.

Come now, open the eyes of thy mind, and gaze if thou canst, on
Being in its naked and simple purity. You will perceive that it
comes from no one, and has no before nor after, and that it cannot
change, because it is simple Being. You will also observe that it is
the most actual, the most present, and the most perfect of beings,
with no defect or mutation, because it is absolutely one in its bare
simplicity. This is so evident to an instructed intellect, that it
cannot think otherwise. Since it is simple Being, it must be the
first of beings, and without beginning or end, and because it is the
first and everlasting and simple, it must be the most present. If
you can understand this, you will have been guided far into the
incomprehensible light of God's hidden truth. This pure and simple
Being is altogether in all things, and altogether outside all
things. Hence a certain doctor says: God is a circle, whose centre
is everywhere, and His circumference nowhere.

When this had been said, the maiden answered: Blessed be God, I have
been shown, as far as may be, both what God is, and where He is. But
I should like also to be told how, if God is so absolutely simple,
He can also be threefold.

The servitor answered: The more simple any being is in itself, the
more manifold is it in its energy and operation. That which has
nothing gives nothing, and that which has much can give much. I have
already spoken of the inflowing and overflowing fount of good which
God is in Himself. This infinite and superessential goodness
constrains Him not to keep it all within Himself, but to communicate
it freely both within and without Himself. But the highest and most
perfect outpouring of the good must be within itself, and this can
be nought else but a present, interior, personal and natural
outpouring, necessary, yet without compulsion, infinite and perfect.
Other communications, in temporal matters, draw their origin from
this eternal communication of the Divine Goodness. Some theologians
say that in the outflow of the creatures from their first origin
there is a return in a circle of the end to the beginning; for as
the emanation of the Persons from the Godhead is an image of the
origin of the creatures, so also it is a type of the flowing back of
the creatures into God. There is, however, a difference between the
outpouring of the creatures and that of God. The creature is only a
particular and partial substance, and its giving and communication
is also partial and limited. When a human father begets a son, he
gives him part, but not the whole, of his own substance, for he
himself is only a partial good. But the outpouring of God is of a
more interior and higher kind than the creature's outpouring,
inasmuch as He Himself is a higher good. If the outpouring of God is
to be worthy of His pre-eminent being, it must be according to
personal relations.

Now, then, if you can look upon the pure goodness of the highest
Good (which goodness is, by its nature, the active principle of the
spontaneous love with which the highest Good loves itself) you will
behold the most excellent and superessential outpouring of the Word
from the Father, by which generation all things exist and are
produced; and you will see also in the highest good, and the highest
outpouring, the most holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
existing in the Godhead. And if the highest outpouring proceeds from
the highest essential good, it follows that there must be in this
Trinity the highest and most intimate consubstantiality or community
of being, and complete equality and identity of essence, which the
Persons enjoy in sweetest communion, and also that the Substance and
power of the three almighty Persons is undivided and unpartitioned.

Here the maiden exclaimed: Marvellous! I swim in the Godhead like an
eagle in the air. The servitor, resuming his exposition, continued:
It is impossible to express in words how the Trinity can subsist in
the unity of one essence. Nevertheless, to say what may be said on
the subject, Augustine says that in the Godhead the Father is the
Fountain-head of the Son and the Holy Ghost. Dionysius says, that in
the Father there is an outflowing of the Godhead, which naturally
communicates itself to the Word or Son. He also freely and lovingly
pours Himself out into the Son; and the Son in turn pours Himself
out freely and lovingly into the Father; and this love of the Father
for the Son, and of the Son for the Father, is the Holy Ghost. This
is truly said, but it is made clearer by that glorious Doctor of the
Church, St Thomas, who says as follows: In the outpouring of the
Word from the Father's heart, God the Father must contemplate
Himself with His own mind, bending back, as it were, upon His Divine
essence; for if the reason of the Father had not the Divine essence
for its object, the Word so conceived would be a creature instead of
God; which is false. But in the way described He is "God of God."
Again, this looking back upon the Divine essence, which takes place
in the mind of God, must, in a manner, produce a natural likeness;
else the Word would not be the Son of God. So here we have the unity
of essence in the diversity of Persons; and a clear proof of this
distinction may be found in the word of that soaring eagle St John:
"The Word was in the beginning with God."

Thus the Father is the Fountain-head of the Son, and the Son is the
outflowing of the Father; and the Father and Son pour forth the
Spirit; and the Unity, which is the essence of the Fountain-head, is
also the substance of the three Persons. But as to how the Three are
One, this cannot be expressed in words, on account of the simplicity
of that Abyss. Into this intellectual Where, the spirits of men made
perfect soar and plunge themselves, now flying over infinite
heights, now swimming in unfathomed depths, marvelling at the high
and wonderful mysteries of the Godhead. Nevertheless, the spirit
remains a spirit, and retains its nature, while it enjoys the vision
of the Divine Persons, and abstracted from all occupation with
things below contemplates with fixed gaze those stupendous
mysteries. For what can be more marvellous than that simple Unity,
into which the Trinity of the Persons merges itself, and in which
all multiplicity ceases? For the outflowing of the Persons is always
tending back into the Unity of the same essence, and all creatures,
according to their ideal existence in God, are from eternity in this
Unity, and have their life, knowledge, and essence in the eternal
God; as it is said in the Gospel: "That which was made, was Life in
Him."[42] This bare Unity is a dark silence and tranquil inactivity,
which none can understand unless he is illuminated by the Unity
itself, unmixed with any evil. Out of this shines forth hidden
truth, free from all falsehood; and this truth is born from the
unveiling of the veiled Divine purity; for after the revelation of
these things, the spirit is at last unclothed of the dusky light
which up till now has followed it, and in which it has hitherto seen
things in an earthly way. Indeed, the spirit finds itself now
changed and something very different from what it supposed itself to
be according to its earlier light: even as St Paul says, "I, yet not
I." Thus it is unclothed and simplified in the simplicity of the
Divine essence, which shines upon all things in simple stillness. In
this modeless mode of contemplation, the permanent distinction of
the Persons, viewed as separate, is lost. For, as some teach, it is
not the Person of the Father, taken by Himself, which produces
bliss, nor the Person of the Son, taken by Himself, nor the Person
of the Holy Ghost, taken by Himself; but the three Persons, dwelling
together in the unity of the essence, confer bliss. And this is the
natural essence of the Persons, which by grace gives the substance
or essence to all their creatures, and it contains in itself the
ideas of all things in their simple essence. Now since this ideal
light subsists as Being, so all things subsist in it according to
their essential being, not according to their accidental forms; and
since it shines upon all things, its property is to subsist as
light. Hence all things shine forth in this essence in interior
stillness, without altering its simplicity.

Then the maiden said: I could wish greatly, sir, that you could give
me this mysterious teaching, as you understand it, under a figure,
that I might understand it better. I should also be glad if you
could sum up what you have been saying at length, so that it may
stick more firmly in my weak mind. The servitor replied: Who can
express in forms what has no form? Who can explain that which has no
mode of being, and is above sense and reason? Any similitude must be
infinitely more unlike than like the reality. Nevertheless, that I
may drive out forms from your mind by forms, I will try to give you
a picture of these ideas which surpass all forms, and to sum up a
long discourse in a few words. A certain wise theologian says that
God, in regard to His Godhead, is like a vast circle, of which the
centre is everywhere, and the circumference nowhere. Now consider
the image which follows. If anyone throws a great stone into the
middle of a pool, a ring is formed in the water, and this ring makes
a second ring, and the second a third; and the number and size of
the rings depend on the force of the throw. They may even require a
larger space than the limit of the pool. Suppose now that the first
ring represents the omnipotent virtue of the Divine nature, which is
infinite in God the Father. This produces another ring like itself,
which is the Son. And the two produce the third, which is the Holy
Ghost. The spiritual superessential begetting of the Divine Word is
the cause of the creation of all spirits and all things. This
supreme Spirit has so ennobled man, as to shed upon him a ray from
His own eternal Godhead. This is the image of God in the mind, which
is itself eternal. But many men turn away from this dignity of their
nature, befouling the bright image of God in themselves, and turning
to the bodily pleasures of this world. They pursue them greedily and
devote themselves to them, till death unexpectedly stops them. But
he who is wise, turns himself and elevates himself, with the help of
the Divine spark in his soul, to that which is stable and eternal,
whence he had his own origin: he says farewell to all the fleeting
creatures, and clings to the eternal truth alone.

Attend also to what I say about the order in which the spirit ought
to return to God. First of all, we should disentangle ourselves
absolutely from the pleasures of the world, manfully turning our
backs upon all vices; we should turn to God by continual prayers, by
seclusion, and holy exercise, that the flesh may thus be subdued to
the spirit. Next, we must offer ourselves willingly to endure all
the troubles which may come upon us, from God, or from the
creatures. Thirdly, we must impress upon ourselves the Passion of
Christ crucified; we must fix upon our minds His sweet teaching, His
most gentle conversation, His most pure life, which He gave us for
our example, and so we must penetrate deeper and advance further in
our imitation of Him. Fourthly, we must divest ourselves of external
occupations, and establish ourselves in a tranquil stillness of soul
by an energetic resignation, as if we were dead to self, and thought
only of the honour of Christ and His heavenly Father. Lastly, we
should be humble towards all men, whether friends or foes. . . . But
all these images, with their interpretations, are as unlike the
formless truth as a black Ethiopian is to the bright sun.

Soon after this holy maiden died, and passed away happy from earth,
even as her whole life had been conspicuous only for her virtues.
After her death she appeared to her spiritual father in a vision.
She was clothed in raiment whiter than snow; she shone with dazzling
brightness, and was full of heavenly joy. She came near to him, and
showed him in what an excellent fashion she had passed away into the
simple Godhead. He saw and heard her with exceeding delight, and the
vision filled his soul with heavenly consolations. When he returned
to himself, he sighed most deeply, and thus pondered: O Almighty
God, how blessed is he, who strives after Thee alone! He may well be
content to bear affliction, whose sufferings Thou wilt thus reward!
May the Almighty God grant that we likewise may be brought to the
same joys as this blessed maiden!

A MEDITATION ON THE PASSION OF CHRIST

THEN said the Eternal Wisdom to the servitor, Attend and listen
dutifully, while I tell thee what sufferings I lovingly endured for
thy sake.

After I had finished My last Supper with My disciples, when I had
offered Myself to My enemies on the mount, and had resigned Myself
to bear a terrible death, and knew that it was approaching very
near, so great was the oppression of My tender heart and all My
body, that I sweated blood; then I was wickedly arrested, bound, and
carried away. On the same night they treated Me with insult and
contumely, beating Me, spitting upon Me, and covering My head.
Before Caiaphas was I unjustly accused and condemned to death. What
misery it was to see My mother seized with unspeakable sorrow of
heart, from the time when she beheld Me threatened with such great
dangers, till the time when I was hung upon the cross. They brought
Me before Pilate with every kind of ignominy, they accused Me
falsely, they adjudged Me worthy of death. Before Herod I, the
Eternal Wisdom, was mocked in a bright robe. My fair body was
miserably torn and rent by cruel scourgings. They surrounded My
sacred head with a crown of thorns; My gracious face was covered
with blood and spittings. When they had thus condemned Me to death,
they led Me out with My cross to bear the last shameful punishment.
Their terrible and savage cries could be heard afar off: "Crucify,
crucify, the wicked man."

Servitor. Alas, Lord, if so bitter were the beginnings of Thy
passion, what will be the end thereof? In truth, if I saw a brute
beast so treated in my presence I could hardly bear it. What grief
then should I feel in heart and soul at Thy Passion? And yet there
is one thing at which I marvel greatly. For I long, O my most dear
God, to know only Thy Godhead; and Thou tellest me of Thy humanity.
I long to taste Thy sweetness, and Thou showest me Thy bitterness.
What meaneth this, O my Lord God?

Wisdom. No man can come to the height of My Godhead, nor attain to
that unknown sweetness, unless he be first led through the
bitterness of My humanity. My humanity is the road by which men must
travel. My Passion is the gate, through which they must enter. Away
then with thy cowardice of heart, and come to Me prepared for a hard
campaign. For it is not right for the servant to live softly and
delicately, while his Lord is fighting bravely. Come, I will now put
on thee My own armour. And so thou must thyself also experience the
whole of My Passion, so far as thy strength permits. Take,
therefore, the heart of a man; for be sure that thou wilt have to
endure many deaths, before thou canst put thy nature under the yoke.
I will sprinkle thy garden of spices with red flowers. Many are the
afflictions which will come upon thee; till thou hast finished thy
sad journey of bearing the cross, and hast renounced thine own will
and disengaged thyself so completely from all creatures, in all
things, which might hinder thine eternal salvation, as to be like
one about to die, and no longer mixed up with the affairs of this
life.

Servitor. Hard and grievous to bear are the things which Thou
sayest, Lord. I tremble all over. How can I bear all these things?
Suffer me, O Lord, to ask Thee something. Couldst Thou not devise
any other way of saving my soul, and of testifying Thy love towards
me, so as to spare Thyself such hard sufferings, and so that I need
not suffer so bitterly with Thee?

Wisdom. The unfathomable Abyss of My secret counsels no man ought to
seek to penetrate, for no one can comprehend it. And yet that which
thou hast suggested, and many other things, might have been
possible, which nevertheless never happen. Be assured, however, that
as created things now are, no more fitting method could be found.
The Author of Nature doth not think so much what He is able to do in
the world, as what is most fitting for every creature; and this is
the principle of His operations. And by what other means could the
secrets of God have been made known to man, than by the assumption
of humanity by Christ? By what other means could he who had deprived
himself of joy by the inordinate pursuit of pleasure, be brought
back more fittingly to the joys of eternity? And who would be
willing to tread the path, avoided by all, of a hard and despised
life, if God had not trodden it Himself? If thou wert condemned to
death, how could any one show his love and fidelity to thee more
convincingly, or provoke thee to love him in return more powerfully,
than by taking thy sentence upon himself? If, then, there is any one
who is not roused and moved to love Me from his heart by My immense
love, My infinite pity, My exalted divinity, My pure humanity, My
brotherly fidelity, My sweet friendship, is there anything that
could soften that stony heart?

Servitor. The light begins to dawn upon me, and I seem to myself to
see clearly that it is as Thou sayest, and that whoever is not
altogether blind must admit that this is the best and most fitting
of all ways. And yet the imitation of Thee is grievous to a slothful
and corruptible body.

Wisdom. Shrink not because thou must follow the footsteps of My
Passion. For he who loves God, and is inwardly united to Him, finds
the cross itself light and easy to bear, and has nought to complain
of. No one receives from Me more marvellous sweetness, than he who
shares My bitterest labours. He only complains of the bitterness of
the rind, who has not tasted the sweetness of the kernel. He who
relies on Me as his protector and helper may be considered to have
accomplished a large part of his task.

Servitor. Lord, by these consoling words I am so much encouraged,
that I seem to myself to be able to do and suffer all things through
Thee. I pray Thee, then, that Thou wilt unfold the treasure of Thy
Passion to me more fully.

Wisdom. When I was hung aloft and fastened to the wood of the cross
(which I bore for My great love to thee and all mankind), all the
wonted appearance of My body was piteously changed. My bright eyes
lost their light; My sacred ears were filled with mocking and
blasphemy; My sweet mouth was hurt by the bitter drink. Nowhere was
there any rest or refreshment for Me. My sacred head hung down in
pain; My fair neck was cruelly bruised; My shining face was
disfigured by festering wounds; My fresh colour was turned to
pallor. In a word, the beauty of My whole body was so marred, that I
appeared like a leper--I, the Divine Wisdom, who am fairer than the
sun.

Servitor. O brightest mirror of grace, which the Angels desire to
look into, in which they delight to fix their gaze, would that I
might behold Thy beloved countenance in the throes of death just
long enough to water it with the tears of my heart, and to satisfy
my mind with lamentations over it.

Wisdom. No one more truly testifies his grief over My Passion, than
he who in very deed passes through it with Me. Far more pleasing to
Me is a heart disentangled from the love of all transitory things,
and earnestly intent on gaining the highest perfection according to
the example which I have set before him in My life, than one which
continually weeps over My Passion, shedding as many tears as all the
raindrops that ever fell. For this was what I most desired and
looked for in My endurance of that cruel death--namely, that mankind
might imitate Me; and yet pious tears are very dear to Me.

Servitor. Since then, O most gracious God, the imitation of Thy most
gentle life and most loving Passion is so pleasing to Thee, I will
henceforth labour more diligently to follow Thy Passion than to weep
over it. But since both are pleasing to Thee, teach me, I pray Thee,
how I ought to conform myself to Thy Passion.

Wisdom. Forbid thyself the pleasure of curious and lax seeing and
hearing; let love make sweet to thee those things which formerly
thou shrankest from; eschew bodily pleasures; rest in Me alone; bear
sweetly and moderately the ills that come from others; desire to
despise thyself; break thy appetites; crush out all thy pleasures
and desires. These are the first elements in the school of Wisdom,
which are read in the volume of the book of My crucified body. But
consider whether anyone, do what he may, can make himself for My
sake such as I made Myself for his.

Servitor. Come then, my soul, collect thyself from all external
things, into the tranquil silence of the inner man. Woe is me! My
heavenly Father had adopted my soul to be His bride; but I fled far
from Him. Alas, I have lost my Father, I have lost my Lover. Alas,
alas, and woe is me! What have I done, what have I lost? Shame on
me, I have lost myself, and all the society of my heavenly country.
All that could delight and cheer me has utterly forsaken me; I am
left naked. My false lovers were only deceivers. They have stripped
me of all the good things which my one true Lover gave me; they have
despoiled me of all honour, joy, and consolation. O ye red roses and
white lilies, behold me a vile weed, and see also how soon those
flowers wither and die, which this world plucks. And yet, O most
gracious God, none of my sufferings are of any account, compared
with this, that I have grieved the eyes of my heavenly Father. This
is indeed hell, and a cross more intolerable than all other pain. O
heart of mine, harder than flint or adamant, why dost thou not break
for grief? Once I was called the bride of the eternal King, now I
deserve not to be called the meanest of his handmaids. Never again
shall I dare to raise mine eyes, for shame. O that I could hide
myself in some vast forest, with none to see or hear me, till I had
wept to my heart's desire. O Sin, Sin, whither hast thou brought me?
O deceitful World, woe to those who serve thee! Now I have thy
reward, I receive thy wages--namely, that I am a burden to myself
and the whole world, and always shall be.

Wisdom. Thou must by no means despair; it was for thy sins and those
of others that I came into this world, that I might restore thee to
Thy heavenly Father, and bring thee back to greater glory and honour
than thou ever hadst before.

Servitor. Ah, what is this, which whispers such flattering things to
a soul that is dead, abhorred, rejected?

Wisdom. Dost thou not know Me? Why art thou so despondent? Art thou
beside thyself with excessive grief, My dearest son? Knowest thou
not that I am Wisdom, most gentle and tender, in whom is the Abyss
of infinite mercy, never yet explored perfectly even by all the
saints, but none the less open to thee and all other sorrowing
hearts. I am he who for thy sake willed to be poor and an exile,
that I might recall thee to thy former honour. I am He who bore a
bitter death, that I might restore thee to life. I am thy Brother; I
am thy Bridegroom. I have put away all the wrong that thou ever
didst against Me, even as if it had never been, only henceforth,
thou must turn wholly to Me, and never again forsake Me. Wash away
thy stains in My blood. Lift up thy head, open thine eyes, and take
heart. In token of reconciliation, take this ring and put it on thy
finger as My bride, put on this robe, and these shoes on thy feet,
and receive this sweet and loving name, that thou mayst both be and
be called for ever My bride. Thou has cost Me much labour and pain;
for that cause, the Abyss of My mercy toward thee is unfathomable.

Servitor. O kindest Father, O sweetest Brother, O only joy of my
heart, wilt Thou be so favourable to my unworthy soul? What is this
grace? What is the Abyss of Thy clemency and mercy? From the bottom
of my heart I thank Thee, O heavenly Father, and beseech Thee by Thy
beloved Son, whom Thou hast willed to suffer a cruel death for love,
to forget my impieties. . . .

Now, O Lord, I remember that most loving word, wherewith in the book
of Ecclesiasticus[43] Thou drawest us to Thyself. "Come to me, all
ye who desire me, and be filled with my fruits. I am the mother of
beautiful affection. My breath is sweeter than honey, and my
inheritance above honey and the honeycomb." "Wine and music rejoice
the heart, and above both is the love of Wisdom."[44] Of a surety, O
Lord, Thou showest Thyself so lovable and desirable, that it is no
wonder that the hearts of all long for Thee, and are tormented by
the desire of Thee. Thy words breathe love, and flow so sweetly,
that in many hearts the love of temporal things has wholly dried up.
Therefore, I greatly long to hear Thee speak of Thy lovableness.
Come, O Lord, my only comfort, speak to the heart of Thy servant.
For I sleep sweetly beneath Thy shadow, and my heart is awake.

Wisdom. Hear, My son, and see; incline thine ear, forgetting thyself
and all other things. Lo, I in Myself am that ineffable Good, which
is and ever was; which has never been expressed nor ever will be.
For although I give Myself to be felt by men in their inmost hearts,
yet no tongue can ever declare or explain in words what I am. For
verily all the beauty, grace, and adornment which can be conceived
by thee or by others, exists in me far more excellently, more
pleasantly, more copiously, than any one could say in words. I am
the most loving Word of the Father, begotten from the pure substance
of the Father, and wondrously pleasing am I to His loving eyes in
the sweet and burning love of the Holy Spirit. I am the throne of
happiness, the crown of souls: most bright are Mine eyes, most
delicate My mouth, My cheeks are red and white, and all My
appearance is full of grace and loveliness. All the heavenly host
gaze upon Me with wonder and admiration; their eyes are ever fixed
upon Me, their hearts rest in Me, their minds turn to Me and turn
again. O thrice and four times happy is he, to whom it shall be
given to celebrate this play of love amid heavenly joys at My side,
holding My tender hands in happiest security, for ever and ever to
all eternity. Only the word that proceeds out of My sweet mouth
surpasses the melodies of all the angels, the sweet harmony of all
harps, and musical instruments of every kind....

Servitor. There are three things, O Lord, at which I marvel greatly.
The first is, that although Thou art in Thyself so exceedingly
loving, yet towards sin Thou art a most severe judge and avenger.
Alas, Thy face in wrath is too terrible; the words which Thou
speakest in anger pierce the heart and soul like fire. O holy and
adorable God, save me from Thy wrathful countenance, and defer not
till the future life my punishment.

Wisdom. I am the unchangeable Good, remaining always the same. The
reason why I do not appear always the same, is on account of those
who do not behold Me in the same way. By nature I am friendly; yet
none the less I punish vice severely, so that I deserve to be
feared. From My friends I require a pure and filial fear, and a
friendly love, that fear may ever restrain them from sin, and that
love may join them to Me in unbroken loyalty.

Servitor. What Thou sayest pleases me, O Lord, and it is as I would
have it. But there is another thing at which I greatly marvel--how
it is that when the soul is faint from desire of the sweetness of
Thy presence, Thou art wholly mute, and dost not utter a single word
that can be heard. And who, O Lord, would not be grieved, when Thou
showest Thyself so strange, so silent, to the soul that loves Thee
above all things?

Wisdom. And yet all the creatures speak of Me.

Servitor. But that is by no means enough for the soul that loves.

Wisdom. Also every word that is uttered about Me is a message of My
love; all the voices of holy Scripture that are written about Me are
letters of love, sweet as honey. They are to be received as if I had
written them Myself. Ought not this to satisfy thee?

Servitor. Nay but, O most holy God, dearest Friend of all to me,
Thou knowest well that a heart which is on fire with love is not
satisfied with anything that is not the Beloved himself, in whom is
its only comfort. Even though all the tongues of all the angelic
spirits were to speak to me, none the less would my unquenchable
love continue to yearn and strive for the one thing which it
desires. The soul that loves Thee would choose Thee rather than the
kingdom of heaven. Pardon me, O Lord: it would become Thee to show
more kindness to those who love Thee so ardently, who sigh and look
up to Thee and say: Return, return! Who anxiously debate with
themselves: alas, thinkest thou that thou hast offended Him? That He
has deserted thee? Thinkest thou that He will ever restore thee His
most sweet presence, that thou wilt ever again embrace Him with the
arms of Thy heart, and press Him to thy breast, that all thy grief
and trouble may vanish? All this, O Lord, Thou hearest and knowest,
and yet Thou art silent.

Wisdom. Certainly I know all this, and I watch it with great
pleasure. But I would have thee also answer a few questions, since
thy wonder, though veiled, is so great. What is it which gives the
greatest joy to the highest of all created spirits?

 Servitor. Ah, Lord, this question is beyond my range. I prithee,
answer it Thyself.

Wisdom. I will do as thou desirest. The highest angelic spirit finds
nothing more desirable or more delightful than to satisfy My will in
all things; so much so, that if he knew that it would redound to My
praise for him to root out nettles and tares, he would diligently
fulfil this task in preference to all others.

Servitor. Of a truth, Lord, this answer of Thine touches me sharply.
I perceive that it is Thy will that I should be resigned in the
matter of receiving and feeling tokens of Thy love, and that I
should seek Thy glory alone, in dryness and hardness as well as in
sweetness.

Wisdom. No resignation is more perfect or more excellent, than to be
resigned in dereliction.

 Servitor. And yet, O Lord, the pain is very grievous.

Wisdom. Wherein is virtue proved, if not in adversity? But be
assured, that I often come, and try whether the door into My house
is open, but find Myself repulsed. Many times I am received like a
stranger, harshly treated, and then driven out of doors. Nay, I not
only come to the soul that loves me, but tarry with her like a
friend; but that is done so secretly, that none know it save those
who live quite detached and separated from men, and observe My ways,
and care only to please and satisfy My grace. For according to My
Divinity I am purest Spirit, and I am received spiritually in pure
spirits.

Servitor. So far as I understand, Lord God, Thou art a very secret
Lover. How glad would I be if Thou wouldest give me some signs, by
which I might know Thee to be truly present.

Wisdom. By no other way canst thou know the certainty of My presence
better, than when I hide Myself from thee, and withdraw what is Mine
from thy soul. Then at last thou knowest by experience what I am,
and what thou art. Of a surety I am everlasting Good, without whom
no one can have anything good. When therefore I impart that immense
Good, which is Myself, generously and lovingly, and scatter it
abroad, all things to which I communicate Myself are clothed with a
certain goodness, by which My presence can be as easily inferred, as
that of the Sun, the actual ball of which cannot be seen, by its
rays. If therefore thou ever feelest My presence, enter into
thyself, and learn how to separate the roses from the thorns, the
flowers from the weeds.

Servitor. Lord, I do search, and I find within myself a great
diversity. When I am deserted by Thee, my soul is like a sick man,
whose taste is spoiled. Nothing pleases me, but all things disgust
me. My body is torpid, my mind oppressed; within is dryness, without
is sadness. All that I see or hear, however good in reality, is
distasteful and hateful to me. I am easily led into sins; I am weak
to resist my enemies; I am cold or lukewarm towards all good.
Whoever comes to me, finds my house empty. For the House-Father is
away, who knows how to counsel for the best, and to inspire the
whole household. On the other hand, when the day-star arises in my
inmost heart, all the pain quickly vanishes, all the darkness is
dispelled, and a great brightness arises and shines forth. My heart
laughs, my mind is exalted, my soul becomes cheerful, all things
around me are blithe and merry; whatever is around me and within me
is turned to Thy praise. That which before seemed hard, difficult,
irksome, impossible, becomes suddenly easy and pleasant. To give
myself to fasting, watching, and prayer, to suffer or abstain or
avoid, in a word all the hardnesses of life seem when compared with
Thy presence to have no irksomeness at all. My soul is bathed in
radiance, truth, and sweetness, so that all its labours are
forgotten. My heart delights itself in abundant sweet meditations,
my tongue learns to speak of high things, my body is brisk and ready
for any undertaking; whoever comes to ask my advice, takes back with
him high counsels such as he desired to hear. In short, I seem to
myself to have transcended the limits of time and space, and to be
standing on the threshold of eternal bliss. But who, O Lord, can
secure for me, that I may be long in this state? Alas, in a moment
it is withdrawn from me; and for a long space again I am left as
naked and destitute as if I had never experienced anything of the
kind; till at last, after many and deep sighings of heart, it is
restored to me. Is this Thou, O Lord, or rather I myself? Or what is
it?

Wisdom. Of thyself thou hast nothing except faults and defects.
Therefore that about which thou askest is I Myself, and this is the
play of love.

Servitor. What is the play of love?

Wisdom. So long as the loved one is present with the lover, the
lover knoweth not how dear the loved one is to him; it is only
separation which can teach him that.

Servitor. It is a very grievous game. But tell me, Lord, are there
any who in this life no longer experience these vicissitudes of Thy
presence?

Wisdom. You will find very few indeed. For never to be deprived of
My presence belongs not to temporal but to eternal life.

APHORISMS AND MAXIMS

ACT according to the truth in simplicity; and, whatever happens, do
not help thyself; for he who helps himself too much will not be
helped by the Truth.

God wishes not to deprive us of pleasure; but He wishes to give us
pleasure in its totality--that is, all pleasure.

Wilt thou be of use to all creatures? Then turn thyself away from
all creatures.

If a man cannot comprehend a thing, let him remain quiet, and it
will comprehend him.

Say to the creatures, I will not be to thee what thou art to me.

The power of abstaining from things gives us more power than the
possession of them would.

Some men one meets who have been inwardly drawn by God, but have not
followed Him. The inner man and the outer man in these cases are
widely at variance, and in this way many fail.

He who has attained to the purgation of his senses in God performs
all the operations of the senses all the better.

He who finds the inward in the outward goes deeper than he who only
finds the inward in the inward.

He is on the right road who contemplates under the forms of things
their eternal essence.

It is well with a man who has died to self and begun to live in
Christ.






RUYSBROEK

THE ADORNMENT OF THE SPIRITUAL NUPTIALS

BOOK I





PREFACE

"SEE the Bridegroom cometh: go forth to meet Him." St Matthew the
evangelist wrote these words, and Christ said them to His disciples
and to all men, in the Parable of the Ten Virgins. The Bridegroom is
our Lord Jesus Christ, and human nature is the bride, whom God has
made in His own image and likeness. He placed her at first in the
most exalted, the most beautiful, the richest and most fertile place
on earth--in paradise. He subjected to her all the creatures; He
adorned her with graces; and He laid a prohibition upon her, in
order that by obedience she might deserve to be established in an
eternal union with her Bridegroom, and never more fall into any
affliction, trouble, or guilt. Then came a deceiver--the infernal,
envious foe, under the guise of a cunning serpent. He deceived the
woman, and the two together deceived the man, who possessed the
essence of human nature. So the enemy despoiled human nature, the
bride of God, by his deceitful counsels, and she was driven into a
strange country; poor and miserable, a prisoner and oppressed,
persecuted by her enemies, as if she could never more return to her
country and the grace of reconciliation. But when God saw that the
time was come, and took pity on the sufferings of His beloved, He
sent His only Son to earth, in a rich abode and a glorious
temple--that is to say, in the body of the Virgin Mary. There he
married His bride, our nature, and united it to His Person, by means
of the pure blood of the noble Virgin. The priest who joined the
Bride and Bridegroom was the Holy Spirit; the angel Gabriel
announced the marriage, and the blessed Virgin gave her consent. So
Christ, our faithful Bridegroom, united our nature to His, and
visited us in a strange land, and taught us the manners of heaven
and perfect fidelity. And He laboured and fought like a champion
against our enemy, and He broke the prison and gained the victory,
and His death slew our death, and His blood delivered us, and He set
us free in baptism under the life-giving waters, and enriched us by
His sacraments and gifts, that we might go forth, as He said,
adorned with all virtues, and might meet Him in the abode of His
glory, to enjoy Him throughout all eternity.

Now the Master of truth, Christ, saith: "See, the Bridegroom
cometh, go forth to meet Him." In these words Jesus, our Lover,
teaches us four things. In the first word He gives a command, for He
says, "See." Those who remain blind, and those who resist this
command are condemned without exception. In the next word He shows
us what we shall see--that is to say, the coming of the Bridegroom,
when He says, "The Bridegroom cometh." In the third place, He
teaches us and commands us what we ought to do, when He says, "Go
forth." In the fourth place, when He says, "to meet Him," He shows
us the reward of all our works and of all our life, for that must be
a loving "going forth," by which we meet our Bridegroom.

We shall explain and analyse these words in three ways, first,
according to the ordinary mode of the beginner's life--that is to
say, the active life, which is necessary to all who would be saved.
In the second place, we shall analyse these words by applying them
to the inner life, exalted and loving, to which many men arrive by
the virtues and by the grace of God. Thirdly, we shall explain them
by applying them to the superessential and contemplative life, to
which few attain and which few can taste, because of the supreme
sublimity of this life.

ON THE ACTIVE LIFE

CHRIST, the Wisdom of the Father, hath said from the time of Adam
and still saith (inwardly, according to His Divinity), to all men,
"See"; and this vision is necessary. Now let us observe attentively
that for him who wishes to see materially or spiritually, three
things are necessary. First, in order that a man may be able to see
materially, he must have the external light of heaven, or another
natural light, in order that the medium--that is to say, the air
across which one sees, may be illuminated. In the second place, he
must have the will, that the things which he will see may be
reflected in his eyes. Thirdly, he must have the instruments, his
eyes, healthy and without flaw, that the material objects may be
exactly reflected in them. If a man lacks any one of these three
things, his material vision disappears. We shall speak no more of
this vision, but of another, spiritual and supernatural, wherein all
our blessedness resides.

Three things are necessary for spiritual and supernatural vision.
First, the light of the divine grace, then the free conversion of
the will towards God, and lastly, a conscience pure from all mortal
sin. Now observe: God being a God common to all, and His boundless
love being common to all, He grants a double grace; both antecedent
grace, and the grace by which one merits eternal life. All men,
heathens and Jews, good and bad, have in common antecedent grace. In
consequence of the common love of God towards all men, He has caused
to be preached and published His name and the deliverance of human
nature, even to the ends of the earth. He who wishes to be converted
can be converted. For God wishes to save all men and to lose none.
At the day of judgment none will be able to complain that enough was
not done for him, if he had wished to be converted. So God is a
common Light and Splendour which illumine heaven and earth, and men
according to their merits and their needs. But though God is common,
and though the sun shines on all trees, some trees remain without
fruit, and others bear wild fruit useless to mankind. This is why we
prune these trees and graft fertile branches upon them, that they
may bear good fruit, sweet to taste and useful for men. The fertile
branch which comes from the living paradise of the eternal kingdom,
is the light of divine grace. No work can have savour, or be useful
to man, unless it comes from this branch. This branch of divine
grace, which makes man acceptable and by which we merit eternal
life, is offered to all. But it is not grafted on all, for they will
not purge away the wild branches of their trees--that is to say,
unbelief or a perverse will, or disobedience to the commandments of
God. But in order that this branch of divine grace may be planted in
our soul, three things are necessary; the antecedent grace of God,
the conversion of our free will, and the purification of the
conscience. Antecedent grace touches all men; but all men do not
attain to free conversion and purification of the conscience, and
this is why the grace of God, by which they might merit eternal
life, fails to touch them. The antecedent grace of God touches man
from within or from without. From without, by sickness or loss of
outward goods, of relations and friends, or by public shame; or
perhaps a man is moved by preaching, or by the examples of saints
and just men, by their words or works, till he comes to the
knowledge of himself. This is how God touches us from without.
Sometimes also a man is touched from within, by recalling the pains
and sufferings of our Lord, and the good which God has done to him
and to all men, or by the consideration of his sins, of the
shortness of life, of the eternal pains of hell and the eternal joys
of heaven, or because God has spared him in his sins and has waited
for his conversion; or he observes the marvellous works of God in
heaven, on earth, and in all creation. These are the works of
antecedent divine grace, which touch man from within or from
without, and in divers manners. And man has still a natural
inclination towards God, proceeding from the spark of his soul or
synteresis, [Footnote: See Introduction] and from the highest
reason, which always desires the good and hates the evil. Now, in
these three manners God touches every man according to his needs, so
that the man is struck, warned, frightened, and stops to consider
himself. All this is still antecedent grace and not merited; it thus
prepares us to receive the other grace, by which we merit eternal
life; when the mind is thus empty of bad wishes and bad deeds,
warned, struck, in fear of what it ought to do, and considers God,
and considers itself with its evil deeds. Thence come a natural
sorrow for sin and a natural good will. This is the highest work of
antecedent grace.

When man does what he can, and can go no further because of his
weakness, it is the infinite goodness of God which must finish this
work. Then comes a higher splendour of the grace of God, like a ray
of the sun, and it is poured upon the soul, though it is as yet
neither merited nor desired. In this light God gives Himself, by
free will and by bounty, and no one can merit it before he has it.
And it is in the soul an internal and mysterious operation of God,
above time, and it moves the soul and all its faculties. Here then
ends antecedent grace; and here begins the other--that is to say,
supernatural light.

This light is the first necessary condition, and from it is born a
second spiritual condition--that is to say, a free conversion of the
will in a moment of time, and then love is born in the union of God
and the soul. These two conditions are connected, so that one cannot
be accomplished without the other. There, where God and the soul are
united in the unity of love, God grants His light above time, and
the sou! freely turns to God by the force of grace, in a moment of
time, and charity is born in the soul, from God and the soul, for
charity is a bond of love between God and the loving soul. From
these two things, the grace of God, and the free conversion of the
will illuminated by grace, is born charity--that is to say, divine
love. And from divine love proceeds the third point, the
purification of the conscience. And this is accomplished in the
consideration of sin and of the flaws in the soul, and because man
loves God, there enters into him a contempt for self and for all his
works. This is the order of conversion. From it are born a true
repentance and a perfect sorrow for the evil that we have done, and
an ardent desire to sin no more and to serve God henceforward in
humble obedience; from it are born a sincere confession, without
reserves, without duplicity and without pretences, the desire to
satisfy God and to undertake the practice of all the virtues and all
good works. These three things, as you have just heard, are
necessary for divine vision. If you possess them, Christ says to
you, "See," and you become really seeing. This is the first of the
four chief ways in which Christ, our Lord, says "See."

ON THE FIRST COMING OF CHRIST, IN THE FLESH

NEXT, He shows us what we shall see when He says, "The Bridegroom
cometh." Christ, our Bridegroom, says this word in Latin: Venit.
The word expresses two tenses, the past and the present, and yet
here it indicates the future. And this is why we must consider three
comings of our Bridegroom Jesus Christ. At His first coming He was
made man for love of man. The second coming is daily and frequent in
every loving soul, with new graces and new gifts, as man is able to
receive them. In the third coming, He will come manifestly on the
dreadful day of judgment or at the hour of each man's death. In all
these comings we must observe three things, the cause, the interior
mode, and the external work.

The cause of the creation of angels and men is the infinite goodness
and nobleness of God; He wished that the wealth and blessedness,
which are Himself, should be revealed to reasonable creatures, for
them to enjoy in time, and in eternity above time. The reason why
God became man, is His inconceivable love, and the distress of all
men, lost since the fall in original sin, and unable to raise
themselves again. But the reason why Christ, according to His
divinity and His humanity, accomplished His works on earth, is
fourfold--namely, His divine love, which is without measure; the
created love, which is called charity, and which He had in His soul
by the union of the Eternal Word and the perfect gift of His Father;
the great distress of human nature; and the glory of His Father.
These are the reasons for the coming of Christ, our Bridegroom, and
for all His works, exterior and interior.

Now we must observe in Jesus Christ, if we wish to follow Him in His
virtues according to our powers, the mode or condition which He had
within, and the works which He wrought without, for they are virtues
and the acts of virtues.

The mode which He had according to His divinity is inaccessible and
incomprehensible to us, for it is after this mode that He is
continually born of the Father, and that the Father in Him and by
Him knows and creates and orders, and rules everything in heaven and
on earth; for He is the Wisdom of the Father, and from them flows
spiritually a Spirit--that is to say, a love, which is the bond
between them and the bond of all the saints and just persons on
earth and in heaven. We will speak no more of this mode but of the
created mode which He had by these divine gifts and according to His
humanity. These modes are singularly multiform; for Christ had as
many modes as He had interior virtues, for each virtue has its
special mode. These virtues and these modes were, in the mind of
Christ, above the intelligence and above the comprehension of all
creatures. But let us take three--namely, humility, charity, and
interior or exterior suffering in patience. These are the three
principal roots and origins of all virtues and all perfection.

ON THE TWOFOLD HUMILITY OF CHRIST

NOW understand: there are two kinds of humility in Jesus Christ,
according to His divinity. First, He willed to become man; and this
nature, which was accursed even to the depth of hell, He accepted
according to His personality and was willing to unite Himself to it.
So that every man, good or bad, may say, Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, is my brother. Secondly, He chose for mother a poor virgin, and
not a king's daughter, so that this poor virgin became the mother of
God, who is the only Lord of heaven and earth and all creatures. In
consequence, of all the works of humility which Christ ever
accomplished, one may say that God accomplished them. Now let us
take the humility which was in Jesus Christ according to His
humanity and by grace and divine gifts; according to His humility
His soul inclined with all its power in respect and veneration
before the power of the Father. For an inclined heart is a humble
heart. This is why He did all His works to the praise and glory of
the Father, and sought in nothing His own glory according to His
humanity. He was humble, and submitted to the old law, and to the
commandments, and often to the customs. He was circumcised, and
carried to the Temple, and redeemed according to usages, and He paid
taxes to Caesar like other Jews. And He submitted Himself humbly to
His mother and to Joseph, and served them with a sincere deference
according to their needs. He chose for friends--for apostles--the poor
and the despised, in order to convert the world. In his intercourse
with them and all others He was humble and modest. This is why He
was at the disposal of all men, in whatever distress they were,
within or without; He was, as it were, the servant of the whole
world. This is what we find first in Jesus Christ, our Bridegroom.

ON THE LOVE OF CHRIST, ADORNED WITH ALL VIRTUES

NEXT comes charity, the beginning and source of all virtues. This
charity maintained the supreme forces of His soul in tranquillity,
and in the enjoyment of the same blessedness which He enjoys at
present. And this same charity kept Him continually exalted towards
His Father, with veneration, love, praise, respect, with internal
prayers for the need of all men, and with the offering of all His
works to the glory of God the Father. And this same charity made
Christ still overflow with love and kindness towards all the
material or spiritual needs of mankind. This is why He has given, by
His life, the model after which all men should fashion their lives.
He has given spiritual nourishment to all well-disposed men by real
internal teachings, as well as by outward miracles. We cannot
comprehend His charity to its full extent, for it flowed from the
unfathomable fountains of the Holy Spirit, above all the creatures
who have ever received charity, for He was God and man in one
Person. This is the second point of charity.

ON THE PATIENCE OF CHRIST, EVEN UNTO DEATH

THE third point is to suffer in patience. We will examine this
seriously, for it is this which adorned Christ, our Bridegroom,
during all His life. He suffered when He was newly born, from
poverty and cold. He was circumcised and shed his blood. He was
obliged to fly into a foreign country. He served Joseph and His
mother, He suffered from hunger and thirst, from shame and contempt
and from the wicked words and deeds of the Jews. He fasted, He
watched, and was tempted by the enemy. He was subject to all men, He
went from district to district, from town to town, to preach the
gospel painfully and zealously. Finally, He was taken by the Jews,
who were His enemies and whom He loved. He was betrayed, mocked,
insulted, scourged, struck, and condemned on false testimony. He
carried His cross with great pain to the mount of Calvary. He was
stripped naked as at His birth, and never was seen a body so
beautiful, nor a mother so unhappy. He endured shame, pain, and cold
before all the world, for He was naked, and it was cold, and He was
exhausted by His wounds. He was nailed with large nails to the wood
of the cross, and was so strained that His veins were burst. He was
lifted up and shaken upon the cross, so as to make His wounds bleed,
His head was crowned with thorns, and His ears heard the fierce Jews
crying out, "Crucify Him! crucify Him!" and many other shameful
words. His eyes saw the obstinacy and wickedness of the Jews, and
the distress of His mother, and His eyes were extinguished under the
bitterness of pain and death. His mouth and palate were hurt by the
vinegar and gall, and all the sensitive parts of His body wounded by
the scourge.

Behold then Christ, our Bridegroom, wounded to death, abandoned by
God and the creatures, dying on the cross, hanging from a post, with
no one to care much for Him except Mary, His unhappy mother, who
nevertheless could not aid Him. And Christ suffered moreover
spiritually, in His soul, from the hardness of the Jews' hearts and
those who made Him die, for in spite of the prodigies and miracles
which they saw, they remained in their wickedness; and He suffered
by reason of their corruption and the vengeance which God was about
to inflict upon them, in body and soul, for His death. He suffered
moreover for the grief and misery of His mother and disciples, who
were in great sadness. And He suffered because His death would be
wasted for many men, and for the ingratitude of many, and for the
blasphemies of those who would curse Him who died for love of us.
And His nature and interior reason suffered because God withdrew
from them the inflow of His gifts and consolations, and abandoned
them to themselves in such distress. Therefore Christ complained and
said, My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?

Behold then the interior virtues of Christ; humility, charity, and
suffering in patience. These three virtues Jesus, our Bridegroom,
practised throughout His life, and He died in them, and He paid our
debt by satisfying justice, and opened His side in His bounty. And
thence flow rivers of delight, and sacraments of blessedness. And He
was exalted to His power, and sat at the right hand of the Father,
and reigns eternally. This is the first coming of our Bridegroom,
and it is completely past.

ON THE SECOND COMING OF CHRIST, HOW HE EVERY DAY FLOWS INTO OUR
HEARTS WITH NEW GRACE

THE second coming of Christ, our Bridegroom, takes place every day
in just men. We do not wish to speak here of the first conversion of
man, nor of the first grace which was given him when he was
converted from sin to virtue. But we wish to speak of a daily
increase of new gifts and new virtues, and of a more actual coming
of Christ, our Bridegroom, into our soul. Now we must observe the
cause, the mode, and the work, of this coming. The cause is fourfold;
the mercy of God, our misery, the divine generosity, and our
desire. These four causes make the virtues grow and increase.

Now understand. When the sun sends forth its bright rays into a deep
valley between two high mountains, and while it is at the zenith, so
that it can illuminate the depths of the valley, a triple phenomenon
occurs; for the valley is lighted from the mountains, and it becomes
warmer and more fertile than the plain. In the same way, when a just
man sinks in his misery, and recognises that he has nothing, and is
nothing, that he can neither halt nor go forward by his own
strength; and when he perceives also that he fails often in virtues
and good works, he thus confesses his poverty and distress, and
forms the valley of humility. And because he is humble and in need,
and because he confesses his need, he makes his plaint to the
kindness and mercy of God. He is conscious of the sublimity of God,
and of his own abasement.

Thus he becomes a deep valley. And Christ is the sun of justice and
mercy, which burns at the meridian of the firmament--that is to say,
at the right hand of the Father, and shines even to the bottom of
humble hearts; for Christ is always moved by distress, when man
humbly offers to Him complaints and prayers. Then the two mountains
rise--that is to say, a double desire, in the first place a desire to
serve and love God by his merits, in the second place to obtain
excellent virtues. These two desires are higher than heaven, for
they touch God without any intermediary, and desire His immense
generosity. Then that generosity cannot be kept back, it must flow,
for the soul is at this moment susceptible of receiving countless
boons.

These are the causes of the second coming of Christ, with new
virtues. Then the valley--that is to say, the humble heart, receives
three things. It is enlightened the more, and illuminated by grace,
and warmed by charity, and becomes more fertile in virtues and good
works. Thus you have the cause, the mode, and the work, of this
coming.

HOW WE MAY MAKE DAILY PROGRESS BY THE SACRAMENTS OF THE CHURCH

THERE is yet another coming of Christ, our Bridegroom, which takes
place every day, in the growth of grace and in new gifts--that is to
say, when a man receives some sacrament with a humble and
well-prepared heart. He receives then new gifts and more ample
graces, by reason of his humility, and by the internal and secret
work of Christ in the sacrament. That which is contrary to the
sacrament is in baptism the want of faith, in confession the want of
contrition; it is to go to the sacrament of the altar in a state of
mortal sin, or of bad will; and it is the same with the other
sacraments.

ON THE THIRD COMING OF CHRIST, TO JUDGMENT

THE third coming, which is still future, will take place at the last
judgment or at the hour of death. Christ, our Bridegroom and our
Judge at this judgment, will recompense and avenge according to
justice, for He will award to each according to his deserts. He
gives to every just man, for every good work done in the spirit of
the Lord, a reward without measure, which no creature can merit--
namely, Himself. But as He co-operates in the creature, the creature
deserves, through His merit, to have a reward. And by a necessary
justice He gives eternal pains to those who have rejected an eternal
good for a perishable.

ON THE THIRD SPIRITUAL GOING FORTH, TO ALL THE VIRTUES

NOW understand and observe. Christ says at the beginning of our
text, "See"--that is to say, see by charity and pureness of
conscience, as you have been told. Now, He has shown us what we
shall see--namely, His three comings.

He orders us what we must do next, and says, "Go forth" if you have
fulfilled the first necessary condition--that is to say, if you see
in grace and in charity, and if you have well observed your model,
Christ, in His "going forth"; there leaps up in you, from your love
and loving observation of your Bridegroom, an ardour of justice--
that is to say, a desire to follow Him in virtue. Then Christ says
in you, "Go forth." This going forth must have three modes. We must
go forth towards God, towards ourselves, and towards our neighbour
by charity and justice; for charity always pushes upward, towards
the kingdom of God, which is God Himself; for He is the source from
which it flowed without any intermediary, and He remains always
immanent in it. The justice which is born of charity wishes to
perfect the manners and the virtues which are suitable to the
kingdom of God--that is to say, to the soul. These two things,
charity and justice, establish a solid foundation in the kingdom of
the soul where God may dwell, and this foundation is humility. These
three virtues support all the weight and all the edifice of all the
virtues and all sublimity; for charity maintains man in presence of
the unfathomable good things of God from whence it flows, so that it
perseveres in God, and increases in all the virtues and in true
humility; and justice maintains man in presence of the eternal truth
of God, so that truth may be discovered by him, and that he may be
illuminated, and may accomplish all the virtues without error. But
humility maintains man always before the supreme power of God, so
that he remains always abased and little, and abandons himself to
God, and holds no longer by himself. This is the way in which a man
must bear himself before God, that he may grow alway in new virtues.

HOW HUMILITY IS THE FOUNDATION OF ALL THE VIRTUES

NOW understand; for having made humility the base of everything, we
must speak first of it. Humility is the desire of abasement or of
depth--that is to say, an inclination or internal desire for
abasement of heart and conscience before the sublimity of God. The
justice of God exacts this submission, and, thanks to charity, the
loving heart cannot abandon it. When the loving and humble man
considers that God has served him so humbly, so lovingly, and so
faithfully, and then that God is so high, so powerful, and so noble,
and that man is so poor, little, and base, there is born from all
this, in the humble heart, an immense respect and reverence towards
God; for to reverence God in all works, within and without, is the
first and most delightful work of humility, the sweetest work of
charity, and the most suitable work of justice. For the humble and
loving heart cannot pay honours to God and His noble humanity, nor
abase himself so deeply as to satisfy his desire. That is why it
seems to the humble man that he always does too little in honour of
God and in his humble service. And he is humble, and venerates Holy
Church and the sacraments, and he is temperate in meat and drink, in
his words, and in all relations of life. He is content with poor
raiment, with menial employment, and his face is naturally humble,
without pretence. And he is hunible in his practices, within and
without, before God and before men, that none may be offended by
reason of him. Thus he tames and removes far from him all pride,
which is the cause and origin of all sins. Humility breaks the
snares of sin, the world, and the Devil. And man is ordered within
himself, and established in the very place of virtue. Heaven is open
to him, and God is inclined to hear his prayer, and he is loaded
with graces. And Christ, the solid stone, is his support, and he who
builds his virtues upon humility cannot go wrong.

ON OBEDIENCE

FROM this humility is born obedience, for only the humble man can be
inwardly obedient. Obedience is a submission and pliant disposition,
and a good will ready for all that is good. Obedience subjects a man
to orders, to prohibitions, and to the will of God, and it subjects
the soul and sensual force to the highest reason, in such a way that
the man lives suitably and reasonably. And it makes men submissive
and obedient to Holy Church and to the sacraments, and to all the
good practices of holy Christianity. It prepares man, and makes him
ready for the service of all, in works, in bodily and spiritual
care, according to the needs of each, and prudence. Also, it drives
far away disobedience, which is the daughter of pride, and which we
ought to flee from more than from poison. Obedience in will and work
adorns, extends, and manifests the humility of man. It gives peace
to cloisters, and if it exists in the prelate, as it ought to exist,
it attracts those who are under his orders. It maintains peace and
equality among equals. And he who observes it is beloved by those
who are above him, and the gifts of God, which are eternal, elevate
and enrich him.

ON THE ABDICATION OF OUR OWN WILL

FROM this obedience is born the abdication of our own will. By this
abdication the substance and occasion of pride are repulsed, and the
greatest humility is accomplished. And God rules the man as He
wills; and the will of the man is so well united to that of God that
he can neither wish nor desire anything otherwise. He has put off
the old man, and has put on the new man, renewed and perfect
according to the divine will. It is of such an one that Christ said,
"Blessed are the poor in spirit," that is, those who have renounced
their will--"for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."

ON PATIENCE

FROM the abandonment of the will is born patience; for no one can
be perfectly patient in everything, except he who has submitted his
will to the will of God, and to all men in things useful and
convenient. Patience is a tranquil endurance of all that can happen
to a man, whether sent by God or by men. Nothing can trouble the
patient man, neither the loss of earthly goods, nor the loss of
friends or relations, nor sickness, nor disgrace, nor life, nor
death, nor purgatory, nor the devil, nor hell. For he has abandoned
himself to the will of God in true love. And, provided that mortal
sin does not touch him, all that God orders for him in time or
eternity seems light. This patience adorns a man, and arms him
against anger and sudden rage, and against impatience of suffering,
which often deceives a man within and without, and exposes him to
manifold temptations.

ON GENTLENESS

FROM this patience are born gentleness and kindness, for no one can
be gentle under adversity if not the patient man. Gentleness creates
in man peace and repose from everything; for the gentle man endures
insulting words and gestures, and bad faces and bad deeds, and all
manner of injustice towards his friends and himself, and he is
content with all, for gentleness is suffering in repose. Thanks to
gentleness, the force of anger remains immovable in its
tranquillity, the force of desire lifts itself up towards the
virtues, and the reason rejoices, and the conscience dwells in
peace, for the other mortal sins, such as anger and rage, are
removed far from her. For the Spirit of God reposes in a gentle and
humble heart, as Christ saith, "Blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth"--that is to say, their own nature and the things
of earth in meekness, and, after this life, the things of eternity.

ON KINDNESS

FROM the same source as gentleness comes kindness, for the gentle
spirit alone can possess kindness. This kindness causes a man to
oppose a loving face and friendly words, and all the works of pity,
to those who are angry with him, and he hopes that they will return
to themselves and amend. Thanks to mercy and kindness, charity
remains lively and fruitful in a man; for the heart full of kindness
is like a lamp full of precious oil; and the oil of kindness
lightens the wandering sinner by its good example, and soothes and
heals by consoling words and deeds those whose heart is wounded,
saddened, or irritated. And it inflames and illumines those who are
in charity, and no jealousy or envy can touch it.

ON COMPASSION

FROM kindness is born compassion, by which we sympathise with every
one, for no one can suffer with all men, except he who has kindness.
Compassion is an inward movement of the heart, aroused by pity for
the bodily or spiritual distress of all men. This compassion makes a
man partaker in Christ's sufferings, when he considers the reason of
these sufferings, the resignation and love of Christ, His wounds,
His tortures, His shame, His nobleness, His misery, the shame which
He endured, the crown, the nails, and the death in patience. These
unheard of and manifold pains of Christ, our Redeemer and
Bridegroom, move to pity anyone who is capable of feeling pity.
Compassion makes a man observe and note his faults, his want of
power to do any good thing, and weakness in all that pertains to the
glory of God; his lukewarmness and slowness, the multitude of his
faults, the waste of his time, and his positive shortcomings in
virtue and good conduct. All this makes a man truly sorry for
himself. Then his compassion for himself makes him consider his
errors and wanderings, the small care which he has of God and of his
eternal salvation, his ingratitude for all the good that God has
done him, and for all that He has suffered for man. And he considers
also that he is a stranger to the virtues, that he neither knows
them nor practises them, while he is clever and crafty in all that
is bad and unjust; he sees how attentive he is to the loss or gain
of worldly goods, how inattentive and indifferent towards God, the
things of eternity, and his own salvation. This consideration makes
the just man feel a great compassion towards the salvation of all
men. The man will also observe with pity the bodily needs of his
neighbour and the manifold pains of nature, when he sees the hunger
which men suffer, the thirst, cold, nakedness, poverty, contempt,
and oppression; the sadness which they feel at the loss of
relations, friends, goods, honour, and repose; and the innumerable
afflictions to which flesh is heir. All this rouses the just man to
compassion, and he suffers with all men; but his greatest suffering
arises when he sees the impatience of others under their own
sufferings, by which they lose their reward and often deserve hell.
This is the work of compassion and pity.

This work of compassion and love for all men overcomes and removes
the third mortal sin--namely, hatred and envy; for compassion is a
wound of the heart, which makes us love all men, and can only work
healing in so far as some suffering lives in men; for God has
ordained that mourning and pain must precede all the other virtues.
This is why Christ said, "Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted"--that is to say, when they shall reap in joy what
they now sow in compassion and sorrow.

ON GENEROSITY

FROM this compassion is born generosity, for no one can be
supernaturally generous, with faith in all men, and with love,
except the merciful man; though one many give to a particular
individual without charity, and without supernatural generosity.

Generosity is the copious outflow of a heart moved with charity and
pity. When a man considers with compassion the sufferings and pains
of Christ, from this compassion is born generosity, which excites us
to praise and thank Christ for His pains and for His love, at the
same time that it causes to be born in us respect and veneration,
and a joyous and humble submission of heart and soul, in time and in
eternity. When a man observes and pities himself, and considers the
good that God has done to him and his own weakness, he cannot help
flowing out into the liberality of God, taking refuge in His pity
and fidelity, and abandoning himself to God, with a free and perfect
wish to serve Him for ever. The generous man, who observes the
errors, the wanderings, and the injustice of men, desires and
implores the outflow of the divine gifts and the exercise of their
generosity on all men, that they may return to themselves and be
converted to the truth. The generous man considers also with
compassion the material needs of all men; he helps them, gives,
lends, consoles to the best of his power. By means of this
generosity, men practise the seven works of mercy, the rich by their
services and the bestowal of their goods, the poor by good will and
the desire to do good if they can, and thus the virtue of generosity
is perfected. Generosity in the depth of the heart multiplies all
the virtues, and illuminates the forces of the soul. For the
generous, man is always of joyful spirit, he is without anxiety; he
is full of sympathy, and is ready to do kindnesses to all men in the
works of virtue. He who is generous, and loves not the things of
earth, however poor he may be, is like unto God, for all that he
has, and all the thoughts of his heart flow out of him in largess.
And so he is delivered from the fourth of the deadly sins, avarice.
Jesus Christ saith to these: "Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy"; in the day when they shall hear this word
spoken unto them: "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world."

ON ZEAL AND DILIGENCE

FROM this generosity are born supernatural zeal and diligence in all
the virtues. None can exhibit this zeal, save the generous and
diligent man. This is an internal and eager impulse towards all the
virtues, and towards the imitation of Christ and the saints. In this
zeal, a man desires to expend in the honour of God the united powers
of his heart and senses, his soul and body, all that he is, and all
that he may receive. This zeal makes a man watchful in reason and
discrimination, and makes him practise the virtues in justice.
Thanks to this supernatural zeal, all the forces of his soul are
open to God, and prepared for all the virtues. His conscience is
refreshed, and divine grace is increased, virtue is practised with
joy, and his external works are adorned. He who has received this
lively zeal from God is removed far from the fifth deadly
sin--lukewarmness and gloominess towards the virtues necessary for
salvation. [Footnote: The best account in English of the deadly sin
of acedia, too much neglected in modern religious teaching, is to be
found in Bishop Paget's Spirit of Discipline.] And sometimes this
lively zeal disperses heaviness and sluggishness of the bodily
temperament. It is on this subject that Jesus Christ says: "Blessed
are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall
be filled." This will be, when the glory of God shall be manifested,
and shall fill every man in proportion to his love and justice.

ON TEMPERANCE AND SOBRIETY

FROM zeal are born temperance and sobriety within and without; for
none can maintain true moderation in sobriety, if he is not
thoroughly diligent and zealous to preserve his body and soul in
justice. Sobriety separates the higher faculties from the animal
faculties, and preserves a man from excesses. Sobriety wishes not to
taste nor know those things which are not permitted.

The incomprehensible and sublime nature of God surpasses all the
creatures in heaven and earth, for whatever the creature conceives
is creature. But God is above every creature, and within and without
every creature, and all created comprehension is too strait to
comprehend Him. In order that the creature may conceive and
comprehend God, it must be drawn up into God from above; it is only
by God that it can comprehend God. Those then who wish to know what
God is, and to study Him, let them know that it is forbidden. They
would become mad. All created light must fail here. What God is,
passes the comprehension of every creature. But Holy Scripture,
nature, and all the creatures show us that He is. We shall believe
the articles of faith without trying to penetrate them, for that is
impossible while we are here: this is sobriety. The difficult and
subtle teachings of the inspired writings we shall only explain in
accordance with the life of Christ and His saints. Man will study
nature and the Scriptures, and every creature; and will seek to
learn from them only what may be to his own advantage. This is
sobriety of spirit.

A man will maintain sobriety of the senses, and he will subdue by
reason his animal faculties, that the animal pleasure in food and
drink may not delight him too much, but that he may eat and drink as
a sick man takes a potion, because it is his duty to preserve his
strength for the service of God. This is sobriety of body. A man
will preserve moderation in words and actions, in silence and
speech, in eating and drinking, in what he does and abstains from
doing, as Holy Church enjoins and the saints give the example.

By moderation and sobriety of spirit within, a man maintains
constancy and perseverance in the faith, that purity of intelligence
and calmness of reason which are necessary to understand the truth,
readiness to bend to the will of God with regard to every virtue,
peace of heart and serenity of conscience. Thanks to this virtue, he
possesses assured peace in God and in himself.

By moderation and sobriety in the use of the bodily faculties, he
often preserves health and contentment of the bodily nature, his
honour in external relations, and his good name. And thus he is at
peace with himself and with his neighbour. For he attracts and
rejoices all men of good will, by his moderation and sobriety. And
he escapes the sixth deadly sin, which is want of temperance, and
gluttony. It is of this that Christ said: "Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God." For
being like unto the Son, who has made peace in all creatures who
desire it, and who make peace in their turn, by moderation and
sobriety, the Son will divide among them the heritage of His Father,
and they will possess this heritage with Him throughout eternity.

ON PURITY

FROM this sobriety are born purity of soul and body, for none can be
absolutely pure in body and soul, save he who follows after sobriety
in body and soul. Purity of spirit consists in this--that a man
cleaves to no creature with any passionate desire, but attaches
himself to God only; for one may use all the creatures while
rejoicing in God only. Purity of spirit makes a man attach himself
to God above intelligence and above the senses, and above all the
gifts which God may bestow upon the soul; for all that the creature
receives in its intelligence or in its senses purity desires to
transcend, and to repose in God only. We should approach the
sacrament of the altar not for the sake of the delights, the
pleasure, the peace, or the sweetness which we find there, but for
the glory of God only, and that we may grow in all the virtues. This
is purity of spirit.

Purity of heart signifies that a man turns towards God without
hesitation in every bodily temptation and every disturbance of
nature, in the freedom of his will abandoning himself to Him with a
new confidence and a firm resolve to abide always with God. For to
consent to sin, or to the animal desires of the bodily nature, is a
separation from God.

Purity of body means that a man abstains from impure actions of
every kind, when his conscience assures him that they are impure and
contrary to the commandments, to the glory, and to the will of God.

Thanks to these three kinds of purity, the seventh deadly sin, that
of wantonness, is conquered and driven away. Wantonness is a
voluptuous inclination of the spirit, leading away from God towards
a created thing; it is the impure act of the flesh outside what
Holy Church permits, and the carnal occupation of the heart in some
taste or desire for a creature. I do not here refer to those sudden
stirrings of love or desire which none can escape.

You now know that purity of spirit preserves men in the likeness of
God, without care for the creatures, inclined towards God and united
to Him. The chastity of the body is compared to the whiteness of the
lily and to the purity of the angels. In its resistance to
temptation, it is compared to the redness of the rose, and to the
nobility of the martyrs. If it is preserved for love of God and in
His honour, it is then perfect, and it is compared to the
heliotrope, for it is one of the highest adornments of nature.

Purity of heart renews and increases the grace of God. In purity of
heart all the virtues are inspired, practised, and preserved. It
keeps and preserves the outer senses, it subdues and binds the
animal desires within, and it is the ornament of all the inner life.
It is the exclusion of the heart from things of earth and from all
lies, and its inclusion among the things of heaven and all truth.
And this is why Christ has said: "Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God." This is the vision in which consists our
eternal joy, and all our reward, and our entrance into bliss. This
is why a man will be sober and moderate in everything, and will keep
himself from every occasion which might tarnish the purity of his
soul and body.

ON THE THREE ENEMIES WHO ARE TO BE CONQUERED BY JUSTICE

IF we wish to possess this virtue and to repulse these enemies, we
must have justice, and we must practise it, and preserve it even
until our death, in purity of heart, for we have three powerful
enemies who try to attack us at all times, in all states, and in
many different ways. If we make our peace with any one of them and
follow him, we are vanquished, for they are in league with each
other in all wickedness and injustice. These three enemies are the
devil, the world, and our own flesh, which is the nearest to us, and
is often the worst and most mischievous of our foes. For our animal
desires are the weapons with which our enemies fight against us.
Idleness, and indifference to virtue and the glory of God are the
cause and occasion of war and combat. But the weakness of our
natures, our negligence and ignorance of truth are the sword by
which our enemies wound us and sometimes conquer us.

And this is why we must be divided in ourselves. The lower part of
ourselves, which is animal and contrary to the virtues, we ought to
hate and persecute and cause it to suffer by means of penitence and
austerities, so that it may be always crushed down and submissive to
reason, and that justice, with purity of heart, may always keep the
upper hand in all virtuous actions. And all the pains, sorrows, and
persecutions which God makes us suffer at the hands of those who are
enemies to virtue, we shall endure with joy, in honour of God and
for the glory of virtue, and in the hope of obtaining and possessing
justice in purity of heart; for Christ said: "Blessed are those who
are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven." For righteousness preserved in virtue and in virtuous
actions is a coin of the same weight and value as the kingdom of
heaven, and it is by it that we may purchase and obtain eternal
life. By these virtues a man goes forth towards God and towards
himself, in good conduct, virtue, and justice.

ON THE KINGDOM OF THE SOUL

HE who wishes to obtain and preserve these virtues, will adorn,
occupy, and order his soul like a kingdom. Free will is the king of
the soul. It is free by nature, and more free still by grace. It
will be crowned with a crown or diadem named Charity. We shall
receive this crown and this kingdom from the Emperor, who is the
Lord, the sovereign and king of kings, and we shall possess, rule,
and preserve this kingdom in His name. This king, free will, will
dwell in the highest town in the kingdom--that is to say, in the
concupiscent faculty of the soul. He will be adorned and clad with a
robe in two parts. The right side of his robe will be a virtue
called strength, that he may be strong and powerful to overcome all
obstacles and sojourn in the heaven, in the palace of the supreme
Emperor, and to bend with love and ardent self-surrender his crowned
head before the supreme monarch. This is the proper work of charity.
By it we receive the crown, by it we adorn the crown, and by it we
keep and possess the kingdom throughout eternity. The left side of
the robe will be a cardinal virtue, called moral courage. Thanks to
it, free will, the king, will subdue all immorality, will accomplish
all virtue, and will have the power to keep his kingdom even until
death. The king will choose councillors in his country, the wisest
in the land. They will be two divine virtues, knowledge and
discretion, illuminated by divine grace. They will dwell near the
king, in a palace called the reasonable force of the soul. They will
be crowned and adorned with a moral virtue called temperance, that
the king may always act and refrain from acting according to their
advice. By knowledge we shall purge our conscience from all its
faults and adorn it with all virtues; and, thanks to discretion, we
shall give and take, do and not do, speak and be silent, fast and
eat, listen and answer, and act in all ways according to knowledge
and discretion clad in their moral virtue, which is called
temperance or moderation.

This king, free will, will also establish in his kingdom a judge,
who will be justice, which is a divine virtue when it is born from
love. And it is one of the highest moral virtues. This judge will
dwell in the conscience, in the middle of the kingdom in the
irascible faculty. And he will be adorned with a moral virtue called
prudence. For justice without prudence cannot be perfect. This
judge, justice, will traverse the kingdom with royal powers,
accompanied by wise counsel and his own prudence. He will promote
and dismiss, he will judge and condemn, will condemn to death and
acquit, will mutilate, blind, and restore to sight, will exalt and
abase and organise, will punish and chastise according to justice,
and will destroy all vices. The people of the kingdom--that is to
say, all the faculties of the soul, will be supported by humility
and the fear of God, submitting to Him in all the virtues, each
after its own manner. He who has thus occupied, preserved, and
ordered the kingdom of his soul, has gone forth, by love and the
virtues, towards God, towards himself, and towards his neighbour.
This is the third of the four principal points which Christ speaks
of when He says, Go forth.

ON THE THREEFOLD MEETING OF THE SOUL

WHEN a man has, by the grace of God, eyes to see, and a pure
conscience, and when he has considered the three comings of Christ,
our Bridegroom, and lastly when he has gone forth by the virtues,
then takes place the meeting with our Bridegroom, and this is the
fourth and last point. In this meeting consist all our blessedness,
and the beginning and the end of all the virtues, and without this
meeting no virtue can be practised.

He who wishes to meet Christ as his well-beloved Bridegroom, and to
possess in Him and with Him eternal life, must meet Christ, now in
time, in three points or in three manners. First, he must love God
in everything wherein we shall merit eternal life. Secondly, he must
attach himself to nothing which he might love as much as or more
than God. Thirdly, he must repose in God with all his might, above
all creatures and above all the gifts of God, and above all acts of
virtue and above all the sensible graces which God might spread
abroad in his soul and body.

Now understand: he who has God for his end must have Him present to
himself, by some divine reason. That is to say, he must have in view
Him who is the Lord of heaven, and of earth, and of every creature,
Him who died for him, and who can and will give him eternal
salvation. In whatever mode and under whatever name he represents
God, as Lord of every creature, it is well. If he takes some divine
Person, and in Him sees the essence and power of the divine nature,
it is well. If he regards God as saviour, redeemer, creator,
governor, as blessedness, power, wisdom, truth, goodness, it is
well. Though the names which we ascribe to God are numerous, the
sublime nature of God is simple and unnameable by the creatures. But
we give Him all these names by reason of His nobleness and
incomprehensible sublimity, and because we cannot name or proclaim
Him completely. See now under what mode and by what knowledge God
will be present to our intention. For to have God for our aim is to
see spiritually. To this quest belong also affection and love, for
to know God and be without love aids and advances us not a whit, and
has no savour. This is why a man, in all his actions, must bend
lovingly towards God, whom he seeks and loves above everything.
This, then, is the meeting with God by means of intention and love.

In order that the sinner may turn from his sins in a meritorious
penitence, he must meet God by contrition, free conversion, and a
sincere intention to serve God for ever, and to sin no more. Then,
at this meeting, he receives from the mercy of God the assured hope
of eternal salvation and the pardon of his sins, and he receives the
foundation of all the virtues, faith, hope, and charity, and the
good will to practise all the virtues. If this man advances in the
light of faith, and observes all the works of Christ, all His
sufferings and all His promises, and all that He has done for us and
will do to the day of judgment and through eternity; if he examines
all this for his soul's health, he must needs meet with Christ; and
Christ must needs be present to his soul, so grateful and full of
thankfulness. So his faith is fortified, and he is impelled more
inwardly and powerfully towards all the virtues. If he still
progresses in the works of virtue, he must again meet with Christ,
by the annihilation of self. Let him not seek his own things; let
him set before him no extraneous ends; let him be discreet in his
actions; let him set God always before him, and the praise and glory
of God; and let him so continue till his death; then his reason
will be enlightened and his charity increased, and he will become
more pious and apt for all the virtues. We shall set God before us
in every good work; in bad works we cannot set Him before us. We
shall not have two intentions--that is to say, we shall not seek God
at the same time as something else, but all our intention must be
subordinated to God and not contrary to Him, but of one and the same
kind, so that it may help us and give us an impulse which may lead
us more easily to God. Then and then only is a man in the right
road. Moreover, we shall rest rather upon Him who is our aim and our
goal and the object of our love, than upon the messengers whom He
sends us--that is to say, His gifts. The soul will rest constantly
upon God, above all the adornments and presents which His messengers
may bring. The messengers sent by the soul are intention, love, and
desire. They carry to God all our good works and virtues. Above all
these, the soul will rest on God, its Beloved, above all
multiplicity. This is the manner in which we shall meet Christ all
through our life, in all our actions and virtues, by right
intention, that we may meet Him at the hour of our death in the
light of glory.

This mode, as you have learnt, is called the active life. It is
necessary to all men; or at least they must not live in a manner
contrary to any virtue, though they may not attain the degree of
perfection in all the virtues which I have described. For to live
contrary to the virtues is to live in sin, as Christ has said: "He
that is not with me is against me." He who is not humble is proud,
and he who is proud belongs not to God. We must always possess a
virtue and be in a state of grace, or possess what is contrary to
that virtue and be in a state of sin. May every man examine and
prove himself, and order his life as I have here described.

ON THE DESIRE TO KNOW GOD AS HE IS, IN THE NATURE OF HIS GODHEAD

THE man who thus lives, in this perfection, as I have here described
it, and who devotes all his life and actions to the honour and glory
of God, and who seeks and loves God above all things, is often
seized by the desire to see and know Christ, this Bridegroom who was
made man for love of him, who laboured in love even till death, who
drove away from him sin and the enemy, who gave him His grace, who
gave him Himself, who left him His sacraments and promised him His
kingdom. When a man considers all this, he is exceedingly desirous
to see Christ his Bridegroom, and to know what He is in Himself
While He only knows Him in His works he is not satisfied. So he will
do like Zacchasus, the publican, who desired to see Jesus Christ. He
will go in front of the crowd--that is to say, the multitude of the
creatures, for they make us so little and short, that we cannot
perceive God. And he will climb the tree of faith, which grows from
above downwards, for its roots are in the Godhead. This tree has
twelve branches, which are the twelve articles of faith. The lower
branches speak of the humanity of Christ, and of the things which
concern the salvation of our body and soul. The higher part of the
tree speaks of the Godhead, of the Trinity of the Divine Persons and
the Unity of the Divine Nature. A man will strive to reach the unity
at the top of the tree, for it is there that Jesus must pass with
all His gifts. Here Jesus comes, and sees the man, and tells Him in
the light of faith that He is, according to His Godhead,
immeasurable and incomprehensible, inaccessible and abysmal, and
that He surpasses all created light and all finite comprehension.
This is the highest knowledge acquired in the active life, to
recognise thus, in the light of faith, that God is inconceivable and
unknowable. In this light Christ saith to the desire of a man: "Come
down quickly, for I must lodge at thy house to-day." This rapid
descent to which God invites him is nothing else but a descent, by
desire and love, into the abyss of the Godhead, to which no
intelligence can attain in crested light. But where intelligence
remains outside, love and desire enter. The soul thus bending
towards God, by the intention of love, above all that the intellect
can comprehend, rests and abides in God, and God abides in her. Then
mounting by desire, above the multitude of the creatures, above the
work of the senses, above the light of nature, she meets Christ in
the light of faith, and is enlightened, and recognises that God is
unknowable and inconceivable. Finally, bending by her desires
towards this inconceivable God, she meets Christ and is loaded with
His gifts; by living and resting upon Him, above all His gifts,
above herself and above all the creatures, she dwells in God and God
in her.

This is how you will meet Christ at the summit of the active life,
if you have as your foundations justice, charity, and humility; and
if you have built a house above--that is to say, the virtues here
described, and if you have met Christ by faith--that is to say, by
faith and the intention of love, you dwell in God and God dwells in
you, and you possess the active life.

This is the first explanation of the word of Jesus Christ our
Bridegroom, when He said, "See, the Bridegroom cometh; go forth to
meet Him."

BOOK II

THE SUBJECTS OF THE SECOND BOOK

THE prudent virgin--that is to say, the pure soul, who has
renounced the things of earth, and lives henceforth for God in
virtue, has taken in the vessel of her heart the oil of charity and
of divine works by means of the lamp of an unstained conscience. But
when Christ, her Bridegroom, withdraws His consolations and the
fresh outpouring of His gifts, the soul becomes heavy and torpid.

At midnight--that is to say, when it is least expected, a spiritual
cry resounds in the soul: "See, the Bridegroom cometh, go forth to
meet Him." We shall now speak of this seeing, and of the inward
coming of Christ, and of the spiritual going forth of the man to
meet Jesus, and we shall explain these four conditions of an inward
life, exalted and full of desire, to which all men attain not, but
many reach it by means of the virtues and their inward courage.

In these words, Christ teaches us four things. In the first, He
requires that our intelligence shall be enlightened with a
supernatural light. This is what we observe in the word, "See." In
the next words He shows us what we ought to see--that is to say, the
inward coming of our Bridegroom of eternal truth. This is His
meaning when He says: "The Bridegroom cometh." In the third place,
in the words "go forth," He bids us go forth in inward actions
according to righteousness. In the fourth place, He shows us the end
and motive of all our works, the meeting with our Bridegroom Jesus
Christ in the joyous unity of His adorable Godhead.

HOW WE MAY GAIN SUPERNATURAL VISION BY INTERNAL EXERCISES

NOW let us speak of the first word. Christ saith, "See." Three
things are required by him who would see supernaturally in interior
exercises. The first is the light of the divine grace, but in a far
more sublime manner than can be felt in the external, active life.
The second is a stripping off of extraneous images and a denudation
of the heart, so that a man may be free from images, and attachments
to every creature. The third is a free conversion of the will, by
means of a concentration of all the bodily and spiritual faculties,
and complete deliverance from all inordinate affections. Thus this
will flows together into the unity of the Godhead and of our own
mind, so that the reasonable creature may be able to obtain and
possess supernaturally the sublime unity of God. It is for this that
God made the heaven and earth and mankind, it is for this that He
was made man, and taught us by word and example by what way we
should come to this unity. And then in the ardour of His love He
endured to die, and He ascended to heaven, and opened to us this
unity in which we may possess felicity and eternal blessedness.

ON THE THREEFOLD NATURAL UNITY OF MAN

NOW consider attentively: there are three kinds of natural unity in
all men, and, moreover, of supernatural unity among the just. The
first and supreme unity of man is in God; for all creatures are
immanent in this unity, and if they were to be separated from God,
they would be annihilated, and would become nothing. This unity is
essential in us according to nature, whether we are good or bad. And
without our co-operation it makes us neither holy nor blessed. This
unity we possess in ourselves, and nevertheless above us, as a
beginning and support of our life and essence.

Another unity exists in us naturally--that of the supreme forces, in
so far as they actively take their natural origin in the unity of
the spirit or of the thoughts. This is the same unity as that which
is immanent in God, but it is taken here actively and there
essentially. Nevertheless the spirit is entirely in each unity
according to the integrity of its substance. We possess this unity
in ourselves, above the sensitive part of us; and thence are born
memory, intelligence, and will, and all the power of spiritual
works. In this unity the soul is called spirit.

The third unity which is in us naturally is the foundation of bodily
forces in the unity of the heart, the source and origin of bodily
life. The soul possesses this unity in the lively centre of the
heart, and from it flow all the material works and the five senses,
and the soul draws from thence its name of soul (anima); for it is
the source of life, and animates the body--that is to say, it makes
it living and preserves it in life. These three unities are in man
naturally, as a life and a kingdom. In the inferior unity we are
sensible and animal, in the intermediate unity we are rational and
spiritual; and in the superior unity we are preserved according to
our essence. And this exists in all men, naturally.

Now these three unities are adorned and cultivated naturally, like a
kingdom and an eternal abode, by the virtues, in charity and in the
active life. And they are adorned still better and more gloriously
cultivated by the internal exercises of a spiritual life. But most
gloriously and blessedly of all by a supernatural contemplative
life.

The inferior unity, which is corporeal, is adorned and cultivated
supernaturally by external practices, by perfect conduct, by the
example of Christ and the saints, by carrying the cross with Christ,
by submitting our nature to the command of Holy Church and the
teachings of the saints, according to the forces of nature and
prudence.

The other unity which resides in the spirit and which is absolutely
spiritual, is adorned and cultivated supernaturally by the three
Divine gifts, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and by the influx of grace
and Divine gifts, and by good will directed to all the virtues, and
the desire to follow the example of Christ and of holy Christendom.

The third and supreme unity is above our intelligence and yet
essentially in us. We cultivate it supernaturally when in all our
works of virtue we have in view only the glory of God, without any
other desire but to repose in Him, above thought, above ourselves,
and above everything. And this is the unity from which we flowed out
when we were created, and where we abide according to our essence,
and towards which we endeavour to return by love. These are the
virtues which adorn this triple unity in the active life.

Now we proceed to say how this triple unity is adorned more
sublimely and cultivated more nobly by interior exercises joined to
the active life. When a man, by love and right intention, elevates
himself in all his works and in all his life towards the honour and
glory of God, and seeks rest in God above all things, he will wait
in humility and patience and abandonment of self and in the hope of
new riches and new gifts, and he will not be troubled or anxious
whether it pleases God to grant His gifts or to refuse them. So men
prepare themselves for receiving an internal life of desires; even
as a vessel is fitted and prepared, into which a precious liquid is
to be poured. There is no vessel more noble than the loving soul,
and no drink more necessary than the grace of God. Man will thus
offer to God all his works and all his life, in a simple and right
intention, and in a zest above his intention, above himself, and
above everything, in the sublime unity in which God and the loving
spirit are united without intermediary.

ON THE FIRST MODE OR DEGREE OF THE FIRST SPIRITUAL COMING OF CHRIST

THE first coming of Christ to those who are engaged in the exercises
of desire is an internal and sensible current from the Holy Spirit,
which impels and attracts us to all the virtues. We shall compare
this coming to the splendour and power of the sun, which, so soon as
it is risen, enlightens and warms the whole world in the twinkling
of an eye. In the same way Christ, the eternal sun, burns and
shines, dwelling at the highest point of the spirit, and enlightens
and fires the lower part of man--that is to say, his physical heart
and sense-faculties, and this is accomplished in less time than the
twinkling of an eye, for the work of God is prompt; but the man in
whom it takes place ought to be internally seeing by means of his
spiritual eyes.

The sun burns in the East, in the middle of the world, on the
mountains; there it hastens in the summer, and creates good fruits
and strong wines, filling the earth with joy. The same sun shines in
the West, at the end of the world; the country there is colder and
the force of the heat less; nevertheless, it there produces a great
number of good fruits, but not much wine. The men who dwell in the
West part of themselves, abide in their external senses, and by
their good intentions, their virtues, and their outer practices, by
the grace of God produce abundant harvests of virtues of divers
kinds, but they but rarely taste the wine of inward joy and
spiritual consolation.

The man who wishes to experience the rays of the eternal sun, which
is Christ Himself, will be seeing; and will dwell on the mountains
of the East, by concentrating all his faculties, and lifting up his
heart to God, free, and indifferent to joy and pain and all the
creatures. There shines Christ, the sun of righteousness, on the
free and exalted heart, and this is what I mean by the mountains.
Christ, the glorious sun and divine effulgence, shines through and
fires by his internal coming, and by the power of His Spirit, the
free heart and all the powers of the soul. This is the first work of
the internal coming in the exercises of desire. Just as fire
inflames things which are thrown into it, so Christ inflames the
hearts offered to Him in freedom and exultation at His internal
coming, and He says in this coming: "Go forth by the exercises
appropriate to this life."

ON UNITY OF HEART

FROM this heat is born unity of heart, for we cannot obtain true
unity, unless the Spirit of God lights His flame in our heart. For
this fire makes one and like unto itself all that it can overtop and
transform. Unity gives a man the feeling of being concentrated with
all his faculties on one point. It gives internal peace and repose
of heart. Unity of heart is a bond which draws and binds together
the body and the soul, and all exterior and interior forces, in the
unity of love.

HOW THE VIRTUES PROCEED FROM UNITY

FROM this unity of heart is born inwardness or the internal life,
for none can have inwardness unless he is one and united in himself;
fervour or inwardness is the introversion of a man into his own
heart, to comprehend and experience the internal operation or speech
of God. Inwardness is a sensible flame of love, which the Spirit of
God lights and kindles in a man, and a man knows not whence it
comes, nor what has happened to him.

ON SENSIBLE LOVE

FROM inwardness is born a sensible love which penetrates the heart
of man and the highest faculties of the soul. This love and delight
none can experience who has not inwardness. Sensible love is the
desire and appetite for God as for an eternal good in which all is
contained. Sensible love renounces all the creatures, not as needs
but as pleasures. Interior love feels itself touched from above by
the eternal love which it must practise eternally Interior love
willingly renounces and despises everything, in order to obtain that
which it loves.

ON DEVOTION

FROM this sensible love is born devotion to God and His glory. For
none can have a hungry devotion in his heart, unless he possesses
the sensible love of God. Devotion excites and stimulates a man
internally and externally to the service of God. It makes the body
and soul abound in glory and merit in the eyes of God and men. God
exacts devotion in all that we do. It purges the body and soul from
all that might hold us back; it shows us the true path to
blessedness.

ON GRATITUDE

FROM fervent devotion is born gratitude, for none can thank or
praise God perfectly if he is not fervent and pious. We should thank
God for everything here below, that we may be able to thank Him
eternally above. Those who praise not God here, will be mute
eternally. To praise God is the most joyous and delicious employment
of the loving heart. There is no limit to the praises of God, for
therein is our salvation, and we shall praise Him eternally.

Now hear a comparison, by which you may understand the exercise of
gratitude. When the summer approaches and the sun mounts, it
attracts the moisture of the earth along the stems and branches of
the trees, whence come green leaves, flowers, and fruit. Even so
when Christ, the eternal sun, rises in our hearts, He sends His
light and heat upon our desires, and draws the heart away from all
the manifold things of earth, creating unity and inwardness, and
makes the heart grow and become green by interior love, and makes
loving devotion flourish, and makes us bear the fruits of gratitude
and love, and preserves these fruits eternally in the humble pain of
our inability to praise and serve Him enough.

Here ends the first of the four chief kinds ot interior exercises,
which adorn the lower part of a man.

HOW TO INCREASE INWARDNESS BY HUMILITY

BUT in thus comparing to the splendour and power of the sun the
modes in which Jesus Christ comes, we shall find in the sun another
virtue or influence which makes the fruit more early ripe and more
abundant.

When the sun rises to a very great height, and enters the sign of
the Twins--that is to say, into a double thing, but of the same
nature, in the middle of the month of May, the sun has a double
power over the flowers, herbs, and all that grows upon the earth. If
at that time the planets which rule nature are well ordered
according to the season of the year, the sun shines brightly on the
earth, and attracts the moisture in the atmosphere. Hence are born
dew and rain, and the fruits of the ground increase and multiply.

Even so when Christ, that bright sun, rises in our heart above all
other things, and when the requirements of material nature, which
are contrary to the spirit, are well regulated according to reason,
when we possess the virtues as I have said above, and when, lastly,
we offer and restore to God, by the ardour of charity, and with
gratitude and love, the delight and peace which we find in the
virtues, from all these are born, at times, a gentle rain of new
internal consolations, and a celestial dew of divine sweetness. This
dew and rain make all the virtues increase and multiply day by day,
if we put no hindrance in their way. This is a new and special
operation, and a new coming of Christ into the loving heart.

ON PURE SATISFACTION OF THE HEART

FROM this sweetness is born satisfaction of heart, and of all the
bodily faculties, so that a man imagines that he is inwardly
embraced in the divine bands of love. This pleasure and consolation
is greater and more delicious to body and soul than all the
pleasures granted on earth, even if a man could enjoy them to the
full. In this pleasure God sinks into the heart by means of His
gifts with such a profusion of delights, consolations, and joys,
that the heart overflows internally.

ON THE OBSTACLES WHICH WE ENCOUNTER IN THIS STATE

THIS coming, or kind of coming, is granted to beginners, when they
turn from the world, when their conversion is complete, and they
abandon all the consolations of earth to live for God only;
nevertheless they are still weak, and need milk and not strong meat,
such as great temptations and the hiding of God's face. At this
season frost and fog often injure them, for they are in the middle
of the May of the interior life. The frost is to wish to be
something, or to imagine that we are something, or to be somewhat
attached to ourselves, or to believe that we have deserved
consolations and are worthy of them. The fog is the wish to rest
upon internal consolations and pains. This obscures the atmosphere
of reason, and the ilowers, which were about to unfold and bloom and
bear fruits, shut up again. This is why we lose the knowledge of
truth, and nevertheless we sometimes keep certain false sweetnesses
granted by the enemy, which at the last lead men astray.

HOW ONE OUGHT TO BEHAVE IN THIS CASE

I WISH to give you here a brief comparison, that you may not go
astray, and that you may be able to behave wisely in this case.
Observe the wise bee, and imitate her. She dwells in unity, in the
midst of the assembly of her kind, and she goes forth, not during a
storm, but when the weather is calm and bright, and the sun shines;
and she flies towards every flower where she may find sweetness. She
rests not on any flower, neither for its beauty nor for its
sweetness, but draws out from the cups of the flowers their
sweetness and clearness--that is to say, the honey and wax, and she
brings them back to the unity which is formed of the assembly of all
the bees, that the honey and wax may be put to good use.

The expanded heart on which Christ, the eternal sun, shines, grows
and blooms under His rays, and from it flow all the interior forces
in joy and sweetness.

Now the wise man will act like the bee, and will try to settle, with
affection, intelligence, and prudence, on all the gifts and all the
sweetness that he has experienced, and on all the good that God has
done to him. He will not rest on any flower of the gifts, but laden
with gratitude and praise he will fly back towards the unity where
he wishes to dwell, and to rest with God eternally.

ON THE THIRD MODE OF THE SPIRITUAL COMING OF CHRIST

WHEN the sun in heaven reaches its highest point, in the sign of the
Crab--that is to say, when it can go no higher, but must begin to go
backwards, then the greatest heat of the year begins. The sun
attracts the moisture, the earth dries, and the fruits ripen. In the
same way, when Christ, the divine sun, arises above the highest
summit of our heart--that is to say, above all His gifts,
consolations and sweetnesses, and if we do not rest in any of these,
however sweet, but return always with humble praises to the source
from which these gifts flow, Christ stops and remains lifted up
above the summit of our heart, and desires to attract all our powers
to Himself.

This invitation is an irradiation of Christ, the eternal sun, and
causes in the heart a joy and pleasure so great that the heart
cannot close again after such an expansion, without pain. A man is
wounded internally and feels the smart of love. To be wounded by
love is the sweetest sensation and the most grievous pain that can
be experienced. To be wounded by love is a sure sign that we shall
be cured. This spiritual wound does us good and harm at the same
time.

ON THE FOURTH KIND OF THE SPIRITUAL COMING OF CHRIST

NOW I wish to speak of the fourth kind of coming of Jesus Christ,
which exalts and perfects the man in his interior exercises,
according to the lower part of his being. But having compared all
the interior comings to the shining of the sun, we will continue to
speak, while following the course of the seasons, of the other
effects and works of the sun.

When the sun begins to descend the sky, it enters the sign of the
Virgin, so called because this period of the year becomes barren
like a virgin. The glorious virgin Mary, mother of Christ, full of
joys and rich in all the virtues, ascended to heaven at this season.
The heat begins then to diminish, and men gather, for use during the
whole year, the ripe fruits which can be used long after, such as
corn and the grape. And they sow part of the corn, that it may be
multiplied for the use of men. At this season all the solar work of
the year is finished. In the same way, when Christ, the glorious
sun, has risen to the zenith in the heart of men, and begins to
descend, so as to hide the splendour of His divine beams and to
leave a man alone, the heat and impatience of love diminish. Now
this occultation of Christ and the withdrawal of His light and heat
are the first work and the new coming of this mode. Now Christ says
spiritually in a man: "Go forth in the manner that I now show thee";
and the man goes forth, and finds himself poor, miserable, and
desolate. Here all the storm, all the passion and eagerness of love
grow cold; summer becomes autumn, and all his wealth is changed into
great poverty. And the man begins to complain by reason of his
misery; what is become of his ardent love, his inwardness, his
gratitude, the interior consolations, the heartfelt joys? Where has
it all gone? How comes it that all is dead within him? He is like
a scholar who has lost his knowledge and his work; and nature is
often troubled by such losses. Sometimes these unhappy ones are
deprived of the good things of earth, of their friends and
relations, and are deserted by all the creatures; their holiness is
mistrusted and despised, men put a bad construction upon all the
works of their life, and they are rejected and disdained by all
those who surround them; and sometimes they are afflicted with
diverse diseases; and some of them fall into bodily temptations, or
into spiritual temptations, the most dangerous of all. From this
misery are born the fear of falling, and a sort of half-doubt, and
this is the extreme point where we can stop without despair. Let
such men seek out the good, complain to them, show them their
distress, and ask their help, and implore the aid of Holy
Church, and of all just men.

WHAT A MAN OUGHT TO DO WHEN HE IS ABANDONED

A MAN will here observe humbly that he has nothing but his distress,
and he will say in his resignation and self-abnegation the words of
holy Job: "The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; He hath done
what seemed good to Him; blessed be the name of the Lord." And he
will leave himself in everything, and will say and think in his
heart: "Lord, I am as willing to be poor, lacking all that Thou hast
taken from me, as I should be to be rich, if such were Thy will, and
if it were for Thine honour. It is not my will according to nature
which must be accomplished, but Thy will, and my will according to
my spirit, O Lord; for I belong to Thee, and I should love as well
to be Thine in hell as in heaven, if that could serve Thy glory; and
therefore, O Lord, accomplish in me the excellence of Thy will."
From all these pains and acts of resignation, a man will derive an
inward joy, and he will offer himself into the hands of God, and
will rejoice to be able to suffer in His honour. And if he so
perseveres, he will taste inward pleasures such as he has never had
before; for nothing so rejoices the lover of God as to feel that he
is His beloved. And if he is truly exalted as far as this mode, in
the path of virtue, it is not necessary for him to have passed
through all the states which we have described above; for he feels
within himself in action, in humble obedience, in patience, and in
resignation, the source of all the virtues. It is thus that this
mode is eternally sure.

At this season the sun in the sky enters the sign of the Scales, for
the day and night are equal, and the sun balances the light and the
darkness. In the same way Jesus Christ is in the sign of the Scales
for the resigned man; and whether He grants sweetness or
bitterness, darkness or light, whatever He chooses to send him, the
man keeps his balance, all things are equal to him except sin, which
has been driven away once for all. When every consolation has been
thus withdrawn from these resigned men, when they believe that they
have lost all their virtues and that they are abandoned by God and
all the creatures, if they then know how to reap the divers fruits,
their corn and wine are ready and ripe. That is to say, that all
that the bodily virtues can suffer will be offered by them to God
with joy, without resistance to His supreme will. All the exterior
and interior virtues, which they formerly practised with joy in the
light of love, they will now practise courageously and laboriously,
and will offer them to God, and never will they have so much merit
in His eyes. Never will they have been more noble or more beautiful.
All the consolations which God formerly granted, they will allow to
be stripped from them with joy, since it is for the glory of God. It
is thus that the virtues become perfect, and that sadness is
transformed into an eternal vintage. These men--their life and their
patience--improve and teach all who know and live near them, and
thus it is that the wheat of their virtues is sown and multiplied
for the good of all just men.

This is the fourth kind of coming which, according to the bodily
faculties and the lower part of his being, adorns and perfects a man
in interior exercises.

HOW THESE FOUR MODES ARE FOUND IN JESUS CHRIST

WE must needs walk in the light if we wish not to lose our way, and
we must observe Jesus Christ, who has taught us these four modes,
and has preceded us in them. Christ, the bright sun, rises in the
heaven of the sublime Trinity and in the dawn of His glorious mother
the virgin Mary, who was and is the dawn of all the graces. Now
observe. Christ had and still has the first mode, for He was unique
and united. In Him were and are collected and united all the virtues
which have ever been practised, and which ever will be, and besides
this, all the creatures who will cultivate these virtues. He was
thus in an unique sense the Son of the Father, and united to human
nature. And He was equally full of inwardness, for it was He who
brought upon earth the fire which has consumed all the saints and
all good men. And He had a sensible and faithful love for His
Father, and for all who will have joy in Him eternally, and His
pitiful and loving heart sighed and glowed with love for all men,
before His Father. All His life and all His actions, within and
without, and all His words, were praises of His Father. This is the
first mode.

Christ, the sun of love, blazed and shone yet more brightly and
warmly, for in Him was and is the fullness of all gifts. This is why
the heart of Christ, and His character, and His habits and His
service, overflowed with pity, sweetness, humility, and generosity.
So gracious was He and so loving, that His manners and His
personality attracted all whose nature was good. He was the pure
lily in the midst of the flowers of the field, from which the good
were to draw the honey of eternal sweetness and eternal
consolations. According to His humanity He thanked His eternal
Father for all the gifts which were ever granted to humanity, and
praised Him, for His Father is the Father of all gifts, and He
rested on Him, according to the highest faculties of His soul, above
all gifts, in the sublime unity of God from which all the gifts flow;
thus He had the second mode.

Christ, the glorious sun, blazed and shone yet higher, and more
brightly and warmly; for during all His days on earth, all His
bodily faculties were invited and pressed to the sublime glory and
bliss which He now experiences in His senses and body. And He was
inclined thereto Himself, according to His desires; and nevertheless
He willed to remain in this exile, till the time which the Father
had foreseen and fixed from all eternity. Thus He had the third
mode. When the time came at which Christ was to reap and carry away
to the eternal kingdom the fruits of all the virtues which ever have
been and ever will be practised, the eternal sun began to descend;
for Christ humbled Himself, and gave up His bodily life into the
hands of His enemies. And he was misunderstood and deserted by His
friends in so great a distress; and all consolation, within and
without, was withdrawn from His nature; and it was overwhelmed with
misery, pain, and contempt, and paid all the debt which our sins
justly incurred. All this He suffered in humble patience, and He
accomplished the greatest works of love in this resignation, whereby
He received and purchased our eternal inheritance. It is thus that
the lower part of His noble humanity was adorned, for it was in it
that He suffered this pain for our sins. It is on this account that
He is called the Saviour of the world, and that He is glorified and
raised up and seated on the right hand of His Father, and that He
reigns in power. And every creature, on the earth, above the earth,
and under the earth, bends the knee for ever before His glorious
name.

HOW A MAN SHOULD LIVE IF HE DESIRES TO BE ENLIGHTENED

THE man who, in true obedience to the commandments of God, lives in
the moral virtues, and moreover exercises himself in the interior
virtues, after the direction and impulse of the Holy Spirit, acting
and speaking according to righteousness, and who seeks not his own
interests in time or in eternity, and who supports with true
patience obscurity and affliction and every kind of misery, and who
thanks God for everything, and offers himself in humble resignation,
has received the first coming of Jesus Christ according to interior
exercises. When this man is purified and pacified, and turns back
upon himself according to his lower nature, he may be internally
enlightened, if he asks it, and if God judges that the right time
has come. It may also happen that he is enlightened from the
beginning of his conversion, so that he may offer himself entirely
to the will of God and give up all possession of himself, which is
the supreme end. But if he is to follow any further the road which I
have shown, in the exterior and at the same time in the interior
life, it will be much easier for him than for the man who has been
raised straight from the bottom, for the former will have more light
than the latter.

ON ANOTHER COMING OF CHRIST

NOW we are about to speak of another mode of the coming of Christ,
in interior exercises, which adorn, enlighten, and enrich a man,
according to the three supreme faculties of his soul. We shall
compare this coming to a life-giving fountain from which flow three
rivers.

This fountain is the fullness of divine grace in the unity of our
spirit. There resides grace essentially in its permanence, like a
full fountain, and it flows out actively by its rivers into each of
the faculties of the soul, according to their needs. These rivers
are a special influx, or operation of God in the highest faculties,
in which God operates in various manners by the intermediary of His
grace.

HOW THE FIRST RIVER FLOWS INTO THE MEMORY

THE first river of grace, which God causes to flow in this coming,
is a pure simplicity which shines without distinction in the spirit.
This river takes its source in the fountain, in the unity of the
spirit, and flows directly downwards, and penetrates all the
faculties of the soul, both higher and lower, and lifts them up out
of all multiplicity and all over-occupation, and makes a simplicity
in a man, and gives and shows him an internal bond in the unity of
his spirit. A man is thus lifted up according to his memory, and
delivered from strange and irrelevant thoughts, and from
inconstancy. Now Christ in this light demands a going forth,
according to the mode of this light and this coming. Then the man
goes forth, and observes himself that by virtue of the simple light
that is spread abroad in him he is united, established, penetrated
and fixed in the unity of his spirit or of his thoughts. Here the
man is exalted and established in a new essence; he turns his
thoughts inwards, and rests his memory on the naked truth, above all
sensuous images and above all multiplicity. There the man possesses
essentially and supernaturally the unity of his spirit, for his own
dwelling, and as an heritage of his own for ever. He always has an
inclination towards that same unity, and this unity will have an
eternal and loving inclination towards the more sublime unity where
the Father and the Son are united with all the saints in the bands
of the Holy Spirit.

HOW THE SECOND RIVER ENLIGHTENS THE INTELLIGENCE

THROUGH internal love, and loving inclination towards union with
God, is born the second river from the fullness of grace, in unity
of spirit, and this is a spiritual brightness which flows and sheds
light through the intelligence, but with distinctions in the diverse
modes. For this light shows and gives to the spirit, in the truth,
the discretion in all the virtues. But this light is not placed
altogether in our power, for though we have it always in our soul,
God makes it speak or keep silence, and He can manifest or hide it,
give or withdraw it, at all times and under all conditions, for this
light is His. Such men do not absolutely need revelations, nor to be
drawn up above sense, for their life and abode and habits and
essence are in the spirit above sense and sensibility. And God shows
them what He wills and what is necessary for them. Nevertheless God,
if He wished, could withdraw their exterior sense, and show them,
from within, unknown symbols and future things, in diverse manners.

Now Christ desires that this man should go forth, and go into the
light, according to the mode of this light. This enlightened man
will therefore go forth and observe his state and his life within
and without, in order to know if he is perfectly like Christ
according to His humanity and also according to His divinity. And
this man will lift up his eyes, enlightened by enlightened reason,
in intelligible truth, and will observe and consider, as a creature
can, the sublime nature of God, and the unlimited attributes which
are in God.

It is then necessary to consider and examine the sublime nature of
God; how it contains simplicity and purity, inaccessible height and
abysmal depth, incomprehensible extension and eternal duration; dark
silence and wild waste; repose of all the saints in unity and joy in
itself and in all the saints in eternity. This enlightened man will
also examine the attributes of the Father in the Godhead, how He is
all-powerful, the creator, mover, preserver, beginning and end,
cause and existence of all creatures; this is what the bright river
of grace shows to the enlightened reason. It shows also the
attributes of the eternal Word, abysmal wisdom and truth, model of
every creature and of all life, eternal norm of things, unveiled
contemplation and intuition into everything, brightness and
illumination of all saints, according to their merits, in heaven and
on earth. But this bright river shows also to the enlightened reason
the attributes of the Holy Spirit; inconceivable charity and
generosity, pity and mercy, infinite watchfulness and faithfulness,
immense and inconceivable riches flowing with delights through all
heavenly spirits, ardent flame consuming all in unity, effluent
fountain, preparation of all the saints for their eternal
blessedness, and their introduction thereto; enveloping and
penetrating the Father, the Son, and all the saints in joyous unity.

ON THE STATE OF AMAZEMENT AT THE DIVINE EFFLUENCE

THE incomprehensible wealth and sublimity, and the universal
generosity which flow from the divine nature, bring a man into a
state of amazement; and above all he admires the communication of
God and His effluence above everything, for he sees the
inconceivable essence, which is the common joy of God and all the
saints. And he sees that the three divine Persons are a common
effluence in works, in graces, and in glory, in nature and above
nature, in all conditions and in all times, in the saints and in
men, in heaven and on earth, in all reasonable and irrational
creatures, according to each one's merits, needs, and powers of
receiving. God is common to all, with all His gifts, the angels are
common, the soul is common in all its faculties, in all life, in all
the members, and all in each, for one cannot divide it, except by
reason. For the higher and lower faculties, the spirit and the soul,
are distinct according to reason, but one in nature. Thus God is
entirely and specially present to each one, and nevertheless common
to all the creatures, for by Him are all things, and on Him depend
the heaven, the earth, and the whole of nature. When a man thus
observes the astonishing wealth and sublimity of the divine nature,
and all the manifold gifts which He grants and offers to His
creatures, he is lifted up internally by wonder at such manifold
riches and sublimity; and from thence arises a singular inward joy
of spirit, and a vast confidence in God; and this internal joy
surrounds and penetrates all the faculties of the soul in inwardness
of spirit.

HOW THE THIRD RIVER CONFIRMS THE WILL

FROM this joy and fullness of graces, and divine faithfulness, there
is born and flows out the third river in this same unity of spirit.
This river, like a flame, lights up the spirit and absorbs all
things in unity. And it causes to overflow and flood with rich gifts
and singular nobility, all the faculties of the soul, and it creates
in the will a love without labour, spiritual and subtle. Now Christ
says internally in the spirit by means of this flaming river: "Go
forth by exercises according to the mode of these gifts and this
coming." Thanks to the first river--that is to say, to a simple
light, the memory is lifted up above the accidents of sense, and is
established in the unity of spirit. Thanks to the second river--
that is to say, to the brightness spread abroad within, the
intelligence and reason are enlightened, so as to recognise the
diverse modes of the virtues and of exercises, and the mysteries of
the Scriptures. Thanks to the third river--that is to say, to an
inspired ardour, the sublime will is kindled into a more tranquil
love, and adorned with greater riches. In this way a man becomes
spiritually enlightened, for the grace of God abides, like a
fountain in the unity of the spirit; and these rivers create in the
faculties of the soul an effluence of all the virtues. And the
fountain of grace always requires a reflux towards its source.

HOW CHRIST IS GIVEN TO ALL MEN IN THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR

THERE is a special benefit which Christ left in the Holy Church, to
all good people, in this supper of the great Paschal feast, when He
was about to pass from His sufferings to His Father after having
eaten the Paschal lamb with His disciples, and when the ancient law
was accomplished. At the end of the supper, He wished to give them a
special meal, as He had long desired to do. And this is why He
wished to finish the ancient law and to inaugurate the new law. He
took bread in His sacred hands, and consecrated His holy body, and
then His holy blood, and gave them to all His disciples, and left
them to all the just, for their eternal good.

This gift and this special food rejoice and adorn all the great
festivals and all the banquets in heaven and on earth. In this gift
Christ gives Himself to us in three manners; He gives us His flesh
and blood and His bodily life, glorified and full of joys and
griefs. And He gives us His spirit with its highest faculties, and
full of glory, of gifts, of truths and justifications. And He gives
us His personality with the divine light which lifts up His spirit
and all enlightened spirits, even to the sublime and joyous unity.

Now Christ wishes us to remember Him, whenever we consecrate, offer,
and receive His body. Now observe how we should remember Him. We
shall observe and consider how Christ bends towards us in loving
affection, in great desire, in loving joy, and by flowing into our
bodily nature. For He gives us that which He received from our
humanity--that is to say, His flesh and blood and bodily nature. We
shall contemplate this precious body pierced and wounded with love,
by reason of His faithfulness to us. It is by it that we are adorned
and nourished in the lower part of our human nature. He gives us
also, in this sublime gift of the sacrament, His spirit full of
glory, and the richest gifts of the virtues, and ineffable marvels
of charity and nobleness.

It is by this that we are nourished, adorned, and illuminated in the
unity of our spirit and in our higher faculties, thanks to the
indwelling of Christ with all His riches. He gives us also in the
sacrament of the altar His sublime personality in incomprehensible
light. And thanks to this, we are united to the Father, and so we
reach our inheritance of divinity in eternal bliss. If a man
meditate rightly on this, he will meet Christ in the same manner in
which Christ comes to him. He will raise himself up to receive
Christ, with all his faculties and in eager joy. It is not possible
for our joy to be too great, for our nature receives His nature--that
is to say the glorified humanity of Christ, full of joyfulness and
full of merits. This is why I would that man, at the reception of
this sacrament, should melt away with desire, joy, and pleasure, for
he is receiving the fairest, the most gracious, the most lovable of
the children of men, and is united to Him. In this union and in this
joy great benefits often come to men, and many mysterious and
marvellous secrets of divine treasures are manifested and disclosed.
When a man meditates, at this reception, on the martyrdom and
sufferings of the precious body of Christ, whom he is receiving, he
enters sometimes into so loving a devotion and so great a
compassion, that he desires to be nailed with Christ to the cross,
and to shed his heart's blood for the honour of Christ. And he
presses himself to the wounds and open heart of Christ His Saviour.
In these exercises revelations and great benefits have often come to
men.

ON THE UNITY OF THE DIVINE NATURE IN THE TRINITY OF PERSONS

THE sublime and superessential unity of the Divine nature, in which
the Father and the Son possess their nature in the unity of the Holy
Spirit, above the conception and comprehension of all our faculties,
in the bare essence of our spirit, surpasses in this sublime calm
all the creatures of created light. This sublime unity of the Divine
nature is living and fruitful, for, from this same unity, the
eternal Word is born from the Father without interruption. And by
this birth the Father knows the Son, and all things in the Son. And
the Son knows the Father, and all things in the Father, for their
nature is simple. From this reciprocal vision of the Father and the
Son in an eternal clearness, flow forth an eternal satisfaction and
unfathomable love, which is the Holy Spirit. And by the Holy Spirit
and the eternal Wisdom God inclines towards every creature
severally, and loads every one of them with gifts and kindles it
with love, according to its nobility and according to the state
wherein it is constituted and elected though its virtues and the
eternal foresight of God. And it is by this that all just spirits,
in heaven and on earth, are united in virtue and justice.

HOW GOD MOVES AND POSSESSES THE SOUL, NATURALLY AND SUPERNATURALLY

NOW be attentive: I am about to give you an example on this
subject. God has made the upper heaven a pure and simple clearness
encircling and enveloping all the heavens; and all the material
world which God has created for it is the exterior abode and kingdom
of God and His saints, full of glory and eternal joys. Now the
heaven being an unmixed clearness, there is there neither time, nor
state, nor temptation, nor change, for it is unchangeably fixed
above all things. The sphere which approaches most nearly to it is
called the primum mobile. All movement, by the power of God,
emanates from the supreme heaven. This is the movement which carries
with it the motions of the firmament and all the planets. It is by
this same initial movement that all the creatures live and grow,
according to their order. Now understand that the essence of the
soul is like a spiritual kingdom of God, full of Divine clearness,
surpassing all our faculties, unless these faculties are not
transformed in a simple fashion, of which I do not wish to speak
now. See; in this essence of the soul in which God reigns, the
unity of our spirit is like the primum mobile; for in this unity
the spirit is moved from above, by the power of God, naturally and
supernaturally; for by ourselves we have nothing either in or above
nature. And this motion of God, when it is supernatural, is the
first and chief cause of all our virtue. And by this motion of God
the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit are granted to certain
enlightened men, like the seven planets which illuminate all the
lives of men. This is how God possesses the essential unity of our
spirit, as His Kingdom.

ON THE ESSENTIAL MEETING WITH GOD, WITHOUT INTERMEDIARY

NOW attend carefully. The unity of our spirit has two modes, one
essential and the other active. You should know that the spirit,
according to its essential existence, receives the coming of Christ
in its bare nature, without intermediary and without interruption.
For this essence and life which we are in God, in our eternal image,
and which we have in ourselves, according to essential existence,
are without intermediary and inseparable. This is why the spirit
receives, in its highest and most intimate part, in its bare nature,
the impression of its eternal image, and the divine brightness
without interruption, and it is an eternal dwelling of God, which He
occupies by a perpetual inhabitation, and which He visits always
with a new coming, and a new effulgence from His eternal birth. For
where He comes He is, and where He is He comes. And where He has
never been, He will never come, for there is in Him neither accident
nor change, and everything, where He is, is in Him, for He never
goes out of Himself. And this is why the spirit possesses God
essentially in its bare nature, and God the spirit, for the spirit
lives in God, and God in the spirit. And it is capable, in its
highest part, of receiving the brightness of God, and all that God
may grant it, without intermediary. And by the brightness of its
eternal image, which shines essentially and personally in it, the
spirit is plunged, as regards the highest part of its vitality, in
the divine essence; and there enters into possession of its eternal
bliss, and flowing out again by the eternal birth of the Son is
placed in its created essence by the free will of the Holy Trinity,
And here it is like the image of the sublime Trinity and Unity for
which it is created. And in its created nature, it takes the
impression of its eternal image without interruption, like an
immaculate mirror in which every impression abides, and which renews
the likeness in itself without interruption. This essential unity of
our spirit in God, exists not in itself, but abides in God and flows
out from God, and is immanent in God and returns to God, as to its
eternal cause. It never separates itself from God, for this unity is
a fact of bare nature, and if nature separated itself from God it
would fall into nothingness. And this unity is above time and
conditions, and works always without interruption according to the
mode of God. This is the nobleness which we have naturally according
to the essential unity of our spirit, where it is united naturally
to God.

This makes us neither saints nor blessed, for all men have it in
them, the bad as well as the good; but it is the first cause of all
holiness and bliss; and this is the meeting and unity of God in our
spirit, in our base nature.

HOW MAN IS LIKE GOD BY GRACE, AND UNLIKE HIM BY MORTAL SIN

NOW examine this thought with care, for if you understand well what
I wish to say to you, and what I have already said, you will
understand all the divine truth which a creature can apprehend at
present, and even things far more sublime. In the second mode, our
spirit keeps itself actively in this same unity, and subsists by
itself as in its personal created essence. This is the foundation
and origin of the supreme faculties, and this is the beginning and
end of all the works of a created nature, accomplished according to
the mode of the creatures, both in nature and above nature.

Nevertheless this unity does not operate as unity; but all the
faculties of the soul have their power entirely in their
foundation--that is to say, in the unity of the spirit, where it
resides in its personal essence. In this unity the spirit must
always be like unto God, by grace and virtue, or unlike Him by
mortal sin; for man is made in the likeness of God, which he must
understand in the sense of grace; for grace is a deiform light which
shines through us and makes us like unto God; and without this light
we cannot be united supernaturally to God, even though we can never
lose the image of God, nor our natural unity in Him. If we lose this
likeness--that is to say, grace, we are damned. And this is why, so
soon as God finds in us something which is capable of receiving His
grace, He wishes to enliven us by His goodness, and to make us like
unto Himself by His gifts. And this happens whenever we turn towards
Him with full purpose; for at the same moment Christ comes to us and
in us, with and without intermediary--that is to say, by the virtues
and above all the virtues. And He impresses His image and likeness
upon us--that is to say, Himself and all His gifts, and He relieves
us from sin and makes us like unto Himself.

By the same operation in which God relieves us from sin, and makes
us like Him and free in charity, the spirit is plunged in joyous
love. And here take place a meeting and a union, which are without
intermediaries and supernatural, and wherein resides our supreme
blessedness. Although all that He gives by love and pure goodness is
natural to God, yet to us it is accidental and supernatural,
according to our mode, since formerly we were strangers and unlike,
and only subsequently have become like God and obtained union with
Him.

ON THE SUPREME DEGREE OF THE INTERIOR LIFE

NOW understand. This incomprehensible light transforms and
penetrates the joyous inclination of our spirit. In this light, the
spirit is plunged in joyous repose; for this repose is without mode
and without bottom, and we can only know it by itself--that is to
say, by repose. For if we could know it and conceive it, it would
fall into mode and measure, and so would not be able to satisfy us,
and repose would become an eternal restlessness. And this is why the
simple, loving, complete inclination of our spirit forms in us a
joyous love, and joyous love is without bottom. And the abyss of God
calls to abyss; so it is with all those whose spirits are united to
God in joyous love. This calling is an irruption from His essential
brightness; and this essential brightness in the embrace of His
bottomless love, causes us to lose ourselves and escape from
ourselves, in the lonely darkness of God. And thus united, without
intermediary, to the spirit of God, we can meet God by God, and
possess unchangeably, with Him and in Him, our eternal blessedness.

ON THE FIRST MODE OF THIS HIGHEST MEETING

THE most interior life is practised in three ways. Sometimes the
interior man operates, above all activity and all virtue, by simple
introspection in joyous love. And here he meets God without
intermediary. And from the unity of God a simple light shines in
him, and this light shows him darkness, nakedness, and nothingness.
He is enveloped in darkness, and falls into the absence of mode as
one who loses his way. He loses, in nakedness, the power of
observing and distinguishing all things, and he is transformed and
penetrated by a simple brightness. He loses, in nothingness, all his
works, for he is overcome in the work of the unlimited love of God;
and in the joyous inclination of his spirit he triumphs in God and
becomes one spirit with Him. This is the first mode, which is
inactive; for it empties a man of all things, and lifts him up above
works and virtues.

ON THE SECOND MODE

THERE are moments when the interior man turns desirously and
actively towards God, to pay Him homage, and to offer up and
annihilate, in the love of God, his being and all that he can give.
And here he meets God, through an intermediary. This intermediary is
the gift of wisdom, which is the foundation and source of all the
virtues, and excites the just to virtues in proportion to their love;
and sometimes it touches and inflames the interior man with love
so violently, that all the gifts of God, and all that God can give
without giving Himself, seem to him too little and do not satisfy
him, but only increase his impatience. For he has at the bottom of
his being an interior perception or sensation, wherein all the
virtues begin and end, and wherein he offers to God all the virtues,
and wherein love lives. And thus the hunger and thirst of love
become so great, that he is reduced to nothingness, and then touched
anew, as it were for the first time, by the irradiation of God. Thus
in living he dies and in dying he lives again. This is the second
mode, and it is more useful and more glorious than the first; for
none can enter into the repose that is above action unless he has
first actively loved love. And this is why none will be inactive,
who is master of himself and who is able to practise love.

ON THE THIRD MODE

FROM these two kinds is born the third, which is an interior life
according to righteousness. Now understand. God comes to us without
interruption, with and. without intermediary, He requires of us
action and joy, in such a way that action may not hinder joy, nor
joy action, but that each may help the other. This is why the
interior man possesses his life in these two modes, repose and work.
And in each of them he is entire and undivided; for he is entirely
in God, in his joyous repose, and he is entirely in himself, in his
active love; and God warns him that He requires him to renew
continually his repose and his work. The righteousness of the spirit
wishes to pay, every hour, what God requires of us, and this is why,
at every irradiation of God, the spirit turns inwards, actively and
joyously, and so is renewed in all the virtues, and plunged more
deeply in joyous love. For God at every gift gives Himself with all
His gifts, and the spirit whenever it turns inwards, gives itself
with all its works. The spirit is united to God, and transferred
without interruption into repose. The man is hungry, for he sees the
nourishment of angels and the food of heaven. He works actively in
love, for he sees his repose. He is a pilgrim, and he sees his
country. He fights, in love, for victory, for he sees his crown.
Consolation, peace, joy, beauty, and riches, and all that can
rejoice the heart, are shown to the reason illuminated by God, in
spiritual similitudes and without measure. And by this vision, at
the touch of God, love remains active. For this just man has built
up, in the spirit, a true life, which will last eternally, but after
this life it will be transformed into a more sublime state. Thus the
man is just, and he goes towards God by interior love in eternal
work, and he goes in God by joyous inclination, in eternal repose.
And he abides in God, and yet he goes out towards all the creatures,
in common love, in the virtues, and in the works of justice. This is
the supreme summit of the inner life.

Note.--Here follow in Ruysbroek's treatise four chapters of warnings
against the errors of Quietism, such as were exemplified in his time
by many of the Brethren of the Free Spirit and similar sects.

BOOK III

THE THREE CONDITIONS BY WHICH WE MAY ATTAIN TO THE CONTEMPLATIVE
LIFE

THE interior lover of God, who possesses God in joyous repose, and
possesses himself in the unity of active love, and possesses all his
life in the virtues, enters into the contemplative life, thanks to
these three points and to the secret manifestation of God; yes, it
is the internal and devout lover, whom God will choose freely and
lift him up even to a superessential contemplation in divine light
and according to the mode of God. This contemplation places us in a
purity and brightness above all intelligence, for it is a singular
ornament and a celestial crown, and at last the eternal recompense
of all the virtues and of all life. And none can arrive there by
knowledge or subtlety, nor by any exercise; but he whom God wills to
unite to His own Spirit and to illuminate by Himself, can
contemplate God, and none other can. To such an one the heavenly
Father says, in the secret and submerged part of the spirit: "See,
the Bridegroom cometh, go forth to meet Him."

I wish to analyse and explain these words, in their relation to
superessential contemplation, which is the basis of all holiness and
of the perfect life. Very few men attain to this divine
contemplation, by reason of our incapacity, and the mystery of the
light in which contemplation takes place. And this is why no one, by
his own knowledge or by any subtle examination, will understand
these ideas. For all words, and all that can be learned and
understood according to the mode of the creatures, are strangers to
the truth which I speak of, and far below it. But he who is united
to God, and illuminated in this truth, can comprehend the truth by
itself. For to conceive and understand God above all similitudes, as
He is in Himself, is to be God in God, without intermediary and
without any difference which might prove an obstacle. This is why I
desire that every man who does not understand this, nor experience
it in the joyous unity of his spirit, may not be wounded by my
words, for what I say is true. And this is why he who wishes to
understand this, must be dead to himself and alive to God, and he
will turn his face to the eternal light, at the bottom of his
spirit, where the hidden truth is manifested without intermediary.
For the heavenly Father wishes that we should be seeing; for He is
the Father of Light, and this is why He says eternally, without
interruption and without intermediary, one abysmal word and no
other. In this word He proffers Himself and all things. The word is:
"See." And it is the going forth and the birth of the Son of the
eternal light, in whom we see and recognise all our blessedness.

HOW A MAN OUGHT TO EXERCISE HIMSELF, IN ORDER TO RECEIVE THE ETERNAL
LIGHT AND TO CONTEMPLATE GOD

IN order that the spirit may contemplate God by God, without
intermediary, in this Divine light, three things are necessary.
First, the man must be well governed externally in all the virtues,
and without obstacles within, and as free from all external works as
if he did them not; for if he is troubled within by any act of
virtue, he has images, and so long as they remain in him he cannot
contemplate. In the second place, he must adhere internally to God,
by the combination of intention and of love, like a burning fire,
which can never more be extinguished. At the moment when he feels
himself in this state, he can contemplate. In the third place, he
should be lost in an absence of mode, and in a darkness, in which
all contemplatives wander joyously, and can never find themselves
again according to the mode of the creatures. In the abyss of this
darkness, where the loving spirit is dead to itself, begin the
manifestation of God and of eternal life. For in this darkness is
born and shines an incomprehensible light, which is the Son of God,
in whom we see eternal life. And in this light we become seeing; and
this Divine light is given in the simple vision of the spirit, in
which the spirit receives the clearness which is God Himself,
without intermediary, and becomes without interruption this
clearness which it receives. See; this dark clearness, in which we
contemplate all that we desire, while the spirit is passive,--this
clearness is so great than the loving contemplative, in the depth
where he reposes, sees and experiences nothing save an
incomprehensible light, and according to the simple nudity which
envelopes all things, he sees and apprehends the same light by which
he sees, and nothing else. This is the first condition of becoming
seeing in the Divine light. Happy are the eyes which thus see, for
they have eternal life.

HOW THE ETERNAL BIRTH OF GOD IS RENEWED WITHOUT INTERRUPTION IN
NOBLENESS OF SPIRIT

WHEN we have thus become seeing, we can contemplate in joy the
eternal coming of the Bridegroom, and this is the second point on
which I wish to speak. What is then this coming of the Bridegroom
which is eternal? It is a new birth and a new illumination without
interruption; for the foundation out of which the clearness shines,
and which is the clearness itself, is living and fruitful; and this
is why the manifestation of the eternal light is renewed without
interruption, in the most secret part of the spirit. See; every
creaturely work, and every exercise of virtue must here submit
themselves, for God works alone in the highest part of the spirit.
There is nought here but an eternal contemplation and fixity of
light, by light, and in light. And the coming of the Bridegroom is
so swift that He comes always, and is immanent with His unfathomable
riches, and comes back ever anew, in person, with such new
splendours that He seems never to have come before. For His coming
consists in an eternal Now, transcending time, and He is always
received with new desire and new joy. The delights and joy which
this Bridegroom brings at His coming are without bottom and without
limits, for they are Himself. This is why the eyes of the spirit, by
which the lover contemplates the Bridegroom, are open so wide that
they will never more be shut. For the contemplation and fixity of
the spirit remain eternal in the hidden manifestation of God. And
the contemplation of the spirit is so widely opened, while waiting
for the coming of the Bridegroom, that the spirit itself acquires
the amplitude of that which it comprehends. And in this way, God is
seen and comprehended by God, in which all our salvation and
blessedness consists. This is the second manner in which we receive,
without interruption in our spirit, the eternal coming of our
Bridegroom.

ON THE ETERNAL GOING FORTH WHICH WE POSSESS IN THE BIRTH OF THE SON

NOW the Spirit of God saith, in the secret depths of our spirit:
"Go forth," in an eternal contemplation and joy, according to the
mode of God. All the wealth which is in God naturally, we possess in
Him by love; and God possesses it in us, by His boundless Love,
which is the Holy Spirit. For in this love all is tasted that can be
desired. And this is why, thanks to this love, we are dead to
ourselves, and have gone forth in loving liquefaction or immersion,
in the absence of mode and in darkness. There the spirit, enveloped
by the Holy Trinity, is eternally immanent in the superessential
unity, in repose and in joy. And in this same unity, according to
the mode of generation, the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the
Father, and every creature in them both. And this is above the
distinction of Persons, for here we understand by reason the
fatherhood and sonship in the lively fruitfulness of nature.

Here is born and begins an eternal going forth, and an eternal work
without beginning, for there is here a beginning without beginning.
For by means of the eternal birth of the Son, the Word of the
Father, all creatures have gone forth eternally, before they were
created in time, and God has considered and recognised them
distinctly in Himself, in lively reason, and in distinction from
Himself: but not in another mode, for all that is in God is God.
This eternal going forth and this eternal life, which we have and
are eternally in God, without ourselves, is the cause of our created
essence in time. And our created essence is immanent in the eternal
essence, and this eternal life, which we have and are in the eternal
wisdom of God, is like unto God; for they have an eternal immanence,
without distinction, in the divine essence. And they have an eternal
effluence by the birth of the Son, in a difference with distinction,
according to the eternal reason. And thanks to these two things, a
man is in this way like unto God, that he recognises himself and
reflects on himself without interruption, in this resemblance,
according to essence and according to the Persons. For though here
there is still distinction and difference, according to reason, this
resemblance is nevertheless one with the very image of the Holy
Trinity, which is the wisdom of God, and wherein God contemplates
Himself and all things in an eternal Now, without before or after.
In simple vision He regards Himself as He regards all things. And
this is the image and likeness of God, and our image and likeness,
for in it God and all things are reflected. In this divine image,
all the creatures, without themselves, have an eternal life, as in
their eternal model, and the Holy Trinity has made us in this
eternal image and likeness. And this is why God wishes that we
should go out from ourselves, in this eternal light, and that we
should pursue this image, which is our true life, supernaturally,
and possess it with Him actively and joyously, in eternal
blessedness.

For we know well that the bosom of the Father is our foundation and
origin, wherein we begin our life and our being. And from our true
foundation--that is to say, from the Father and from all that lives
in Him, beams forth an eternal radiance, which is the birth of the
Son. In this radiance, the Father manifests Himself, and all that
lives in Himself, to Himself; for all that He is, and all that He
has, He gives to the Son, except the prerogative of fatherhood,
which resides in Himself. And this is why all that lives in the
Father hidden in the Unity, lives also in the Son, and flows forth
in His manifestation; but the simple foundation of our eternal image
remains always without mode in the darkness. But the boundless
radiance which shines out thence manifests and reflects in the mode
the mystery of God. And all men who are raised above their
creatureliness into a contemplative life, are united to this divine
splendour. And they are this splendour itself, and they see,
experience, and find, thanks to this divine radiance, that they are
this same simple foundation, according to their uncreated essence,
from which shines forth, in the divine mode, this immeasurable
radiance, which, according to simplicity of essence, remains
eternally within, and without mode. This is why interior men and
contemplatives will go forth, according to the mode of
contemplation, above distinction and above their created essence, by
means of an eternal intuition. Thanks to this inborn light, they are
transformed, and are united to this same light by which they see and
which they see. In this manner contemplatives pursue the eternal
image, after which they are made, and contemplate God and all things
without distinction, by a pure vision in divine brightness. This is
the most sublime and the most useful contemplation which we can
attain in this life; for in this contemplation a man remains the
best and freest master of himself, and at each loving introversion,
above all that we can comprehend, he can advance in the sublimities
of life, for he remains free and master of himself, in unity and in
the virtues. And this contemplation in the divine light maintains
him above all inwardness, above all virtue, above all merit, for it
is the crown and recompense towards which we are striving, and which
we already have and possess in this mode, for the contemplative life
is a celestial life. But if we shall be drawn up out of this exile
and this misery, we shall be, according to our created nature, more
susceptible of this radiance, and then the glory of God would shine
through us better and more sublimely. This is the mode above all
modes, according to which we go forth in a divine contemplation and
in an eternal stability, and according to which we are transformed
and reformed in the divine radiance. This going forth of the
contemplative is also loving; for by joyous love he surpasses his
created essence, and finds and tastes the riches and delights which
are God, and which He causes to flow without interruption into the
most secret part of the spirit, into the place where he is like the
sublimity of God.

ON THE DIVINE MEETING, WHICH TAKES PLACE IN THE MOST SECRET PART OF
OUR SPIRIT

WHEN the interior man and contemplative has thus pursued his eternal
image, and possessed in this purity the bosom of the Father by the
Son, he is illuminated by the divine truth, and receives anew at
each instant the eternal birth; and he goes forth according to the
mode of light, in a divine contemplation. And here arises the fourth
and last point--that is to say, the loving meeting, in which before
all else resides our eternal blessedness.

You know that our heavenly Father, like a living foundation, is
actively inclined towards His Son, as towards His own eternal
wisdom. And this same wisdom, and all that lives therein, is
actively inclined in the Father--that is to say, in the foundation
whence it proceeds. And in this meeting arises the Third Person,
between the Father and the Son, and this is the Holy Spirit, their
mutual love, which is united to them both in the same nature. And He
envelopes and penetrates, actively and joyously, the Father and the
Son and all that lives in them with such riches and such joy, that
all the creatures must be silent thereupon eternally, for the
incomprehensible marvel of this love surpasses eternally the
intelligence of all the creatures. But where we comprehend and taste
this amazement, without being amazed, there the spirit is above
itself, and one with the Spirit of God, and it tastes and sees,
without measure, like God, the riches which He is Himself in the
unity of the living foundation, where He possesses Himself according
to the unity of His uncreated essence.

Now this delightful meeting is without interruption actively renewed
in us, according to the mode of God, for the Father gives Himself in
the Son, and the Son in the Father, in an eternal gratification and
a loving embrace, and this is renewed at every hour in the ties of
love; for even as the Father without interruption contemplates anew
all things in the birth of His Son, so all things are beloved anew,
by the Father and the Son, through the influence of the Holy Spirit.
And this is the eternal meeting of the Father and the Son, in which
we are lovingly wrapped by the Holy Spirit in eternal love.

Now this active meeting and this loving embrace are, in their
foundation, joyous and without mode, for God's infinite absence of
mode is so obscure and so destitute of mode, that it envelopes in
itself every divine mode and every work, and the individuality of
the Persons, in the rich envelopment of essential unity, and forms a
divine rejoicing in the abyss of the unnameable. And here there is a
joyous and outflowing immersion in the essential nakedness, where
all the divine names and all the modes, and all divine reason,
reflected in the mirror of the divine truth, fall into simple
ineffability, in the absence of mode and of reason. For in this
boundless abyss of simplicity, all things are enveloped in joyous
blessedness, and the abyss remains itself uncomprehended save by the
essential unity. Before this essential unity, the Persons must give
way, and all that lives in God. For here is nought but an eternal
rest, in a joyous envelopment of loving immersion, and this is the
essence, without mode, which all interior spirits have chosen above
all other things. It is the dark silence in which all lovers are
lost. But if we could prepare ourselves thus for the virtues, we
should unclothe ourselves, so to speak, from life, and should float
on the wide expanses of this divine sea, and created things would no
longer have power to touch us.

May we be able to possess, rejoicing, the essential unity, and
clearly to contemplate the Unity in Trinity; and may the divine
love, which rejects no suppliant, grant us this. Amen.






THEOLOGIA GERMANICA





SIN AND SELFISHNESS

SIN is nothing else but the turning away of the creature from the
unchangeable Good to the changeable; from the perfect to the
imperfect, and most often to itself. And when the creature claims
for its own anything good, such as substance, life, knowledge, or
power, as if it were that, or possessed it, or as if that proceeded
from itself, it goeth astray. What else did the devil do, and what
was his error and fall, except that he claimed for himself to be
something, and that something was his and was due to him? This claim
of his--this "I, me, and mine," were his error and his fall. And so
it is to this day. For what else did Adam do? It is said that Adam
was lost, or fell, because he ate the apple. I say, it was because
he claimed something for his own, because of his "I, me, and mine."
If he had eaten seven apples, and yet never claimed anything for his
own, he would not have fallen: but as soon as he called something
his own, he fell, and he would have fallen, though he had never
touched an apple. I have fallen a hundred times more often and more
grievously than Adam; and for his fall all mankind could not make
amends. How then shall my fall be amended? It must be healed even as
Adam's fall was healed. And how, and by whom, was that healing
wrought? Man could not do it without God, and God could not do it
without man. Therefore God took upon Himself human nature; He was
made man, and man was made God. Thus was the healing effected. So
also must my fall be healed. I cannot do the work without God, and
He may not or will not do it without me. If it is to be done, God
must be made man in me also; God must take into Himself all that is
in me, both within and without, so that there may be nothing in me
which strives against God or hinders His work. Now if God took to
Himself all men who are or ever lived in the world, and was made man
in them, and they were deified in Him, and this work were not
accomplished in me, my fall and my error would never be healed
unless this were accomplished in me also. And in this bringing back
and healing I can and shall do nothing of myself; I shall simply
commit myself to God, so that He alone may do and work all things in
me, and that I may suffer Him, and all His work, and His divine
will. And because I will not do this, but consider myself to be mine
own, and "I, me, and mine," and the like, God is impeded, and cannot
do His work in me alone and without let or hindrance; this is why my
fall and error remain unhealed. All comes of my claiming something
for my own. ii., iii.

THE TWO EYES

We should remember the saying that the soul of Christ had two eyes,
a right eye and a left eye. In the beginning, when the soul of
Christ was created, she fixed her right eye upon eternity and the
Godhead, and remained in the full beholding and fruition of the
Divine essence and eternal perfection; and thus remained unmoved by
all the accidents and labours, the suffering, anguish, and pain,
that befell the outer man. But with the left eye she looked upon the
creation, and beheld all things that are therein, and observed how
the creatures differ from each other, how they are better or worse,
nobler or baser; and after this manner was the outer man of Christ
ordered. Thus the inner man of Christ, according to the right eye of
His soul, stood in the full exercise of His Divine nature, in
perfect blessedness, joy, and eternal peace. But the outer man and
the left eye of the soul of Christ stood with Him in perfect
suffering, in all His tribulations, afflictions and labours; in such
a way that the inner or right eye remained unmoved, unimpeded and
untouched by all the labour, suffering, woe, and misery that
happened to the outer man. It has been said that when Jesus was
bound to the pillar and scourged, and when He hung on the cross,
according to the outer man, the inner man, a soul according to the
right eye, stood in as full possession of Divine joy and blessedness
as it did after the ascension, or as it does now. Even so His outer
man, or soul according to the left eye, was never impeded,
disturbed, or troubled by the inward eye in its contemplation of the
outward things which pertained to it. The created soul of man has
also two eyes. The one is the power of looking into eternity, the
other the power of looking into time and the creatures, of
perceiving how they differ from each other, of giving sustenance and
other things necessary to the body, and ordering and ruling it for
the best. But these two eyes of the soul cannot both perform their
office at once; if the soul would look with the right eye into
eternity, the left eye must be shut, and must cease to work: it must
be as if it were dead. For if the left eye is discharging its office
towards outward things--if it is holding conversation with time and
the creatures--then the right eye must be impeded in its working,
which is contemplation. Therefore, he who would have one must let
the other go; for no man can serve two masters. vii.

A FORETASTE OF ETERNAL LIFE

Some have asked whether it is possible for the soul, while it is
still in the body, to reach so great a height as to gaze into
eternity, and receive a foretaste of eternal life and blessedness.
This is commonly denied; and in a sense the denial is true. For
indeed it cannot come about, so long as the soul is occupied with
the body, and the things which minister to the body and belong to
it, and to time and created things, and is disturbed and troubled
and distracted by them. For the soul that would mount to such a
state, must be quite pure, entirely stripped and bare of all images;
it must be wholly separate from all creatures, and above all from
itself. Many think that this is impossible in this present life. But
St Dionysius claims that it is possible, as we find from his words
in his letter to Timothy, where he says: "In order to behold the
hidden things of God, thou shalt forsake sense and the things of the
flesh, and all that can be perceived by the senses, and all that
reason can bring forth by her own power, and all things created and
uncreated which reason can know and comprehend, and thou shalt stand
upon an utter abandonment of thyself, as if thou knewest none of
those things which I have mentioned, and thou shalt enter into union
with Him who is, and who is above all existence and knowledge." If
he did not think this to be possible in this present time, why did
he teach it and urge it upon us in this present time? But you ought
to know that a master has said, about this passage of St Dionysius,
that it is possible, and may come to a man so often that he may
become accustomed to it, and be able to gaze into eternity whenever
he will. And a single one of these glances is better, worthier,
higher, and more pleasing to God than all that the creature can do
as a creature. He who has attained to it asks for nothing more, for
he has found the kingdom of heaven and eternal life here on earth.
viii.

DESCENT INTO HELL

Even as the soul of Christ had to descend into hell, before it
ascended into heaven, so must the soul of man. And mark how this
comes to pass. When a man truly perceives and considers who and what
he is, and finds himself wholly base and wicked, and unworthy of all
the consolation and kindness that he ever received, either from God
or from the creatures, he falls into such a profound abasement and
contempt for himself, that he thinks himself unworthy to walk upon
the earth; he feels that he deserves that all creatures should rise
against him and avenge their Maker upon him with punishments and
torments; nay, even that were too good for him. And therefore he
will not and dare not desire any consolation or release, either from
God or any creature; he is willing to be unconsoled and unreleased,
and he does not lament for his condemnation and punishment, for they
are right and just, and in accordance with God's will. Nothing
grieves him but his own guilt and wickedness; for that is not right,
and is contrary to God's will: for this reason he is heavy and
troubled. This is the meaning of true repentance for sin. And the
man who in this life enters into this hell, enters afterwards into
the kingdom of heaven, and has a foretaste of it which exceeds all
the delights and happiness which he has ever had, or could have,
from the things of time. But while a man is in this hell, no one can
comfort him, neither God, nor the creatures. Of this condition it
has been written, "Let me die, let me perish! I live without hope;
from within and from without I am condemned, let no man pray for my
deliverance." Now God has not forsaken a man, while he is in this
hell, but He is laying His hand upon him, that he may desire nothing
but the eternal Good only, and may discover that this is so noble
and exceedingly good, that its blessedness cannot be searched out
nor expressed, comfort and joy, peace, rest, and satisfaction. When,
therefore, the man cares for and seeks and desires the eternal Good
and nought beside, and seeks not himself, nor his own things, but
the glory of God only, he is made to partake of every kind of joy,
blessedness, peace, rest, and comfort, and from that time forward is
in the kingdom of God.

This hell and this heaven are two good safe ways for a man in this
present life, and he is happy who truly finds them. For this hell
shall pass away, but this heaven shall abide for evermore. Let a man
also observe, that when he is in this hell, nothing can console him;
and he cannot believe that he shall ever be delivered or comforted.
But when he is in heaven, nothing can disturb him: he believes that
no one will ever be able to offend or trouble him again, though it
is indeed possible that he may again be troubled and left
unconsoled.

This heaven and hell come upon a man in such a way, that he knows
not whence they come; and he can do nothing himself towards making
them either come or depart. He can neither give them to himself, nor
take them away from himself, neither bring them nor drive them away;
even as it is written, "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou
hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh or
whither it goeth." And when a man is in either of these two states,
all is well with him, and he is as safe in hell as in heaven. And
while a man is in the world, it is possible for him to pass many
times from the one state into the other--even within a day and
night, and without any motion of his own. But when a man is in
neither of these two states, he holds intercourse with the
creatures, and is carried this way and that, and knows not what
manner of man he is. A man should therefore never forget either of
these states, but carry the memory of them in his heart. xi.

THE THREE STAGES

Be well assured that none can be illuminated, unless he be first
cleansed, purified, or stripped. Also none can be united to God
unless he be first illuminated. There are therefore three
stages--first, the purification; secondly, the illumination; and
thirdly, the union. The purification belongs to those who are
beginning or repenting. It is effected in three ways; by repentance
and sorrow for sin, by full confession, and by hearty amendment. The
illumination belongs to those who are growing, and it also is
effected in three ways; by the renunciation of sin, by the practice
of virtue and good works, and by willing endurance of all trials and
temptations. The union belongs to those who are perfect, and this
also is effected in three ways; by pureness and singleness of heart,
by love, and by the contemplation of God, the Creator of all things.
xiv.

THE LIFE OF CHRIST

We ought truly to know and believe that no life is so noble, or
good, or pleasing to God, as the life of Christ. And yet it is to
nature and selfishness the most bitter of all lives. For to nature,
and selfishness, and the Me, a life of careless freedom is the
sweetest and pleasantest, but it is not the best; indeed, in some
men it may be the worst. But the life of Christ, though it be the
bitterest of all, should be preferred above all. And hereby ye shall
know this. There is an inward sight which is able to perceive the
one true good, how that it is neither this nor that, but that it is
that of which St Paul says: "When that which is perfect is come,
then that which is in part shall be done away." By this he signifies
that what is whole and perfect excels all the parts, and that all
which is imperfect, and in part, is as nothing compared to what is
perfect. In like manner, all knowledge of the parts is swallowed up
when the whole is known. And where the good is known, it cannot fail
to be desired and loved so greatly, that all other love, with which
a man has loved himself, and other things, vanishes away. Moreover,
that inward sight perceives what is best and noblest in all things,
and loves it in the one true good, and for the sake of the true good
alone. Where this inward sight exists, a man perceives truly that
the life of Christ is the best and noblest life, and that it is
therefore to be chosen above all others; and therefore he willingly
accepts and endures it, without hesitation or complaining, whether
it is pleasing or displeasing to nature and other men, and whether
he himself likes or dislikes it, and finds it sweet or bitter.
Therefore, whenever this perfect and true good is known, the life of
Christ must be followed, until the decease of the body. If any man
vainly deems otherwise, he is deceived, and if any man says
otherwise, he tells a lie; and in whatever man the life of Christ is
not, he will never know the true good or the eternal truth.

But let no one imagine that we can attain to this true light and
perfect knowledge, and to the life of Christ, by much questioning,
or by listening to others, or by reading and study, or by ability
and deep learning. For so long as a man is occupied with anything
which is this or that, whether it be himself or any other creature;
or does anything, or forms plans, or opinions, or objects, he comes
not to the life of Christ. Christ Himself declared as much, for He
said: "If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross, and follow Me." "And if any man hate not his father
and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple." He means this: "He who
does not give up and abandon everything can never know My eternal
truth, nor attain to My life." And even if this had not been
declared to us, the truth itself proclaims it, for so verily it is.
But as long as a man holds fast to the rudiments and fragments of
this world, and above all to himself, and is conversant with them,
and sets great store by them, he is deceived and blinded, and
perceives what is good only in so far as is convenient and agreeable
to himself and profitable to his own objects.

Since then the life of Christ is in all ways most bitter to nature
and the self and the Me--for in the true life of Christ nature and
the self and the Me must be abandoned and lost and suffered to die
completely--therefore in all of us nature has a horror of it, and
deems it evil and unjust and foolish; and she strives after such a
life as shall be most agreeable and pleasant to ourselves; and says,
and believes too in her blindness, that such a life is the best of
all. Now nothing is so agreeable and pleasant to nature as a free
and careless manner of life. To this therefore she clings, and takes
enjoyment in herself and her powers, and thinks only of her own
peace and comfort. And this is especially likely to happen, when a
man has high natural gifts of reason, for reason mounts up in its
own light and by its own power, till at last it comes to think
itself the true eternal light, and gives itself out to be such; and
it is thus deceived in itself, and deceives others at the same time,
people who know no better and are prone to be so deceived.
xviii.-xx.

UNION WITH GOD

In what does union with God consist? It means that we should be
indeed purely, simply, and wholly at one with the one eternal Will
of God, or altogether without will, so that the created will should
flow out into the eternal Will and be swallowed up and lost in it,
so that the eternal Will alone should do and leave undone in us. Now
observe what may be of use to us in attaining this object. Religious
exercises cannot do this, nor words, nor works, nor any creature or
work done by a creature. We must therefore give up and renounce all
things, suffering them to be what they are, and enter into union
with God. Yet the outward things must be; and sleeping and waking,
walking and standing still, speaking and being silent, must go on as
long as we live.

But when this union truly comes to pass and is established, the
inner man henceforth stands immoveable in this union; as for the
outer man, God allows him to be moved hither and thither, from this
to that, among things which are necessary and right. So the outer
man says sincerely, "I have no wish to be or not to be, to live or
die, to know or be ignorant, to do or leave undone; I am ready for
all that is to be or ought to be, and obedient to whatever I have to
do or suffer." Thus the outer man has no purpose except to do what
in him lies to further the eternal Will. As for the inner man, it is
truly perceived that he shall stand immoveable, though the outer
man must needs be moved. And if the inner man has any explanation of
the actions of the outer man, he says only that such things as are
ordained by the eternal Will must be and ought to be. It is thus
when God Himself dwells in a man; as we plainly see in the case of
Christ. Moreover, where there is this union, which is the outflow of
the Divine light and dwells in its beams, there is no spiritual
pride nor boldness of spirit, but unbounded humility and a lowly
broken heart; there is also an honest and blameless walk, justice,
peace, contentment, and every virtue. Where these are not, there is
no true union. For even as neither this thing nor that can bring
about or further this union, so nothing can spoil or hinder it,
except the man himself with his self-will, which does him this great
injury. Be well assured of this. xxvii., xxviii.

THE FALSE LIGHT

Now I must tell you what the False Light is, and what belongs to it.
All that is contrary to the true light belongs to the false. It
belongs of necessity to the true light that it never seeks to
deceive, nor consents that anyone should be injured or deceived; and
it cannot be deceived itself. But the false light both deceives
others, and is deceived itself. Even as God deceives no man, and
wills not that any should be deceived, so it is with His true light.
The true light is God or Divine, but the false light is nature or
natural. It belongeth to God, that He is neither this nor that, and
that He requires nothing in the man whom He has made to be partaker
in the Divine nature, except goodness as goodness and for the sake
of goodness. This is the token of the true light. But it belongs to
the creature, and to nature, to be something, this or that, and to
intend and seek something, this or that, and not simply what is good
without asking Why. And as God and the true light are without all
self-will, selfishness, and self-Seeking, so the "I, Me, and Mine"
belong to the false light, which in everything seeks itself and its
own ends, and not goodness for the sake of goodness. This is the
character of the natural or carnal man in each of us. Now observe
how it first comes to be deceived. It does not desire or choose
goodness for its own sake, but desires and chooses itself and its
own ends rather than the highest good; and this is an error and the
first deception. Secondly, it fancies itself to be God, when it is
nothing but nature. And because it feigns itself to be God, it takes
to itself what belongs to God; and not that which belongs to God
when He is made man, or when He dwells in a Godlike man; but that
which belongs to God as He is in eternity without the creature. God,
they say, and say truly, needs nothing, is free, exempt from toil,
apart by Himself, above all things: He is unchangeable, immoveable,
and whatever He does is well done. "so will I be," says the false
light. "The more like one is to God, the better one is; I therefore
will be like God and will be God, and will sit and stand at His
right hand." This is what Lucifer the Evil Spirit also said. Now God
in eternity is without contradiction, suffering, and grief, and
nothing can injure or grieve Him. But with God as He is made man it
is otherwise. The false light thinks itself to be above all works,
words, customs, laws, and order, and above the life which Christ led
in the body which He possessed in His human nature. It also claims
to be unmoved by any works of the creatures; it cares not whether
they be good or bad, for God or against Him; it keeps itself aloof
from all things, and deems it fitting that all creatures should
serve it. Further, it says that it has risen beyond the life of
Christ according to the flesh, and that outward things can no longer
touch or pain it, even as it was with Christ after the Resurrection.
Many other strange and false notions it cherishes. Moreover, this
false light says that it has risen above conscience and the sense of
sin, and that whatever it does is right. One of the so-called "Free
Spirits" even said that if he had killed ten men, he would have as
little sense of guilt as if he had killed a dog. This false light,
in so far as it fancies itself to be God, is Lucifer, the Evil
Spirit; but in so far as it makes of no account the life of Christ,
it is Antichrist. It says, indeed, that Christ was without sense of
sin, and that therefore we should be so. We may reply that Satan
also is without sense of sin, and is none the better for that. What
is a sense of sin? It is when we perceive that man has turned away
from God in his will, and that this is man's fault, not God's, for
God is guiltless of sin. Now, who knows himself to be free from sin,
save Christ only? Scarce will any other affirm this. So he who is
without sense of sin is either Christ or the Evil Spirit. But where
the true light is, there is a true and just life such as God loves.
And if a man's life is not perfect, as was that of Christ, still it
is modelled and built on His, and His life is loved, together with
modesty, order, and the other virtues, and all self-will, the "I,
Me, and Mine," is lost; nothing is devised or sought for except
goodness for its own sake. But where the false light is, men no
longer regard the life of Christ and the virtues, but they seek and
purpose what is convenient and pleasant to nature. From this arises
a false liberty, whereby men become regardless of everything. For
the true light is the seed of God, and bringeth forth the fruits of
God; but the false light is the seed of the Devil, and where it is
sown, the fruits of the Devil, nay the very Devil himself, spring
up. xl.

LIGHT AND LOVE

It may be asked, What is it like to be a partaker of the Divine
nature, or a Godlike man? The answer is, that he who is steeped in,
or illuminated by, the eternal and Divine Light, and kindled or
consumed by the eternal and Divine Love, is a Godlike man and a
partaker of the Divine nature. But this light or knowledge is of no
avail without love. You may understand this if you remember that a
man who knows very well the difference between virtue and
wickedness, but does not love virtue, is not virtuous, in that he
obeys vice. But he who loves virtue follows after it, and his love
makes him an enemy to wickedness, so that he will not perform any
wicked act and hates wickedness in others; and he loves virtue so
that he would not leave any virtue unperformed even if he had the
choice, not for the sake of reward, but from love of virtue. To such
a man virtue brings its own reward, and he is content with it, and
would part with it for no riches. Such a man is already virtuous, or
in the way to become so. And the truly virtuous man would not cease
to be so to gain the whole world. He would rather die miserably. The
case of justice is the same. Many men know well what is just and
unjust, but yet neither are nor ever will be just men. For they love
not justice, and therefore practise wickedness and injustice. If a
man loved justice, he would do no unjust deed; he would feel so
great abhorrence and anger against injustice whenever he saw it that
he would be willing to do and suffer anything in order to put an end
to injustice, and that men might be made just. He would rather die
than commit an injustice, and all for love of justice. To him,
justice brings her own reward, she rewards him with herself, and so
the just man would rather die a thousand deaths than live as an
unjust man. The same may be said of truth. A man may know very well
what is truth or a lie, but if he loves not the truth, he is not a
true man. If, however, he loves it, it is with truth as with
justice. And of justice Isaiah speaks in the fifth chapter: "Woe
unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet
for bitter." Thus we may understand that knowledge and light avail
nothing without love. We see the truth of this in the case of the
Evil One. He perceives and knows good and evil, right and wrong: but
since he has no love for the good that he sees, he becomes not good.
It is true indeed that Love must be led and instructed by knowledge,
but if knowledge is not followed by Love, it will be of no avail. So
also with God and Divine things. Although a man know much about God
and Divine things, and even dream that he sees and understands what
God Himself is, yet if he have not Love, he will never become like
God or a partaker of the Divine nature. But if Love be added to his
knowledge, he cannot help cleaving to God, and forsaking all that is
not God or from God, and hating it and fighting with it, and finding
it a cross and burden. And this Love so unites a man to God, that he
can never again be separated from Him. xli.

PARADISE

What is Paradise? All things that are. For all things are good and
pleasant, and may therefore fitly be called Paradise. It is also
said, that Paradise is an outer court of heaven. In the same way,
this world is truly an outer court of the eternal, or of eternity;
and this is specially true of any temporal things or creatures which
manifest the Eternal or remind us of eternity; for the creatures are
a guide and path to God and eternity. Thus the world is an outer
court of eternity, and therefore it may well be called a Paradise,
for so indeed it is. And in this Paradise all things are lawful
except one tree and its fruit. That is to say, of all things that
exist, nothing is forbidden or contrary to God, except one thing
only. That one thing is self-will, or to will otherwise than as the
eternal Will would have it. Remember this. For God says to Adam
(that is, to every man) "Whatever thou art, or doest, or leavest
undone, or whatever happens, is lawful if it be done for the sake of
and according to My will, and not according to thy will. But all
that is done from thy will is contrary to the eternal Will." Not
that everything which is so done is in itself contrary to the
eternal Will, but in so far as it is done from a different will, or
otherwise than from the Eternal and Divine Will. l.

WILL AND SELF-WILL

Some may ask: "If this tree, Self-Will, is so contrary to God and to
the eternal will, why did God create it, and place it in Paradise?"
We may answer: a man who is truly humble and enlightened does not
ask God to reveal His secrets to him, or enquire why God does this
or that, or prevents or allows this or that; he only desires to know
how he may please God, and become as nothing in himself, having no
will of his own, and that the eternal will may live in him, and
possess him wholly, unhampered by any other will, and how what is
due may be paid to the Eternal Will, by him and through him. But
there is another answer to this question. For we may say: the most
noble and gracious gift that is bestowed on any creature is the
Reason and the Will. These two are so intimately connected that the
one cannot be anywhere without the other. If it were not for these
two gifts, there would be no reasonable creatures, but only brutes
and brutality; and this would be a great loss, for God would then
never receive His due, or behold Himself and His attributes
exhibited in action; a thing which ought to be, and is, necessary to
perfection. Now Perception and Reason are conferred together with
will, in order that they may teach the will and also themselves,
that neither perception nor will is of itself, or to itself, nor
ought to seek or obey itself. Nor must they turn themselves to their
own profit, nor use themselves for their own ends; for they belong
to Him from whom they proceed, and they shall submit to Him, and
flow back to Him, and become nothing in themselves--that is, in
their selfhood.

But now you must consider more in detail something concerning the
will. There is an Eternal Will, which is a first principle and
substance in God, apart from all works and all externalisation; and
the same will is in man, or the creature, willing and bringing to
pass certain things. For it pertains to the will, to will something.
For what else does it exist? It would be a vain thing if it had no
work to do, and this it cannot have without the creature. And so
there must needs be creatures, and God will have them, in order that
by their means the will may be exercised, and may work, though in
God it must be without work. Therefore the will in the creature,
which we call the created will, is as truly God's as the eternal
will, and is not from the creature.

And since God cannot exercise His will, in working and effecting
changes, without the creature, He is pleased to do so in and with
the creature. Therefore the will is not given to be exercised by the
creature, but by God alone, who has the right to carry into effect
His own will by the will which is in man, but yet is God's will. And
in any man or creature, in whom it should be thus, purely and
simply, the will of that man or creature would be exercised not by
the man but by God, and thus it would not be self-will, and the man
would only will as God wills; for God Himself, and not man, would be
moving the will. Thus the will would be united with the Eternal
Will, and would flow into it; although the man would retain his
sense of liking and disliking, pleasure and pain. But nothing is
complained of, except what is contrary to God. And there is no
rejoicing except in God alone, and in that which belongs to Him. And
as with the will, so is it with all the other faculties of man; they
are all of God and not of man. And when the will is wholly given up
to God, the other faculties will certainly be given up too; and God
will have what is due to Him.

No one may call that which is free his own, and he who makes it his
own, doeth injustice. Now in all the sphere of freedom nothing is so
free as the will; and he who makes it his own, and allows it not to
remain in its excellent freedom, and free nobleness, and free
exercise, does it a great injustice. This is what is done by the
devil, and Adam, and all their followers. But he who leaves the will
in its noble freedom does right; and this is what Christ, and all
who follow Him, do. And he who deprives the will of its noble
freedom, and makes it his own, must necessarily be oppressed with
cares and discontent, and disquietude, and every kind of misery, and
this will be his lot throughout time and eternity. But he who leaves
the will in its freedom has contentment and peace and rest and
blessedness, through time and eternity. Where there is a man whose
will is not enslaved, he is free indeed, and in bondage to no man.
He is one of those to whom Christ said: "The truth shall make you
free"; and He adds immediately afterwards: "If the Son shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed."

Moreover, observe that whenever the will chooses unhindered whatever
it will, it always and in all cases chooses what is noblest and
best, and hates whatever is not noble and good, and regards it as an
offence. And the more free and unhampered the will is, the more it
is grieved by evil, by injustice, by iniquity, and all manner of
sin. We see this in Christ, whose will was the purest and freest and
the least brought into bondage of any man's who ever lived. So was
the human nature of Christ the most free and pure of all creatures;
and yet He felt the deepest distress, pain, and wrath at sin that
any creature ever felt. But when men claim freedom for themselves,
in such a way as to feel no sorrow or anger at sin, and all that is
contrary to God, and say that we must take no notice of anything,
and care for nothing, but be, in this life, what Christ was after
the resurrection, and so forth, this is not the true and Divine
freedom that springs from the true and Divine light, but a natural,
unrighteous, false, deceiving freedom, which springs from the
natural, false, deceitful light.

If there were no self-will, there would be no proprietorship. There
is no proprietorship in heaven; and this is why contentment, peace,
and blessedness are there. If anyone in heaven were so bold as to
call anything his own, he would immediately be cast out into hell,
and become an evil spirit. But in hell everyone will have self-will,
and therefore in hell is every kind of wretchedness and misery. And
so it is also on earth. But if anyone in hell could rid himself of
his self-will and call nothing his own, he would pass out of hell
into heaven. And if a man, while here on earth, could be entirely
rid of self-will and proprietorship, and stand up free and at
liberty in the true light of God, and continue therein, he would be
sure to inherit the kingdom of heaven. For he who has anything, or
who desires to have anything of his own, is a slave; and he who has
nothing of his own, nor desires to have anything, is free and at
liberty, and is in bondage to no man. li.

UNION THROUGH CHRIST

Observe now how the Father draws men to Christ. When something of
the perfect good is revealed and made manifest within the human
soul, as it were in a sudden flash, the soul conceives a desire to
draw near to the perfect goodness, and to unite herself with the
Father. And the more strongly she longs and desires, the more is
revealed to her; and the more is revealed to her, the more she is
drawn to the Father, and the more is her desire kindled. So the soul
is drawn and kindled into an union with the eternal goodness. And
this is the drawing of the Father; and so the soul is taught by Him
who draws her to Himself, that she cannot become united with Him
unless she can come to Him by means of the life of Christ. liii.

[1]In his Introduction to the "Imitation of Christ," in this series.

[2]e.g. she distinguishes, as Eckhart does, between God and the
Godhead.

[3]The "three propositions" of Amalric are--1. "Deus est omnia." 2.
Every Christian, as a con-dition of salvation, must believe that he
is a member of Christ. 3. To those who are in charity no sin is
imputed.

[4]Preger is probably wrong in identifying him with a "brother
Eckhart," Prior of Frankfort, who about 1320 was delated to the head
of the Order as suspectus de malis familiaritatibus, words which can
only mean "keeping bad company" in a moral sense, not "con-sorting
with heretics," as Preger suggests. Eckhart's character, so far as
we know, was never assailed, even by his enemies, and it is
therefore probable that "brother Eckhart" was a different person.

[5]I have abridged the bull considerably, but have included all the
main accusations.

[6]See pages 13, 16.

[7]See pages 14, 15.

[8]See page 1.

[9]This is an obscure point in Eckhart's philosophy, too technical
to be discussed here; but Eckhart's doctrine of God is certainly
more orthodox and less pantheistic than those of 'Dionysius' and
Scotus Erigena.

[10]Cf. St Augustine, In Joann. Ev. Tract. xxxix. 10: praeteritum et
futurum invenio in omni motu rerum: in veritate quae manet
praeteritum et futurum non invenio, sed solum praesens.

[11]This doctrine is fully explained by St. Augustine, Epist. 237,
who follows Plotinus, Enn. vi. 4-6.

[12]This queer word occurs for the first time, I think, in Jerome's
notes to the first chapter of Ezekiel. He writes the word in Greek,
and explains it as that part of the soul which always opposes vices.
The word is common in Bonaventura and other scholastic mystics, and
is often misspelt synderesis.

[13]It must, however, be said that Preger is too ready to assume
that the logical development of Eckhart's system away from Thomist
scholasticism can be traced as a gradual process in his writings,
the order of which is very uncertain. We are not justified in saying
in a positive manner that Eckhart's philosophy passed through three
phases, in the first of which the primacy is held by the will, in
the second by the created reason, and in the third by the uncreated
reason.

[14]See pages 14, 15.

[15]C.B. Upton: "Hibbert Lectures," p. 17.

[16]A.E. Taylor: "The Problem of Conduct," PP. 464-5.

[17]See pages 71-2.

[18]See pages 12-13.

[19]See, for example, Prof. W. James' "Varieties of Religions
Experience," P. 400.

[20]Jacob Bhme's experience is typical: "Suddenly did my spirit
break through into the innermost birth or geniture of the Deity, and
there was I embraced with love, as a bridegroom embraces his dearly
beloved bride. But the greatness of the triumphing that was in the
spirit I cannot express in speech or writing; nor can it be compared
to anything but the resurrection of the dead to life. In this light
my spirit suddenly saw through all; even in herbs and grass it knew
God, who and what He is," etc. Dr Johnson was, no doubt, right in
thinking that "Jacob" would have been wiser, and "more like St
Paul," if he had not attempted to utter the unutterable things which
he saw.

[21]The extracts from the "Theologia Germanica" will show that this
treatise represents a later and less paradoxical form of mystical
thought than Eckhart's.

[22]The maxim, however, is much older than Suso.

[23]Royce: "The World and the Individual" vol. i. p. 193.

[24]So in the "Lignum Vitae" of Laurentius Justinianus we read: "Let
self-will cease, and there will be no more hell."

[25] "The Inner Way," being thirty-six sermons by John Tauler.
Translated by A.W. Hutton, M.A.

[26]On the psychology of ecstatic mysticism see Leuba, in the Revue
Philosophique, July and November 1902.

[27] "Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 13.

[28]Maudsley: "Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings," p. 256.

[29]See Leuba: "Tendances religieuses chez les mystiques
chrétiens" in Revue Philosophique, Nov. 1902.

[30] "Theologia Germanica," translated by Susanna Winkworth.
Macmillan & Co., 1893.

[31] "Varieties of Religious Experience," 1902.

[32] "Personal Idealism," 1902.

[33] "Varieties of Religious Experience," p. 103.

[34] "In Tune with the Infinite," by R.W. Trine (Bell & Sons, 1902).
Fifty-ninth thousand. The extract appears to be a quotation from
another writer, but no reference is given.

[35]Compare Eckhart's saying that the eye with which I see God is
the same as the eye with which He sees me.

[36] "In Tune with the Infinite," pp. 58, 119.

[37]The numbers refer to pages in Pfeiffer's edition.

[38]The numbers refer to the Sermons in Hamberger's edition of 1864.

[39]The reference is to 1 Peter iii. 8.

[40]The time would, I suppose, be about half-an-hour. Many other
ecstatics have named this as the normal duration of trance.

[41]Or, "spoke the eternal Wisdom (= the Word of God) in his heart."

[42]John i. 3, 4. This punctuation, whereby the words "that which
was made" are referred to the clause which follows, and not to that
which precedes, is adopted by most of the Greek fathers, and is
still maintained by some good commentators--e.g. Bishop Westcott.

[43]Ecclus. xxiv. 19.

[44]Ecclus. xl. 20.

The Project Gutenberg Etext of Light, Life, and Love
by W. R. Inge
******This file should be named lllov10.txt or lllov10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, lllov11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, lllov10a.txt

This etext was produced by Charles Aldarondo.

***

More information about this book is at the top of this file.


We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/eBook03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/eBook03

Or /eBook02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

The most recent list of states, along with all methods for donations
(including credit card donations and international donations), may be
found online at http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these eBooks are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*



End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of Light, Life, and Love
by W. R. Inge
