The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hymns from the East, by John Brownlie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hymns from the East
       Being Centos and Suggestions from the Office Books of the
       Holy Eastern Church

Author: John Brownlie

Release Date: April 2, 2009 [EBook #28479]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYMNS FROM THE EAST ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and Charles Coulston









                           HYMNS FROM THE EAST




                _Hymnological Works by the Same Author._


HYMNS FROM THE GREEK OFFICE BOOKS. Crown 8vo, 3/6 net.

HYMNS OF THE HOLY EASTERN CHURCH. Translated from the Service Books; with
Introductory Chapters on the History, Doctrine, and Worship of the
Church. Crown 8vo, 3/6 net.

                       Alexander Gardner, Paisley.


HYMNS OF THE GREEK CHURCH. Being Translations from the Service Books;
with Introduction and Notes. Crown 8vo, 2/6.

                 Oliphant Anderson & Ferrier, Edinburgh.


HYMNS AND HYMN-WRITERS OF THE CHURCH HYMNARY. Crown 8vo, 3/6.

                 Henry Frowde, Oxford University Press.


HYMNS FROM EAST AND WEST. Crown 8vo, 2/6.

HYMNS OF THE EARLY CHURCH. Crown 8vo, 2/6.

HYMNS OF OUR PILGRIMAGE. Crown 8vo, 2/-.

ZIONWARD: HYMNS OF THE PILGRIM LIFE. Crown 8vo, 1/-.

THE REST OF GOD. Crown 8vo, 1/6 net.

PILGRIM SONGS. Crown 8vo, 1/-.

                    James Nisbet & Co., Ltd., London.




                           HYMNS FROM THE EAST
                                  BEING
                         CENTOS AND SUGGESTIONS
                         FROM THE SERVICE BOOKS
                       OF THE HOLY EASTERN CHURCH


                                  WITH
                              INTRODUCTION

                                 BY THE
                           REV. JOHN BROWNLIE

                               _Author of_
            "_Hymns and Hymn Writers of the Church Hymnary_,"
  "_Hymns of the Greek Church_," "_Hymns from the Greek Office Books_,"
                  "_Hymns of the Holy Eastern Church_,"
                               _&c., &c._

                       PAISLEY: ALEXANDER GARDNER

           Publisher by Appointment to the late Queen Victoria

                                 MCMVII


                                 LONDON:
              SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & CO., LMD.

                  PRINTED BY ALEXANDER GARDNER, PAISLEY


    {TOIS AGIOIS EN DEXIA, THEOU KAI PISTOIS EN CHRISTÔ, ANATITHÊMI}




                          INDEX OF FIRST LINES


                                                                     PAGE
  INTRODUCTION,                                                         9
  MORNING--
      Now, God of Light, the morn appears,                             25
      Up, up my soul! with gladness rise,                              27
      The saffron tints appear,                                        29
      Now glows the morn in beauty rare,                               31
  EVENING--
      When night her sable curtain spreads,                            35
      A crown of gold surpassing rare,                                 37
  CHRISTMAS--
      The Lord of Life to earth came down,                             41
      Jerusalem rejoice!                                               44
      The best that heaven could bring,                                46
      Out from the rising of the sun,                                  47
  EASTER--
      O woeful hour, when from the night,                              51
      Crown the Lord of glory,                                         53
      O Christ, when on the shameful tree,                             55
      O God of Love, Whose mercy came,                                 57
      When hades held the Lord of Life,                                59
      When Thou, O Christ, upon the tree,                              61
      To Thy Cross and Resurrection,                                   63
      Light is dawning 'mong the hills,                                65
      Hail! rising morn, for He hath risen,                            67
      We worship, Lord, before Thee now,                               69
      Heavy laden with thy grief,                                      70
      To Thee, O Christ, our God,                                      72
      Glory shone within the gloom,                                    74
      When Adam heard the voice of sin,                                76
      Within the garden's sombre shade,                                78
  PENTECOST--
      Even as Thou saidst, the Spirit came,                            83
      O may the Spirit of all grace,                                   85
  COMMUNION--
      Let Thy blood in mercy poured,                                   89
      O Lord of bounty, let this bread,                                91
  JUDGMENT--
      When in the clouds the Lord appears,                             95
      The Bridegroom comes, my soul awake!                             98
      O Judge of all, when sinful men,                                100
      I brought my merits to the throne,                              102
      The time is drawing nigh,                                       104
  ASPIRATIONS--
      I sought the Lord at early morn,                                109
      O touch my heart and bring to mind,                             111
      The wealth of high estate,                                      113
      I lift my hands, and with my heart,                             115
      Arise, my soul, and gaily sing,                                 117
      The King shall come when morning dawns,                         119
      Think on me, Lord, for Thou art kind,                           121
      Because Thy mercy is so great,                                  123
      I cannot lift mine eyes,                                        125
      When at Thy feet oppressed,                                     127
      Because I was brought low,                                      129
      O God of Life, in Whom we live,                                 131
      By Thine own hand the gift was given,                           133
      Lord, Thou art good and kind,                                   134
      O Lord of Life, when mortals call,                              136
      I wandered sore distressed,                                     138
      God sent me to the desert wild,                                 140




                              INTRODUCTION


This fourth series of Hymns from the Office Books of The Holy Eastern
Church, differs from the preceding three in this, that the hymns are less
translations or renderings, and more centos and suggestions.

One cannot continue long to interest himself in any work, and receive
from time to time the observations and criticisms of his fellows,
without, if he have his eyes and mind open to receive impressions,
feeling himself impelled to alter his methods in some particular or
other.

In previous volumes the author has been careful to give, for the most
part, carefully executed--that is to say, truthfully rendered
translations from the originals. Work of that kind is useful, and
absolutely necessary for certain purposes; but, unless for the
hymnologist, or for the liturgiologist, it is far from being attractive.
To be true, renderings can hardly be graceful, and they must lack much of
the literary charm which attaches itself to productions which are more
untrammelled. Hence, unless, as has been said, to the few who are
specialists, translations are not much in favour. They have earned a
reputation, and that reputation adheres to them: they are cold and
uninspiring. Such is their reputation, not always just, but who can say
that it has not, on the whole, been earned?

Perhaps it would be wrong to say that there is any prejudice against
translations from the Greek or any other language whatever, as such. The
reluctance to welcome translations is really reluctance to welcome poems
which do not find their way to the heart. For this reason there is
perhaps not more than a score of translations which have won their way
from permanent hymnals to a permanent place in the affections of our
devout fellow-countrymen. In this connection it is to be noted that we
speak of _translations_, and not of _suggestions_ such as, "Art thou
weary," or "O, happy band of pilgrims," and many others, which have
advanced into great favour, and are termed translations, but are not.

True hymns are sacred lyrics, and a lyric to be lyrical and heart
appealing, must be _inevitable_. It must be the spontaneous expression of
the heart of the author--an expression which _had_ to come. It is the
latent secret of the power of true hymns, for what _must_ be uttered will
assuredly, sooner or later, find its way to some heart. Such jets of
living poetry must be awaited: they cannot be forced. But a translator
must deliberately sit down at his desk and work--manufacture, if you
will--and endeavour to turn on the lathe of graceful culture, elegancies
which readers may admire, but will never feel.

Perhaps translators from the Greek have a singular temptation to eschew.
Hymns from the Offices have to be created in Greek, as has been pointed
out in a former Introduction, before they can be the source of living
poetic inspiration. No doubt the necessity of forming a cento is also the
privilege, but it may easily entice a translator to be satisfied with a
lifeless stringing of inept fragments. All this and much more has been
brought home to the writer times without number.

If one would have his work to be permanently useful; if he would aim at
any particular employment of his hymns, he must observe the conditions
which such an aim implies. A translator who aims at the use of his work
in public worship, must aim at pellucid simplicity both of phraseology
and of structure; and if they are to be widely, permanently, or
deservedly popular, they must be gifted with becoming grace. This cannot
be done in translations pure and simple. The present collection gives the
result of an experiment. The Greek has been used as a basis, a theme, a
motive; oriental colour, and it is to be hoped some of the oriental
warmth has been preserved. Now and again an oriental figure is retained,
and to those who have any knowledge of the worship of the Eastern Church,
it must be obvious that the peculiar themes of her praise are in abundant
evidence.

What, then, is the net result? To an unpractised eye, if no indication of
the source of these hymns had been given, could anything about them have
suggested their source? To the unpractised eye, nothing. But no one who
knows the Greek Offices will travel far before he overtakes well-known
landmarks. This is just as it should be. It is sufficient that a fertile
source of suggestion has been found--of theme, thought, form, colour--and
that from this ancient source it is possible to procure much that is
beautiful for the adornment of the worship of God's house to-day. And
this gratifying fact is made plain, that the themes of Greek Church
praise are the grand themes of the praise of the Church in our land and
in all Christian lands;--The Christ in all the Might and Glory of His
Person and Work: the need of our humanity, and the way in which Christ
met it: His miraculous birth, which is not shorn of any of its mystery,
and the embellishments of the event, which are never toned down, but, in
true oriental fashion, made, if possible, more dazzling: His Passion and
His Death, and the fulness of their atoning efficacy. But, as is to be
expected, the grand theme of the Greek singers, as became those who, more
than we have done, caught the first inspiration of their praise from the
apostles, is the glorious Resurrection of our Lord from the dead. Here,
the praise of the Greek Church touches its highest note, and pours forth
its most enchanting melody. "Christ is risen," and the glad response, "He
is risen indeed"--these words constitute the keynote of all that is best
and most beautiful in Greek worship. The Knowledge and the Wisdom of God
are everywhere extolled, and the attribute of Light is continually and
cordially applied to the Deity.

One cannot acquaint himself with the Church of the Apostles, with its
glowing service, and with the noble stand it has made, and still
maintains, for the truth of God and for the Kingdom of Christ in the
world, and not feel pained with the fact, so little to the credit of the
Church of the West, that, of our sympathy it has little or none. This is
largely due to our ignorance. But is ignorance in many cases not
culpable? Is it not so in our case? A little more acquaintance with the
Eastern Church would vastly alter our attitude towards it, and speedily
remove most of our prejudices.

More than once have we listened to depreciations of the Greek Church, and
the epithet "stagnant" has always been incorporated as a first-rate
misdemeanour of the Orthodox Church of the East. The assumption in the
epithet is that the Greek Church is not missionary and aggressive, and
the implication is that it has been so from earliest times. Until men
acquaint themselves with the history of this Church, and open their eyes
to facts which are readily accessible, it is useless to attempt to lift
them out of their prejudices.

How much did the Church of the East suffer by the great Roman schism of
1054! After, in the words of Dr. A. van Millingen, in his _Byzantine
Constantinople_, having in "the empire of which New Rome was the capital,
defended the higher life of mankind against the attacks of formidable
antagonists, and rendered eminent service to the cause of human welfare;"
after having elaborated the Christian doctrines and formed the creed of
Christendom for the world, she was shorn of much of her strength by the
departure of the West. The spring, and energy, and enterprise were
largely taken from her. No fault of hers that she was left with the
meditative souls who could ponder the mysteries of God, but could not
trade in the merchandise of the Kingdom. So she was left in possession of
her splendid attainment, without the aptitude to fit herself to
aggressive enterprise, while Rome, with all the qualifications which have
fitted her for an aggressive task, has made for herself a place and a
name which have eclipsed the glory of the old home. And so we forget the
Church of the Apostles, to which we owe so much.

But worse. How much did the Church of the East suffer, and how much does
she still suffer, by the overthrow of the empire by the Turks in 1453--by
the overthrow of the empire, and the domination of a powerful,
unscrupulous, and fanatical race, down through the 600 years succeeding!
How would the Church in these islands have stood such fiery trials? Would
we have continued an enterprising missionary Church through it all? It
might be good for us to try to understand that, when a despotic Sultan
stands over you, allowing you to breathe on condition of no
proselytising, the conditions are not favourable to well advertised
missionary effort. All that can be done in such circumstances, and under
such conditions, is to hold fast to the faith, and let the light shine,
which the Greek Church actually does.

Since the tenth century, Russia stands to the credit of Greek
missionaries. Not that Russia can be considered much credit in the
meantime by the West; but the ground for hope in Russia is the Christian
element that has entered into her national life. And our Protestantism
has not yet succeeded on the same national scale in missionary effort, a
fact which ought to incline us to think less of the stagnation of the
Greek Church. But why refer specially to Russia as a product of Greek
missionary effort? Would Rome, or the Church of the Reformation in the
West, be what they are to-day, but for the zeal and devotion of that
Church in bye-gone days?

It is an easy matter for us in these days, with our national liberty and
recognition of the Christian faith; with the noble souls around us who
are the products of centuries of grace; with wealth, and all that
Christian work calls for to its aid, to look disparagingly upon the
Church of the East, the mother of us all, as she lies in sore straits
despoiled of her splendour, and trampled under the heel of the Turk. Well
we know the theory of cross-bearing, but, in comparison with the Church
of the East from the very earliest down to the present day, we know but
little of its practice. Our laurels are not too firmly knit upon our
brows: let us take heed, and let us exercise the grace of charity and a
spirit of sympathy.

But our prejudices, which are, as usual, due to imperfect knowledge,
culpable or otherwise, charge this Church, which claims to be Orthodox,
with being heretical in doctrine and worship. To put the common view,
this Church, which is the repository of Apostolic doctrine, and from
which we, in common with others, have derived, has, along with the truth,
a large admixture of error, which renders her dangerous and to be
avoided.

We, who plume ourselves on the orthodoxy of our doctrines and purity of
worship, have a remarkable facility for detecting and magnifying the
errors of others: of creating them where they do not exist, and of
exaggerating them where they do. This facility has this advantage, that
it keeps our eyes away from ourselves and from the errors which are
nearer home. Like the beams of the winter sun which have little warmth in
them, the line of our vision is somewhat oblique.

This is a subject much too large to occupy our attention to any extent
here. It may be enough to remark in regard to the major charges, that
nowhere does the Eastern Church address worship, either to the Mother of
our Lord, or to the saints and angels. They are venerated and invoked,
but worshipped, never. Worship, as we understand it, is addressed to the
Triune God, and to Him alone. This is a rather dangerous subject to
touch, and this is not the place to safely approach it; but it may
suffice to say that we might be a great deal the better, and none the
worse, and it might be comforting and strengthening in times of
affliction and trial, to realise more than we do, that our Lord wore our
flesh when He sojourned with us on the earth, and that He derived His
humanity from Mary. We might thus even be induced to use Her name with
greater veneration and affection than have yet characterised our
references to Her, when these have had to be made, and so aid the
fulfilment of Her own prophecy, "Behold, from henceforth, all generations
shall call me blessed." And might it not be good for us to remember that
there _are_ saints and angels, and that we are "compassed about with so
great a cloud of witnesses?" Who doubts the fact? Do not they who tacitly
ignore the existence of the Blessed Dead?

If any of the hymns contained in this volume should touch the heart of
anyone who reads them, or, better still, at any future time, sings them,
may he, as he remembers the source from which they have come, think
reverently and sympathetically of the struggling Church of the East.




                           HYMNS FROM THE EAST




                                 MORNING




                                    I

    Now, God of Light, the morn appears,
      And life revives, and beauty glows;
    The night has gone with all its fears,
      And lo! the light in brightness grows.

                                   II

    Thine be the glory, God of Light,
      For all the joy from morn that springs;
    O may a morn dispel each night,
      And bless our lives with beauteous things.

                                   III

    Give us this day the light that dwells
      In every heart Thy presence fills;
    That night with all its fears dispels,
      And life, and hope, and joy instils.

                                   IV

    Then shall our nights no darkness bring,
      But morn, bright morn, for ever shine;
    And when night spreads her dusky wings,
      More bright shall be the light divine.

                                    V

    All praise to Thee, the God of Light;
      All praise to Christ, the glorious Son;
    And to the Spirit, Lord of might,
      Now, and while endless ages run.




                                    I

    Up, up, my soul! with gladness rise,
    And greet the ever-brightening skies.
    The morn hath come, sweet morn, awake!
    And from thy pinions slumber shake.

                                   II

    Pure as the morn God's presence shines;
    Love like its beams, thy life entwines;
    Richer the gifts thy God bestows
    Than morning beauty can disclose.

                                   III

    Sweet as the breath that fans the bowers,
    And stirs the leaves and opening flowers,
    Comes with the morn, the breath divine
    To stir thee, slumbering soul of mine.

                                   IV

    O Thou, the Morn, the Light, the Sun,
    With Thee be every day begun;
    Brightness shall clothe my life always,
    And fill my soul with grateful praise.

                                    V

    Glory to Thee, O Christ! my Lord,
    Light of my soul, Incarnate Word!
    Come with the morn, abide alway,
    And cheer my course to endless day.




                                    I

    The saffron tints appear,
    The morning comes--'tis here.
    Wipe slumber from thine eyes,
    Behold the sun arise!

                                   II

    Clad in his garb of gold,
    Bright as he shone of old;
    Beams o'er the heavens extend,
    Shafts from his orb descend.

                                   III

    Sun, that in morning light
    Rises, nor sinks in night,
    Shine in my soul alway,
    Make there an endless day.

                                   IV

    Life for my deadness give;
    Shine, that my soul may live;
    Joy to my sorrow bring;
    Light on Thy glowing wing.

                                    V

    If 'neath the cloud I lie,
    Darkness obscure my sky;
    Yet, may my faith behold
    Glints of the hidden gold.

                                   VI

    Father, to Thee, always,
    And Holy Ghost, be praise;
    Glory, while ages run,
    To Thee, O Christ! our Sun.




                                    I

    Now glows the morn in beauty rare,
    O haste my soul to fervent prayer,
    And let the wings of morning raise
    To God the tribute of thy praise.

                                   II

    The night is gone; now disappear
    The clouds that hung in threatening near;
    Day comes apace, and terrors flee,
    For light illumes the earth and sea.

                                   III

    O soul dismayed! when darkness fills
    The dismal days with darkling ills,
    Rest in the calm the promise gives,
    That Christ, thy Light and Glory, lives.

                                   IV

    Morn shall appear and scatter night;
    Light shall appear in noonday might.
    Strong in the joy the daylight brings,
    Soul, thou shalt rise on glowing wings.

                                    V

    Morn of my soul, O Christ, Thou art;
    Light of my life; my drooping heart
    Sings, when Thy countenance benign
    Shines as the joys of noonday shine.




                                 EVENING




                                    I

    When night her sable curtain spreads,
      And darkness falls on sea and land,
    In silent beauty, o'er our heads,
          The stars shine grand.

                                   II

    The orb of day his race hath run,
      But see what glory comes to view,
    As, full of radiance, one by one,
          The stars shine true.

                                   III

    Now bright their silver light appears,
      And reverent eyes behold the sight;
    Hope lights the darkness of our fears--
          The stars shine bright.

                                   IV

    When on our life the curtain falls,
      And fast descends a threatening night,
    Then, lest dismay the soul appals,
          The stars shine bright.

                                    V

    O great the wisdom, great the power,--
      God draws the curtains of the night,
    And, in the dark and lonesome hour,
          The stars shine bright.

                                   VI

    The glory and the truth of God,
      His lovingkindness and His care,--
    Such is the light He sheds abroad,
          His stars shine rare.




                                    I

    A crown of gold surpassing rare,
    The western hills, in beauty, wear;
    And earth and sea reflect the light,
    That fades before th' approach of night.

                                   II

    O Glorious Sun! whose peerless ray
    Illumes the realm of endless day,
    Shine on a world where darkness dwells,
    And all the joy of day dispels.

                                   III

    Soft o'er the land the twilight creeps;
    Night falls apace, and nature sleeps;
    O let not night my life control,
    And plunge in sleep my drowsy soul.

                                   IV

    Sleep to the weary pilgrim give,
    But let the soul through slumber live;
    Wake when the first faint gleam of morn
    Tells that another day is born.

                                    V

    Light of my life! bid night depart,
    Sing to my soul, and cheer my heart;
    That morn, and noon, and night may be
    One beauteous day of joy to me.

                                   VI

    And when the brightest morn shall break,
    And bid the eternal day awake,
    O Glorious Sun! in radiance shine,
    To guard from night the realm divine.




                                CHRISTMAS




                                CAROL[1]

                     {kai Poimenes eidon to thauma,}
                  {Angelôn anymnountôn, kai legontôn;}
                                 {Doxa}


                                    I

    The Lord of Life to earth came down,--
      Come, gaily sound His praises high;
    O 'twas a day of high renown,
      While angels praise Him in the sky.

                               _Refrain._

    The shepherds saw a wondrous sight,
        In Bethlehem's fields at even,
    When, lo! a star, in radiance bright,
    Shed o'er the plains its glorious light,
    And angel bands, harmonious quite,
        His praises sang from heaven.

                                   II

    Say, came He forth by myriads led?--
      Come, gaily sound his praises high;
    A crown of gold upon his head?
      While angels praise Him in the sky.
                  _Refrain._

                                   III

    Of earthly pomp the Lord had none,--
      Come, gaily sound His praises high;
    His kingly crown had not been won,
      While angels praise Him in the sky.
                  _Refrain._

                                   IV

    A little child the Lord became,--
      Come, gaily sound His praises high,
    To bear our guilt, and share our shame,
      While angels praise Him in the sky.
                  _Refrain._

                                    V

    O Jesu, Who in manger lay,--
      Come, gaily sound his praises high,
    Make me a little child to-day,
      While angels praise Thee in the sky.
                  _Refrain._

                                   VI

    And may I come, with spirit meet,--
      Come, gaily sound His praises high,
    To lay my tribute at Thy feet,
      While angels praise Thee in the sky.
                  _Refrain._

                                   VII

    To Father, Spirit, One with Christ,--
      Come, gaily sound His praises high,
    Be endless praise, Whose love sufficed,
      While angels praise Him in the sky.
                  _Refrain._


----------

[1]This carol has been set to excellent and appropriate music by Mr.
   Arthur Henry Brown, Brentwood, Essex, and is published by Novello &
   Co., London. It is noteworthy that Mr. Brown is honourably associated
   with Eastern Hymnody by his tune, _St. Anatolius_, which was composed
   for Dr. Neale's rendering of the Greek evening hymn, {tên hêmeran
   dielthôn}, "The day is past and over"; and also by _Orthodoxus_ and
   _Apostolicus_, which were composed for The Ektene and The Litany Of
   The Deacon respectively; and by _St. Stythians_, composed for {basileu
   ouranie paraklête}, "O King, enthroned on high"--renderings by the
   present author, all of which find a place in the new edition of Church
   Hymns.




                                CAROL[2]

                       {euphranthêti hierousalêm}


                                    I

    Jerusalem, rejoice!
      Keep festival and sing;
    All ye who dwell in Zion's courts,
      Bring forth an offering.
            Rejoice, rejoice,
            Jerusalem, rejoice;
        And sing with glee, right merrily,
            Let every heart and voice.

                                   II

    To-day the chain is loosed
      That long hath bound our race,
    The condemnation is removed
      Through God's abounding grace.
            Rejoice, rejoice, etc.

                                   III

    The gates of heaven are wide,
      And Satan's work undone;
    For She[3] who fell beneath his power,
      Now gives the world God's Son.
            Rejoice, rejoice, etc.

                                   IV

    O depth of riches great!
      O height of wisdom strong!
    O knowledge of the Living God,
      To right such grievous wrong!
            Rejoice, rejoice, etc.

                                    V

    Now, let creation sing
      And leap, nor brook control,
    For Christ hath come to call it back,
      And save each ruined soul.
            Rejoice, rejoice,
            Jerusalem rejoice;
        And sing with glee, right merrily,
            Let every heart and voice.


----------

[2]Music by Mr. Arthur Henry Brown.

[3]Woman.




                                    I

    The best that heaven could bring--
      First fruits, an offering free--
    Was brought from far, when, by the star,
      The wise men came to Thee.

                                   II

    No sceptre, and no throne!
      The magi were amazed,
    As, with surprise, on humble guise
      And poverty, they gazed.

                                   III

    But there Thy God-head shone,
      Despite the manger bed;
    O Christ, the Lord, Incarnate Word!
      'Twas there Thou laid'st Thy head.




                                    I

    Out from the rising of the sun,
      O'er tracts of desert wild,
    The Magi came on journey lone,
      To seek the heaven-born child;
    The star o'erhead their footsteps led,
      And hope their way beguiled.

                                   II

    They bore Him costly gifts of gold,
      And myrrh and spices sweet:
    "For He is King," they had been told,
      Whom they would meekly greet;
    And they would go, in reverence low,
      And worship at His feet.

                                   III

    O humble Child, in manger laid!
      The wise beheld Thee there,
    And reverently their homage paid,
      And gave their offerings rare.
    Their quest was found, and to the ground
      They bowed the head in prayer.

                                   IV

    O Jesu, who in manger lay,
      The Son of God most high,
    Let me my humble homage pay,
      And bring my offerings nigh,
    And humbly greet Thee at Thy feet,
      And low in worship lie.




                                 EASTER




                                    I

    O woeful hour! when from the night
    Emerged in wrath Satanic might,
    To crush the Christ, whom God in heaven,
    To raise our fallen race, had given.

                                   II

    O woeful hour! when, with the scorn
    Of sinful men, His soul was torn;
    When sin exulting bowed the knee,
    And stung the Christ with mockery.

                                   III

    O woeful hour! when to the tree
    The Christ was nailed in agony;
    When anguish for our sin He bore,
    And thorns His throbbing temples tore.

                                   IV

    O woeful hour! O darkest day!
    The God-Man, still, entombed lay,
    For death his cruel shaft had driven
    To quell the hope our God had given.

                                    V

    O saddened soul! the night is past,
    The morn, bright morn, has come at last;
    The rage of sin its worst hath done,
    Yet lives in power th' eternal Son.

                                   VI

    The dark hath vanished in the light;
    O futile now, Satanic might;
    Sin wounded lies, and death is slain
    By Him who lives in power again.

                                   VII

    Hail, glorious morn! the Christ hath risen;
    Hail Victor from the darkest prison!
    Up, up, my soul! thy praises pour
    To Christ, Thy God, for evermore.




                                    I

    Crown the Lord of glory,
      Angels, crown your King;
    Saints whose souls He ransomed,
      Bring your offering;
    Let no voice be silent,
      Laud and honour bring.

                                   II

    Crown the Lord of glory,--
      Once He dwelt below,
    Bore the cross of sorrow,
      Drank the cup of woe;
    Now He reigns triumphant,
      Let your praises flow.

                                   III

    Crown the Lord of glory,--
      On the earth He wore
    Purple robe that mocked Him,
      Thorns His brow that tore;
    Now His griefs are ended,
      Praise Him evermore.

                                   IV

    Crown the Lord of glory,
      For His work is done;
    Crown the King of glory,
      God's eternal Son;
    In my life enthroned,
      Be Thy reign begun!




                                    I

    O Christ, when on the shameful tree,
    Thou bor'st such cruel pain for me,
    Thine every member felt the smart,
    And sent its sorrows to Thy heart.

                                   II

    A crown of thorns Thy temples tore,
    Thy face, O Christ, vile spittings bore,
    And cruel hands, O action base!
    Smote Thee, defiant, in the face.

                                   III

    When in Thy thirst, men heard Thee call,
    Thy lips were drenched with bitter gall;
    And to Thine ears the words were borne
    Of blasphemy and ribald scorn.

                                   IV

    Thy hands and feet with nails were riven,
    The spear into Thy side was driven;--
    O Christ, when dying on the tree,
    How great the pain Thou bor'st for me!

                                    V

    Now, by Thy Cross, Almighty King,
    Salvation to the sinner bring,
    And let Thy sacrifice for me
    Teach me to sacrifice for Thee.




                                    I

    O God of love, whose mercy came
    To this dark world of sin and shame,
    And on a Cross of suffering sore,
    That sin and shame in meekness bore.

                                   II

    Supreme the love the Christ displayed,
    When He, True God, True Man was made;
    When He was scorned, His patience then
    Shone forth divine, with sinful men.

                                   III

    Did e'er such mercy lead the great
    To stoop from high to low estate?
    Did e'er such love incline the heart
    To take the erring sinner's part?

                                   IV

    'Twas God who loved, 'twas God who gave
    His Son our erring souls to save;
    'Tis Christ that wins us by the love
    From earth below to heaven above.

                                    V

    Win me, O Lord, whose mercy came
    To this dark world of sin and shame,
    To that bright world whose beauties shine
    Forever in Thy love divine.

                                   VI

    To Thee, O Father, glory be,
    And glory, Christ, God-Man, to Thee,
    And to the Spirit, Three in One,
    Now, and while countless ages run.




                                    I

    When Hades held the Lord of Life,
      The boast of sin was vaunting high;
    'Twas much to wound a sinless soul,
      But more to see the God-Man die.

                                   II

    When Hades held the Lord of Life,
      The gates were barred to hold Him fast.
    No prison bars so closely drawn
      Were e'er by soul of mortal passed.

                                   III

    When Hades held the Lord of Life,
      Rejoicing, death beheld Him there;--
    "Now close the ancient barriers draw,
      And drive the prisoner to despair."

                                   IV

    O, blank surprise when Hades shook!
      O, ringing joy through all the gloom!
    Asunder fell the gates of night,
      And rose the Conqueror from the tomb.

                                    V

    Immortal Saviour! death is dead,
      No more it holds the souls of men;
    For Thou hast crushed the power of sin,
      And brought us back to life again.




                                    I

    When Thou, O Christ, upon the tree,
      Wert bearing pain for sinful men,
    The sun, lamenting, hid his face,
      And clothed himself with darkness then;

                                   II

    And o'er the world, when noontide came,
      The light grew faint and faded soon;
    And men in wonder saw the dark
      Bring in the night at hour of noon.

                                   III

    But, low in Hades' depths there shone
      Such light as never shone before;
    And prisoners saw the Light of lights,
      And joyed to feel their bondage o'er.

                                   IV

    O blessed art Thou, Christ, our Lord,
      For all the pain so meekly borne;
    The dark that hid Thee in Thy woe,
      Has ushered in a glorious morn.




                                    I

    To Thy Cross and Resurrection,
      Laud and praise we humbly give;
    In Thy death and life immortal,
      We will die, and ever live.

                                   II

    Christ Incarnate! by Thy Manhood,
      Thou to God hast brought me nigh;
    Christ the humble! by Thy meekness,
      Thou hast raised my horn on high.

                                   III

    Source of life! O Christ, the anguish
      Borne upon the cruel tree
    Lifts me to the bliss abiding,
      Where from suffering, souls are free.

                                   IV

    Endless praises, bright and thankful,
      Christ, to Thee be ever given,
    By the souls in sorrow singing,
      By the souls redeemed in heaven.




                                    I

    Light is dawning 'mong the hills,
      Light of light Thy beams display,
      All the darkness chase away,
    Light that dawned upon our ills.

                                   II

    Dark the day the Cross was raised
      By the hands of cruel men;
      Great Thy load of sorrow then;
    Angel hosts were sore amazed.

                                   III

    Dark the world while in the tomb,
      Lone in death the Saviour lay,
      Till the stone was rolled away,
    And His Rising quelled the gloom.

                                   IV

    Fadeless now, O Light of light,
      Glory of the Father, Thou,
      Shine upon Thy people now,
    Rise upon their darkest night.




                                    I

    Hail rising morn! for He hath risen;
      Hail light that gilds the Eastern skies;
    For, from the bonds of darkest prison,
      Thy first beams saw the Christ arise.

                                   II

    O merciful and gracious One!
      The gates of Hades Thou hast rent,
    And by Thy Rising, Christ the Son,
      No more we lie in bondage pent.

                                   III

    To-day the lips of Adam sing;
      Eve hails the Christ of mankind born;
    And patriarchs and prophets bring
      Their hymns to greet the wondrous morn.

                                   IV

    And Thine the glory, Thine the power,
      By glowing hearts in praise expressed;
    For Thine the might, this glorious hour,
      By which the sons of men are blessed.




                                    I

    We worship, Lord, before Thee now,
    For great, and good, and pure art Thou.
    O Christ, the God, our stumblings heal,
    And lead us all Thy love to feel.

                                   II

    For of Thy will it pleased Thee well
    Here, in our flesh, with us to dwell,
    To bear the Cross, that we might be
    From Satan's servitude set free.

                                   III

    Wherefore we cry aloud and praise,
    With thankful voice, Thy name always;
    For, O! our Saviour, Thou didst bring
    The joy that makes our souls to sing.




                                    I

    Heavy laden with thy grief,
      Do thy tears like raindrops flow?
    Christ hath all thy sorrows borne
              Long ago.

                                   II

    See Him in the garden, prone,
      While He poured His soul to God;
    Then He bore affliction keen,
              And the rod.

                                   III

    Weary, laden with thy sin,
      Dost thou bow beneath the load?
    Cast the burden of thy woe,
              On thy God.

                                   IV

    See Him faint beneath the load,
      As He bears the ghastly tree;
    Hear His weary spirit sigh,
              All for thee.

                                    V

    Sad and doubting, lo! the sun
      Shines upon a glorious day:
    He is risen! come, see the place
              Where He lay.

                                   VI

    Glory to our suffering Lord,
      Praise to our exalted King,--
    Source of life and endless bliss,--
              Let us bring.




                                    I

    To Thee, O Christ, our God,
      Great Shepherd, who didst bear
    The wandering sheep that strayed
      Back to Thy shepherd care;

                                   II

    Who, pitying, gav'st Thy life,
      That we might stray no more,--
    To Thee our hearts we raise,
      And Thee our songs adore.

                                   III

    Blest Spirit, source of life,
      From Hades' fearful gloom
    Thou brought'st the Shepherd, Christ,
      Who lay in mortal tomb,

                                   IV

    That He might still provide,
      And tend, and guard, and keep,
    Where'er His flock, abides
      One Shepherd, of His sheep.




                                    I

    Glory shone within the gloom,
      Vacant eyes in wonder gazed;
    Shook the portals of the tomb,
      And the prisoners stood amazed.

                                   II

    "Who is this in garb of light,
      Come to chase our night away?
    Who is this in glorious might,
      Brings to us eternal day?"

                                   III

    "Back! the triumph has been won;"
      Prone the powers of darkness lie,
    At the feet of God's own Son,
      Fresh from fields of victory.

                                   IV

    Glory, glory, life is ours!
      Hades heard the shout and feared;
    Sin and all satanic powers
      Saw the Victor as He neared.

                                    V

    Burst the gates and cast them down,
      Set the sighing prisoners free;
    Fear not though the tyrant frown,
      Christ hath purchased liberty,

                                   VI

    Sin is crushed and death is slain,
      See the Cross and Him who died!
    From the grave He rose again,
      Who for man was crucified.

                                   VII

    Hail! the Resurrection day,
      Hail! the gladness and the gain;
    "He is risen," the angels say,
      Yea, the Lord is risen again.




                                    I

    When Adam heard the voice of sin
      And fell before its power,
    The flowers of Paradise were shorn
      Of beauty in that hour.

                                   II

    And clouds obscured the heavenly light,
      And e'en the stars were dim;
    For O 'twas night, and only night,
      Dark night 'twixt God and him.

                                   III

    "O whence that flashing sword that gleams?
      And whence those angels there?"
    Out from the garden of their bliss,
      Was thrust the guilty pair.

                                   IV

    Life is not theirs, the tree of Life
      The Cherubim surround;
    Death dogs our guilty parents' steps,
      Curse blasts the fertile ground.

                                    V

    O dreary, dreary, dark and dread,
      O misery of sin!
    "God make another garden fair,
      And take Thy wanderers in."

                                   VI

    All praise to Christ our glorious Lord,
      For sin and death are slain;
    The gates of heaven are open wide,
      And life is ours again.




                                    I

    Within the garden's sombre shade,
      The Christ of God in anguish prayed;--
    And who that agony could tell,
      As from his brow the blood-drops fell?

                                   II

    "Can you not watch one hour?" He saith,
      "My soul is sorrowful to death."
    But He alone the vigil kept,
      While worn disciples slumbering slept.

                                   III

    O dark the cloud that threatening hung,
      And sore the grief His soul that wrung,--
    The hate of man, the guilty name,
      The bitter Cross, the sin and shame.

                                   IV

    "If I must drink this cup," He prayed,
      "The burden bear upon me laid,
    My God, I bow Me to Thy will,
      And meekly Thy behest fulfil."

                                    V

    My soul, when to the garden led,
      And clouds are gathering overhead,
    When none the hour of anguish shares,
      To God direct thy earnest prayers.

                                   VI

    "Thy will be done, Thy will is best,--
      Even then the bitter cup is blest,--
    If 'tis Thy will the cup I'll drain,
      Despite the agony of pain."




                                PENTECOST




               {Ergô, hôs palai tois mathêtais epêngeilô.}


                                    I

    Even as Thou saidst, the Spirit came,
    In fiery tongues of living flame;
    And men were moved to spread abroad,
    The Wisdom of th' Incarnate God.

                                   II

    And nations heard the truth, and gave
    Their souls to Him who came to save;
    And toiling in their sins, arose
    The power of Satan to oppose.

                                   III

    Even as Thou saidst; the Spirit's power
    Came at the Pentecostal hour,
    And drooping souls with zeal were fired,
    And felt the life that power inspired.

                                   IV

    Even as Thou saidst, the Spirit's voice
    Spake to dull hearts, and bade rejoice;
    And men that dwelt in sorrow's night,
    Felt hope awake as morning light.

                                    V

    Even as Thou saidst; His power can still
    Our empty lives to fulness fill;
    Can charge with hope, with zeal inspire,
    And kindle life, and light, and fire.

                                   VI

    Even as Thou saidst!--O Spirit, come,
    Make with Thy people here Thy home;
    In all their need Thy gifts supply,
    And Christ our Lord still glorify.




                                    I

    O may the Spirit of all grace
      Descend and in our hearts abide,
      And what of good or ill betide,
    Find in them aye a resting-place.

                                   II

    There is no peace to mortals given,
      Save when the Spirit finds His rest
      Within the secret of our breast,
    And there inspires the calm of heaven.

                                   III

    Our earthly calms a storm presage,
      They whisper peace, and tempests rise,
      And clouds obscure the brightest skies,
    And winds, and waves in tumult rage.

                                   IV

    No storm disturbs the heavenly peace,
      No whispering fills the soul with fears
      As when the brooding tempest nears,
    And clouds around our path increase.

                                    V

    'Tis lasting calm, 'tis heavenly rest;
      Come, Spirit of the Living God,
      And in our spirits shed abroad
    The peace that makes the troubled blest.




                                COMMUNION




                                    I

    Let Thy Blood in mercy poured,
      Let thy gracious Body broken,
    Be to me, O gracious Lord
      Of Thy boundless love the token;
    Thou didst give Thyself for me,
    Now I give myself to Thee.

                                   II

    Thou didst die that I might live;--
      Blessed Lord Thou cam'st to save me;
    All that love of God could give,
      Jesus by His sorrows gave me;--
    Thou didst give Thyself for me,
    Now I give myself to Thee.

                                   III

    By the thorns that crowned Thy brow,
      By the spear wound and the nailing;
    By the pain and death I now
      Claim, O Christ, Thy love unfailing;
    Thou didst give Thyself for me,
    Now I give myself to Thee.

                                   IV

    Wilt Thou own the gift I bring?
      All my penitence I give Thee;
    Thou art my exalted King,
      Of Thy matchless love forgive me;--
    Thou didst give Thyself for me,
    Now I give myself to Thee.




                                    I

    O Lord of bounty, let this bread
      Be Thy pure Body unto me;
    And let the wine in symbol poured,
      Tell of the glorious Mystery;--
    O let me here Thy presence feel;
    And all my sins in mercy heal.

                                   II

    I am not worthy to partake
      Of Thy pure Body, gracious Lord;
    Nor of the Blood so freely shed
      By Thee, O Thou Incarnate Word;
    Yet grant Thy presence unto me,
    And let me now commune with Thee.




                                JUDGMENT




                                    I

    When in the clouds the Lord appears,
      And angels stand around His throne;
    When judgment fills the soul with fears,
      And none can aught of sin disown;--
    Spare me, O Lord, Thy creature spare,
    And let my soul Thy mercy share.

                                   II

    Even in Thy judgment mercy shew;--
      But ere that awful day awakes,
    Make me my guilty state to know,
      And from my evil courses break;--
    Spare me, O Lord, Thy creature spare,
    And let my soul Thy mercy share.

                                   III

    For Thou art pitiful and kind,
      And Thou hast died, O Judge of men,
    That, ere the Judgment, I may find
      The path that leads to life again;--
    Spare me, O Lord, Thy creature spare,
    And let my soul Thy mercy share.

                                   IV

    I have no penitence nor tears,
      I have no merit of my own;
    But, ah! my soul is filled with fears,
      And gladly would its sin disown;--
    Spare me, O Lord, Thy creature spare,
    And let my soul Thy mercy share.

                                    V

    And bring me nigh the throne of grace,
      That, ere the day of Judgment dire,
    I may behold Thy loving face,
      And flee Thine all consuming ire;--
    Spare me, O Lord, Thy creature spare,
    And let my soul Thy mercy share.

                                   VI

    Swift draws the day of Judgment nigh;
      Wake, wake, my soul, the Judge is near!
    And call for mercy while thy cry
      Can enter His inclining ear;--
    Spare me, O Lord, Thy creature spare,
    And let my soul Thy mercy share.




                                    I

    The Bridegroom comes! My soul, awake,
    And slumber from thine eyelids shake;
    Hark! in the midnight hour the cry;
    Bestir, my soul, for He is nigh.

                                   II

    Now trim your lamp, and let its light
    Illume the darkness of the night;
    And with the tarrying host attend
    The Bridegroom, as the Bridegroom's friend.

                                   III

    Hast thou no oil? O foolish soul!
    Why didst thou not the hours control?
    Why in the darkness slumber still,
    Without the oil your lamp to fill?

                                   IV

    Go, get your oil,--but no, too late!
    The Bridegroom's come, and closed the gate;--
    "O let me knock, for He is kind,
    And will not leave my soul behind."

                                    V

    "O let me in, my lamp's aglow;
    How could I, Lord, Thy coming know?
    'Twas night, I slumbered,--let me in:
    Forgive, O Lord, forgive my sin."

                                   VI

    Too late! The time has gone apace;
    Too late, 'tis gone, the hour of grace;
    O soul of mine, awake, awake,
    And slumber from thine eyelids shake.




                                    I

    O Judge of all, when sinful men
      To Thy dire judgment seat are brought,--
    Tell not the error of my life,
                O tell it not.

                                   II

    When bowed with grief my tears are shed,
      Because my life with sin is fraught,
    To angel hosts tell not my sin,
                O tell it not.

                                   III

    O hide the secrets of my soul,
      And give the pardon I have sought,
    And to the myriads round Thy throne,
                O tell them not.

                                   IV

    O merciful and just Thou art;
      In pity view my woeful lot,
    And shame me not because of sin,--
                O tell it not.




                                    I

    I brought my merits to the throne,
      And set them forth in order there;
    I said, "O Lord, Thy servant own,
      And let his brow the garland wear;
    The grace and virtue of his life,
    He won as victor in the strife."

                                   II

    The song that erstwhile filled the place,
      Where high the throne of Christ was set,
    Grew faint, as on each pensive face
      Joy mixed with pain, and pity met;--
    Their song had told the debt they owed,
    And how the Christ His grace bestowed.

                                   III

    O, silence fell, so sharp and chill,--
      My soul to meanness pined and shrank,
    Forth went my cry in accent shrill,
      "My Lord, have I no grace to thank?"
    Its echo dying, lingered, sank,
    "My Lord, have I no grace to thank?"

                                   IV

    I saw His piercéd hands and side,
      I saw the thorn-wounds on His brow,--
    "My Lord, forgive my sinful pride,
      Accept my sore repentance now;"
    Then rose high heaven's adoring prayers,
    My grateful song went forth with theirs.




                                    I

    The time is drawing nigh,
      Even now the day is near,
    When Christ from heaven high
      To Judgment shall appear;--
    Keep watch, my soul, in fear,
    The Judge of men is near.

                                   II

    Then kings and princes great,
      The rich and poor shall meet;
    And high and low estate,
      Shall gather round His feet;--
    Keep watch, my soul, in fear,
    The Judge of men is near.

                                   III

    No crafty words shall mar,
      Nor sophistry distract;
    No parrying counsel jar
      With the eternal fact;--
    Keep watch, my soul, in fear,
    The Judge of men is near.

                                   IV

    O Christ, in mercy then,
      Forbid my soul should go
    With lost and ruined men
      Down to the place of woe;--
    Keep watch, my soul, in fear,
    The Judge of men is near.




                               ASPIRATIONS




                                    I

    I sought the Lord at early morn,
      When earth awoke to see the light;
    And to my soul a light was borne
      That quelled the darkness of my night;
    He heard my prayer at early morn,
    And light into my heart was borne.

                                   II

    I sought the Lord when noontide shone,
      And head and hand earth's duties shared;
    "I am Thy servant, Lord, alone,"
      I said, and told Him how I fared;
    He heard my prayer as I drew near,
    And kept me at my task, sincere.

                                   III

    I sought the Lord when evening fell,
      And night came gliding on apace;
    For I had sins my Lord to tell,
      And He is full of pardoning grace;
    He heard my prayer, and bade me rest,
    And in His love my soul was blest.

                                   IV

    At morn, at noon, at night I'll pray,
      And Thou, O Lord, my prayer wilt hear,
    For Thou art near my path alway,
      To aid, to comfort, or to cheer;
    No hour too early, none too late,
    To knock imploring at Thy gate.

                                    V

    O Jesus Christ, to Thee be praise,
      'Tis Thou hast taught my soul to pray,
    For Thou didst speak with God always,
      At morn, at noon, at close of day;
    And Thou hast said He hears the prayer,
    The longing soul breathes everywhere.




                                    I

    O, touch my heart, and bring to mind
      The sin I should deplore;
    And give me grace, Thou God most kind,
      That I may sin no more.

                                   II

    O, touch my heart till tears run fast,
      In penitence sincere;
    And may the memories of the past
      Teach me to walk in fear.

                                   III

    For I have strayed, and Thou hast sought,
      And I have strayed again;
    O, may the wanderer Thou hast brought
      Within Thy fold remain.

                                   IV

    O, touch my heart, till love arise,
      And claim me for Thine own;
    Then shall I learn with glad surprise,
      That I am Thine alone.

                                    V

    For love knows no divided heart,
      Nor grudges service given;
    But gives the life in every part,
      And serves in earth and heaven.




                                    I

    The wealth of high estate,
      The silver and the gold,
    The glory of the great,
      The wisdom of the old,--
    Death seizes all, they pass away,
    For all on earth is vanity.

                                   II

    Why seek the vain that dies?
      The life begirt by death?
    The fame, the power that flies
      With the expiring breath?
    The good that carries ill besides,
    And for a fleeting hour abides?

                                   III

    Are there no gains that last,
      To bless the soul for aye,
    When passing things are past,
      And things of earth decay?
    Are there no joys that linger long
    In sweetness, like a heavenly song?

                                   IV

    Arise, my soul, arise!
      The husks of time disdain,
    And wing thee to the skies,
      Where there is lasting gain;
    Where moth nor rust can mock thy toil,
    Nor subtle thief break through to spoil.

                                    V

    O Christ, for Thee we long,
      'Tis Thee our spirits need;
    They only life prolong
      Who on Thy bounties feed;
    And they have wealth, and high estate,
    And endless bliss who on Thee wait.




                                    I

    I lift my hands, and with my heart,
      My prayer ascends to Thee;
    In mercy take a sinner's part,
      Lord, send Thy help to me.

                                   II

    Lo! in the mire of sin I lie,
      My raiment all defiled;
    O come and set me up on high,
      And save Thy fallen child.

                                   III

    I cannot cleanse the filthy stains,--
      I can but mourn and sigh;
    Do what I may, the guilt remains,
      I fail oft' as I try.

                                   IV

    In mercy, Lord, Thy mercy send,
      For merciful art Thou;
    And prove Thyself the sinner's Friend,--
      O come and help me now.

                                    V

    And let my life be ordered quite,
      As Thou wouldst have it be;
    When I am wrong, O set me right,--
      Lord, come and succour me.

                                   VI

    And hold me up, lest to the mire
      Of sin my soul return;
    O let Thy love my spirit fire,
      And base affections burn.

                                   VII

    And glory to my God I'll give,
      And glory to the Son,
    And to the Spirit while I live,
      Great, Blessed, Three in One.




                                    I

    Arise, my soul, and gaily sing
    The praise of thine Immortal King;
    The heavens His matchless power adore,--
    Awake, and sing for evermore.

                                   II

    The morning dawns at His command,
    And lights the world o'er sea and land;
    And upwards, see the sun arise,
    To shed its glories from the skies.

                                   III

    But falls the twilight o'er our heads,
    And night its sable curtain spreads;
    For all His kingly words obey,--
    The dark of night, the light of day.

                                   IV

    O heavenly King, in every soul,
    The darkness of our night control;
    And 'mid the blackness of that night,
    Speak Thou the word, "Let there be light."

                                    V

    And as the morn from darkness springs,
    To speed to earth on silent wings,
    A dawn more glorious shall awake,
    And bright upon our spirits break.

                                   VI

    O Sun of Righteousness, arise,
    And fill our souls with glad surprise;
    Nor into dark of night decline,
    But aye at noontide brightly shine.

                                   VII

    All glory to the God of Might,
    And to the Son, the Light of light;
    And to the Spirit, Three in One,
    Eternal while the ages run.




                                    I

    The King shall come when morning dawns,
      And light triumphant breaks;
    When beauty gilds the eastern hills,
      And life to joy awakes.

                                   II

    Not as of old, a little child
      To bear, and fight, and die,
    But crowned with glory like the sun,
      That lights that morning sky.

                                   III

    O, brighter than the rising morn,
      When He, victorious rose,
    And left the lonesome place of death,
      Despite the rage of foes;--

                                   IV

    O, brighter than that glorious morn,
      Shall this fair morning be,
    When Christ, our King, in beauty comes,
      And we His face shall see.

                                    V

    The King shall come when morning dawns,
      And earth's dark night is past;--
    O, haste the rising of that morn,
      That day that aye shall last.

                                   VI

    And let the endless bliss begin,
      By weary saints foretold,
    When right shall triumph over wrong,
      And truth shall be extolled.

                                   VII

    The King shall come when morning dawns,
      And light and beauty brings;--
    Hail! Christ the Lord; Thy people pray
      Come quickly, King of kings.




                                    I

    Think on me, Lord, for Thou art kind,
    And I am needy, poor, and blind,
    And let the gifts Thou hast in store,
    Enrich me daily, more and more.

                                   II

    I have no food my soul to feed,
    Be Thou my Bread of Life indeed;
    My parchèd spirit sighs, O give
    The stream of Life that I may live.

                                   III

    My filthy raiment I disown,
    Clothe with Thy righteousness alone,
    And I shall walk approved by Thee,
    Clad in Thy robe of purity.

                                   IV

    I have no strength; in evil hour
    I fall beneath temptation's power;
    Be Thou my strength, and I shall stand
    Upheld by Thine outstretched hand.

                                    V

    I cannot see the path to tread,
    And blindly by my sins am led;
    Come to my blindness, give me sight
    That I may shape my course aright.

                                   VI

    I cannot live if Thou deny
    The prayer uplifted with my cry;
    I cannot die,--in mercy give
    Thy grace, that I may die or live.

                                   VII

    Think on me, Lord, for Thou art kind,
    And I am needy, poor, and blind;
    And let the gifts Thou hast in store,
    Enrich me daily, more and more.




                                    I

    Because Thy mercy is so great,
    Lord, think upon my needy state,
    And deign to give the help I need,--
    The Bread of Life my soul to feed.

                                   II

    They cannot live whose souls are fed
    On what this foolish world calls bread;
    For lack of food the spirit sighs,
    And, weak and weary, faints and dies.

                                   III

    O may the hidden manna give
    The strength I need that I may live;
    And may that life be spent for Thee
    Who came and lived on earth for me.

                                   IV

    O Jesus Christ, the living Bread,
    Now at the table Thou hast spread,
    Think of me in my utmost need,
    And let me on Thy bounties feed.




                                    I

    I cannot lift mine eyes,
      For, O, my sin is great,--
    High as the hills that rise
      Up, up to heaven's gate,--
    I cannot lift mine eyes,
      So great my sin, so great.

                                   II

    But I would smite my breast,
      And bow me at the Cross,
    And well He knows the rest,
      My pain, my grief, my loss;--
    Yea, I would smite my breast,
      And bow me at His Cross.

                                   III

    Mayhap when I have told
      The burden of my sin,
    He'll make my spirit bold,
      And speak, and soothe, and win;--
    All this when I have told
      The burden of my sin.

                                   IV

    Then shall I lift mine eyes,
      And see the sin removed,
    And in the radiant skies
      Behold the Well Beloved;--
    Then shall I lift mine eyes,
      And see my sin removed.




                                    I

    When at Thy feet, oppressed,
      The burdened sinner falls,
    And, woeful and distressed,
      Upon Thy mercy calls,--
    O hear the penitential prayer,
    Forgive the burdened sinner there.

                                   II

    Did'st Thou not send the Son,
      To shew the Father's grace,
    To bid a world undone
      Arise and seek His face?
    And wilt Thou not in mercy say,
    "Thy many sins I take away"?

                                   III

    Yea, Thou wilt not despise
      The soul's uplifted prayer;
    Nor when our hopes arise,
      Plunge us in deep despair;
    But wilt forgive the evil done,
    Through Christ the Well Beloved Son.

                                   IV

    O Jesus Christ, by Thee
      The Father's grace is found,
    And pardon full, and we
      With every good abound,--
    We see Thee nailed upon the tree,
    And know all blessing comes from Thee.




                                    I

    Because I was brought low,
      And sin had triumphed quite,
    Thou God, all good, didst bow,
      And seek me in the night.

                                   II

    And Thou didst lift me up,
      For Thou wert lifted high,
    When on the Cross Thou gav'st
      Thyself for man to die.

                                   III

    Thou Life, Immortal Life!
      O, full of sympathy!
    Clothed with my flesh Thou cam'st
      From Thy felicity.

                                   IV

    To burst our mortal bands,
      And vanquish in the strife,
    And dead, from death arise,
      Crowned with immortal life.

                                    V

    To Father and to Son,
      To Thee, blest Spirit, praise,
    Here on the earth, and there
      Where live the endless days.




                                    I

    O God of life, in whom we live,
    The bounties of Thy favour give,
        And teach our souls to soar;
    That, at the source of every good,
    Our life may find its needful food,
        And live for evermore.

                                   II

    O Lord of mercy, by whose grace
    The sinner seeks the Father's face,
        And finds a welcome there;
    When fears the trembling soul distress,
    And sins the aching heart oppress,
        O Lord of mercy, spare.

                                   III

    And say to Him who loves Thee best,
    And sent Thee to a world distressed,
        His blessing to impart,--
    "Hear Thou the sinner's mournful cries,
    Accept his preferred sacrifice,
        A broken, contrite heart."

                                   IV

    Blest Spirit, who in holy flame,
    At Pentecost all powerful came,--
        Our sin-stained souls renew;
    And by Thine all-consuming fire,
    Consume our sin and vile desire,
        And make us pure and true.

                                    V

    To God who dwells in highest heaven,
    Be endless praise and glory given,--
        And praise to Christ the Son.
    And to the Holy Spirit blest,
    For comfort and for gifts the best,--
        Immortal Three in One.




                                    I

    By Thine own hand the gift was given
    Of wealth, and hope of highest heaven;
    But, fool at heart, Thy grace was spurned,
    And from my Father's house I turned.

                                   II

    O, hear my plaint, I cry to Thee;
    Be pitiful, and pardon me,
    For I have sinned; O, give me grace
    To seek in penitence Thy face.

                                   III

    Yea, I repent in anguish low;
    Give me again Thy love to know;
    And if a servant's place remain,
    Take me in mercy back again.




                                    I

    Lord, Thou art good and kind,
      And full of tender grace;
    Now make Thy countenance to shine,
      And let me see Thy face.

                                   II

    For O, my heart is sad,
      Because my sin I know;
    And though I strive, I fail,
      And still ungodly grow.

                                   III

    And all my aims are lost,
      And all my striving vain,--
    Wilt Thou refresh my soul,
      And visit me again?

                                   IV

    'Tis morning when the sun
      Upon the mountain glows;
    'Tis evening when the shade
      Upon the valleys grows;

                                    V

    And when Thy face I see,
      'Tis morning in my soul;
    But when Thou turn'st away,
      The evening shadows roll.

                                   VI

    And night comes on apace,
      And all forlorn I sigh;--
    O, bid the morning dawn,
      Look on me lest I die.

                                   VII

    O, Thou art good and kind,
      And full of tender grace;
    Now make Thy countenance to shine,
      And let me see Thy face.




                                    I

    O Lord of Life, when mortals call,
    And freedom seek from earthly thrall,
    Hear Thou in heaven and save us all,
                  In mercy, Lord.

                                   II

    O Full of Mercy, when we groan,
    Because of sin our spirits own,
    Hear, who for sinners didst atone,
                  In mercy, Lord.

                                   III

    O Full of Pity, when we bear
    To Thy blest feet our cankering care,
    Take of our weary load a share,
                  In mercy, Lord.

                                   IV

    O Full of Grace! when sufferers tell
    The grief Thou knowest, Lord, so well,
    Come, with the broken-hearted dwell,
                  In mercy, Lord.

                                    V

    When, lured by hope, our spirits rise
    To where Thou beckonest from the skies;
    Then, be eternal life the prize,
                  In mercy, Lord.




                                    I

    I wandered sore distressed,
      All weary and forlorn;
    I had no place to rest,
      Of all my pleasures shorn,--
    My thirsting spirit sighed,
    And in the desert cried.

                                   II

    The Shepherd heard my cry,
      Who came His flock to find,
    And drew in mercy nigh,
      For He is wondrous kind;
    His winning voice awoke
    My spirit as He spoke.

                                   III

    He bade my wandering cease,
      And gave my heart a home,
    That, from the bliss of peace,
      I might no longer roam;--
    He gave me hope for fears,
    And lasting joy for tears.




                                    I

    God sent me to the desert wild,
      Where all is parched with endless drought,
    For I had grown a wayward child,
      And now my sin had found me out;--
    He sent me to the desert drear,
    And, ah! my soul was charged with fear.

                                   II

    I wandered where the brooks were dry,
      While memory wove a dismal song,
    And to my God I raised my cry,
      And sang my dirge the whole day long;--
    For I was in the desert drear,
    And, ah! my soul was charged with fear.

                                   III

    The God of grace His comfort sent,
      And soon the desert blossomed fair,
    While round my path, where'er I went,
      Sweet flowers poured forth their odours rare;--
    He sent me to a desert drear,
    Now flowers and luscious fruits appear.

                                   IV

    O God, when by the path of sin,
      We reach the land where famine reigns;
    And dread possesses all within,
      And all around are woes and pains;--
    Then make the world a desert rare,
    Of joys upspringing everywhere.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hymns from the East, by John Brownlie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYMNS FROM THE EAST ***

***** This file should be named 28479-8.txt or 28479-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/4/7/28479/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and Charles Coulston

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
