The Project Gutenberg EBook of Strong Souls, by Charles Beard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Strong Souls
       A Sermon

Author: Charles Beard

Release Date: January 29, 2007 [EBook #20478]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRONG SOULS ***




Produced by Tamise Totterdell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





STRONG SOULS:

A SERMON,

PREACHED IN

RENSHAW STREET CHAPEL, LIVERPOOL,

ON

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1882.

BY

CHARLES BEARD, B.A.

PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.




LONDON:
PRINTED BY C. GREEN AND SON,
178, STRAND.




In Memory of

ELIZABETH RATHBONE,

OF GREENBANK,

AGED 92.




STRONG SOULS.

JOHN x. 10 p. (Revised Version):

"I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly."


Life is a gift of very unequal distribution. I am not speaking merely of
length of life, though that is an important element in the case: there
may be sad and quiet years which do not count: we have known existences
which crept on in one dull round, from petty pleasure to petty pleasure,
from monotonous occupation to monotonous occupation, never roused to
storm by any noble passion, never thrilled by an electric touch of
sympathy. Some lives are complete within narrow limits: in the few
years which are all they have, they ripen into perfect sweetness, or
expend themselves in such a flash of heroism, as would make subsequent
days, were they given, mean and poor by contrast. What shall we say of
that nameless engine-driver in America, who last week, measuring his own
life against six hundred more, rushed through the flames and saved them?
Dead of his glorious wounds, who would dare to pity him, or to think his
end untimely? Life may be measured by its breadth as well as by its
length: by the number of its intellectual points of contact with
humanity, by the width of its sympathies, the largeness of its hopes.
Still more, there is a quality of intensity in which lives differ: some
live more in a week than others in a year: it is not that they are
consuming themselves under stress of circumstance or in agony of
passion, but that their fibre is stronger, their central flame
brighter, their power of endurance larger. This inequality of gift may
be a religious difficulty, but it fits in with the whole economy of
Nature, who is a Mother at once bountiful and prodigal, and while
careful of the type, careless of the individual life; bidding one soul
but open unconscious eyes upon the world and close them again, while
another moves through the slow changes of ninety years. But it is easier
to understand when we remember that a just God asks account only of what
He has given. Within the narrowest fate is yet room to round off the
perfect sphere. Of the lily that blooms to-day and fades to-morrow, He
demands only that it shall be sweet and beautiful in its season.

Energy is largely, though perhaps not wholly, a physical quality. It
comes of a certain superb vitality, a power of unconscious living,
well-strung nerves, a quickly-working brain. I know the wonders which an
eager will and a keen conscience can work, with no better instrument
than a frail body, always full of languors, always accessible to pain;
and I bow before them in glad reverence, as tokens of the spirit's
victory over the flesh. But this, though undoubtedly from a moral point
of view not inferior, is not the same thing as the easy swing of mind
and body which is not only always equal to its work, but finds its
keenest delight in strenuous efforts and long-drawn toils, which would
hopelessly overtax weaker men. And there is an obvious connection
between this kind of vitality and that which shows itself in life
prolonged far beyond the usual limits. Men and women do not live the
longer for sparing themselves, even were long life under such
conditions worth having. I admit the wearing power of fretting anxiety,
of sorrow that saps the springs of life, of labour pushed to contempt of
the physical and moral conditions of existence; but honest work for an
honest purpose, the full exercise of all the powers from day to day, the
steady strain of faculties that were meant for strain and which rust in
disuse, never hurt any one yet. But the temptations of exuberant
vitality are all, if not to over-strain, yet to a certain hardness, and
arrogance, and disregard of eternal law. It is not complimentary to
human nature to note that perfectly healthy people, whom nothing tries
and who are ignorant of pain, are seldom tolerant, tender, sympathetic,
with lives that in one important constituent of happiness are far
beneath their own. Upon such the shadow of the infinite seems to fall
but seldom. They succeed in so many things that they undertake, as to
escape the sense of the impassable barriers that hem in all human
existence. The very fact of living is so much to them, that they fail to
see the meaning of the limitations, the shortcomings, the
disappointments of life. They feel no abiding smart of a thorn in the
flesh, and so are never forced back upon a higher strength than their
own. And yet it is when a nature richly endowed with all the elements of
vitality, and living from the first, living to the last, devotes itself
to the highest aims and is supported by the highest helps, that we see
what I will venture to call the finest triumph of grace. Or if the word
triumph seem to imply a struggle, which is not always necessary, and
difficulties which may never have vexed the development of a vigorous
life, I will describe the result as the richest and sweetest harvest of
the Spirit's husbandry. Great things can be accomplished only by great
natures, and even then by the help and under the eye of God.

"I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly." Life is
the characteristic word of the great spiritual Gospel from which my text
is taken. And no word can penetrate more deeply into the secret of
Christ than this does. He was the sweetest, the most persuasive of moral
teachers; but ethical principles and precepts are the common possession
of humanity; and that in which Christ is pre-eminent over all sages is
not so much that he gives us new matter of obedience, as that he infuses
into us a fresh power to obey. I fail to see that he anywhere presents
to us a dogmatic theological system: I do not believe that his apostles
succeed in throwing his teaching into this shape. But supposing that it
were so, as so many men believe, life is still the ultimate object, the
life of God in man, the life which quickens all faculties, and casts off
all impurities, and rises into a higher stage of vitality from year to
year. "I am the way, the truth, and the life." "I came that they may
have life, and may have it abundantly." "The bread of God is he which
cometh down from heaven and giveth life unto the world." "I am the bread
of life." So, too, the author of this Gospel, speaking in his own
person: "In him was life, and the life was the light of men." So Paul:
"The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus." "Your life is hid with
Christ in God." And last of all, in that antithesis so full of
instruction: "The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam
was made a life-giving spirit."

Adam's children we all are in the possession of a physical nature full
of possibilities of moral good and evil: the question for us is, shall
we be Christ's children too? I cannot assert that this is the only line
in which we can inherit life: heroes and saints before and apart from
Christ would rise up to rebuke me if I did. God's tender mercies, even
of the most intimately spiritual kind, are over all His human children.
But it is the line in which we naturally stand; and to stand in it I
count the highest privilege of our humanity. I will lay down no
conditions of salvation where I believe Christ has laid none down: I
will not attempt to compare his disciples with those of other masters: I
am content to know that here is a fountain of living waters, which flows
for us, and at which those who drink shall never thirst again. I will
not even try to define the process by which a strong, bright,
master-soul pours itself into poorer and narrower spirits, for I rest
joyfully in the certain knowledge that it is so. Is it not possible to
forget the fact too much in discussing the rationale of the process? "In
the last day, that great day of the feast," when the silver trumpets
were sounding, and the priests were bearing up to the temple court the
water which they had drawn from that brook Siloam which "flows fast by
the oracles of God," "Jesus stood and cried, 'If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink. He that believeth in me, as the Scripture has
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.'" There is the
whole secret. All true life is contagious. Not the dull and dead, but
only the living, can quicken. Fragrance makes fragrant: sweetness
imparts sweetness: strength begets strength. How many of us have
learned integrity from an upright father, and breathed in the confidence
of faith at a mother's knee? They gave because they had; and Christ was
their fountain-head.

The religious life, to some imaginations, presents itself as inclining
largely to the side of the passive and the negative. It is abstinence
from evil quite as much as eager realization of good. On this view, an
air of cloistered sanctity hangs about it: it is full of prayers and
mystic raptures: its eye is fixed within, or, if not within, only upon
God. It is sweet rather than strong: more meditative than active: a
faint fragrance exhales from it, but it does not forget itself to
grapple with wrong, or descend upon the arena of human woes and
oppressions, full of the heat of battle, or, with a careless heroism,
spend itself to the last for the kingdom of God. I do not deny the
reality and the sweetness of this type of goodness; but it is not the
only type, and much less the type produced by the contagion of Christ
upon a strong nature and an eager vitality. I have said that the
abundant physical gift of life may carry with it a certain temptation to
an unsympathizing self-sufficiency. It is difficult not to be proud of
an untiring energy, and faculties that are always abreast of the demands
made upon them, and an immunity from pain and languor which is like a
double portion of strength. But what if all these things are only a
larger gift to lay upon the altar of humanity? What if strength be used
only to follow with swifter stride in the self-denying footsteps of
Christ? What if the sense of joyous energy only fortifies the soul
against disappointment, and makes light of hindrances, and enables
patience to have her perfect work? We envy the strong because we think
they can do more than we, and enjoy more than we--in a word, because
they live more than we. Let us envy them, if at all, because they have
more than we to give to God and men, and answer with a fuller and more
eager impulse to the breath of inspiration, and can throw a less
infinitesimal weight into the scale of the Divine purpose.

Such lives, believe me, are eminently happy. They have their full
measure of sensibility, and therefore their full share of trouble too.
What sorrows come to all, do not spare them; and it is the quickly
throbbing heart that is the tenderest. They cannot take life with dull
acquiescence, being neither keenly glad nor greatly sorry: to them, its
brightness is like opening Paradise; its gloom, a very valley of the
Shadow of Death. And as they emerge out of the narrowness of their
personal lot, to go down into the ringing battle of the world, they
encounter blows and bruises which more selfish lives are able to avoid;
they lay bare their hearts to sorrows not their own, and are stricken
with the disappointments of mankind. Was it not a part of the secret of
Christ that his affections were so wide, his sympathies so keen, his
identification with humanity so complete, that sin not his own cast a
shadow upon him almost like remorse, and all his tears were for others'
sorrows? So is it with his strong and eager disciples: they lay their
breast against the thorn, and would not have it otherwise. And yet they
are happy. If it be happiness to have life filled to the brim with
occupation that never tires and always brings with it its own reward: to
be conscious of the easy movement of power, the strong putting forth of
faculty: to be secure against disappointment in reliance upon the
righteous purposes of God, which must prevail at last: to have a sure
escape from personal grief in the largeness of human sympathy and the
vista of universal hope: to feel, as life wears away, no disenchantment
of purpose, no stealing languor upon the will, no freezing chill upon
the heart, but only a passionate desire to live to the last in the full
glow of service, and an absolute completeness of self-renunciation--then
are these strong souls happy. They cannot but find life good, because
everywhere in it they feel the touch of God's hand; they see the skirt
of Christ's garment as he goes before them in the way.

"He that believeth on me, out of him shall flow rivers of living water."
The privilege of giving life is not Christ's alone, though still his in
the first instance and the greatest degree: it is shared by all who are
truly one with him in spirit and in work. And I am not sure that a large
part of the value to humanity of these bright and strong souls does not
lie in the inspiration which goes out of them. The weaker ones are
always apt to take life in too low a key. They are easily daunted: they
resign themselves, as they say, to the inevitable: they have too keen a
sense of evils to be overborne and difficulties to be confronted: they
learn to distrust, if not to smile at, the ideal, to call acquiescence
common sense, and cowardice prudence. And upon them the presence of a
strong soul, with its carelessness of toil, its contempt of danger, its
faith in the better things that shall be, its trust in God, its generous
self-abandonment to men, passes like a breath of inspiration, bringing
shame at once and strength with it. Before such an one, not only does
selfishness hold its peace, and cynicism forget to be sarcastic, but a
new vigour steals into the irresolute will, a fresh power of
self-sacrifice takes possession of the heart. The kingdom of God no
longer seems a dimly glorious dream, far off in a new strange world, but
an ideal that may be realized, here, upon the ruins of innumerable
failures, now, in the depths of living human hearts. It is as if God
himself were somewhat nearer to us: a strong faith seems to draw Him
down from heaven, to build His tabernacle among men: or if this cannot
be, and we know that He is always round about us, at least the mists
scatter, the clouds clear away, and we catch a glimpse of His unceasing
activity, of His eternal rest. I cling to the thought that at some time
or other the soul of every one of His children is in direct
communication with Him; but for the most part He speaks to us by other
human lips, and strong, clear, white lives are the ladder by which we
climb to Him. So down the ages we trace the golden thread of the
succession of Saints, Christ the first, afterwards they that are his, in
turn receiving, in turn giving life, blessed and blessing--till at last
the kingdom comes.

       *       *       *       *       *

You know of whom I have been speaking, friends and fellow-worshippers:
though I have named no name, you have interpreted my meaning, you have
read between my lines. And now that we are about to part, with regretful
love and honour freely paid, with the oldest of those who have loved
this place,--and, in parting with her, to bid good-bye for ever to a
generation of pious men and women who in their day served God and
wrought righteousness,--I have one last appeal to make. And I make it
far less to the middle-aged, whose habits are fixed, whose principles
chosen, and who have taken a course in life which they will not lightly
abandon, than to the young, whose nature is yet plastic, and who may
make of their existence what they will. I ask them, Is the life which I
have tried to describe worth living? or is there any other method by
which they think the highest objects of existence can be more completely
attained? Is there any finer discipline for their powers than the
service of God, any nobler education than the fellowship of Christ? I do
not plead with them for allegiance to any particular form of
Christianity, though we have a right to rejoice in the strength and
sweetness of our own Saints, and I might argue that the faith which
issues in such fruit of holy living cannot be without its just claim to
respect. But my interest is at once deeper and wider than this: I plead
for Christianity, I plead for Religion; for the awe of God, for the love
of Christ, for the service of man. We are falling upon careless times,
when the world is too much with us, and the love of ease seduces us, and
we flit--thinking, God help us! that it is pleasure--from one facile
excitement, from one selfish gratification, to another. We live in a
sceptical age, when knowledge and faith find it hard to come to terms,
and there is always an excuse for disbelieving truths which startle the
soul into seriousness and make a painful demand upon the will. But
whatever else is false, one thing remains true--that the service of God
is strength and peace and freedom. Christ still holds the secret of
life: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up
his cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it,
and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." Amen.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Strong Souls, by Charles Beard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STRONG SOULS ***

***** This file should be named 20478.txt or 20478.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/4/7/20478/

Produced by Tamise Totterdell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
