Project Gutenberg's The Mormon Prophet and His Harem, by C.V. Waite

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mormon Prophet and His Harem

Author: C.V. Waite

Release Date: December 12, 2013 [EBook #44414]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORMON PROPHET AND HIS HAREM ***




Produced by Heiko Evermann, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Google Print)







Transcriber's Notes: Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been
left as in the original. Words in italics in the original are
surrounded by _underscores_. A row of asterisks represents a thought
break. Ellipses match the original. A complete list of corrections
follows the text.




     THE MORMON PROPHET

     AND

     HIS HAREM;

     OR,

     AN AUTHENTIC HISTORY OF BRIGHAM YOUNG,

     HIS

     NUMEROUS WIVES AND CHILDREN.


     BY

     MRS. C. V. WAITE.


                ----"And with a piece of scripture,
          Tell them,--that God bids us do good for evil.
            And thus I clothe my naked villainy
          With old odd ends, stol'n forth of Holy Writ,
            And _seem_ a saint, when most I play the devil."


     FOURTH EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED.

     CAMBRIDGE:
     Printed for the Author; and Sold by Subscription.
     J. S. GOODMAN AND COMPANY,
     5 CUSTOM HOUSE PLACE, CHICAGO.
     1867.




     Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866, by
     CATHARINE V. WAITE,
     In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States for the Second
     Judicial District of the Territory of Idaho.


     RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
     STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
     H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




PREFACE.


No apology is offered for presenting to the public the only authentic
account of Brigham Young, of his polygamous family, and of that
complicated and incongruous system of social and political machinery,
called Mormonism.

The only form of religion in this country which refuses to conform
either to the spirit of progress and improvement and enlightened
humanity which characterizes the age in which we live, or to our laws
and the genius of our free institutions,--drawing constantly from
foreign countries hosts of votaries, impelled hither _not_ by a love of
republicanism, but rather by a desire to exchange a political for a
religious monarchy,--is Mormonism, which presents an antagonism to our
Government, and can scarcely fail to result in national trouble.

The elements of a second rebellion are in active progress in Utah, and,
as in the case of the slavery rebellion, the great danger lies in
failing to place a proper estimate upon the power of those elements for
mischief, and to take the proper precautions in time. Religious
fanaticism is more active, and, when hostile, more dangerous, than
political ambition; hence the arrogant and intolerant spirit, and the
bitter hostility of the Mormons, are more worthy the serious attention
of our statesmen than would be the opposition of so many mere political
traitors.

Again; their power for mischief is much increased by the position they
occupy upon the great thoroughfare between the eastern and western
portions of our country.

It is with the view of calling the attention of the Government and of
the people of the country to the dangerous character of this monarchy
growing up in the midst of the Republic, that the political history of
Utah has been written.

The chief interest of the work, however, with a large class of readers,
will doubtless consist in the information it contains, relative to the
family and social relations of the celebrated Mormon leader. These, and
all other facts contained in this volume, may be relied upon as true,
and many of them are now published for the first time.

The subject of polygamy is treated thoroughly, and as dispassionately as
the writer's utter abhorrence of the system will permit. A residence of
two years in the midst of this state of society, could not fail to
afford me a tolerably good view of its inside workings, and this view I
have presented to my readers.

Some of the facts narrated in this volume have been furnished by persons
in Salt Lake, who are thoroughly conversant with them; in some cases, by
persons who have long been in the service of Young, and know whereof
they relate. While I am not at liberty to mention their names, I take
this opportunity to return them my thanks for such valuable information.

This book is believed to be a desideratum demanded by the social and
political well-being of the country, and as such it is presented to the
consideration of the people of this country, and especially to my own
sex, who are deeply interested in preventing the framework of our social
system from being broken up and superseded by the customs and maxims of
the worst ages of barbarism.

To the suffering women of Utah, I especially dedicate this result of my
labors in their behalf; and I am not without hope that many of them may,
upon a perusal of its pages, be induced to retrace their steps, and
rescue themselves from the snares of the religious impostors now seeking
their destruction.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.

  EARLY HISTORY OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.
                                                                  PAGE
     The Birth and Parentage of Brigham Young.--His Brothers and
     Sisters.--He embraces Mormonism, and becomes a Leader.--Is
     appointed President of the Twelve, and finally placed at the
     Head of the Church, to succeed Joseph Smith.--Establishes the
     Mormons in Salt-Lake.                                           1


  CHAPTER II.

  POLITICAL.

     Brigham as Governor of Utah and Superintendent of Indian
     Affairs.--Formation of the State of Deseret.--Proceedings of
     the Utah Legislature.--Brigham's Proclamations.--Difficulties
     with the Federal Officers.--Proceedings of the First Judges.   11


  CHAPTER III.

  POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.

     Colonel Steptoe and Brigham Young.--Brigham reappointed
     Governor.--John F. Kinney.--Western Utah, or Nevada.--Letter
     of Hon. James M. Crane.--Judge Stiles and the Records.--W. W.
     Drummond.                                                      26


  CHAPTER IV.

  POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.--THE MORMON WAR.

     Report of the Secretary of War.--Proclamation of Governor
     Brigham Young, declaring Martial Law.--Correspondence.--Sermons
     of Young and Kimball.--Proclamation of Governor Cumming.--His
     Echo Canyon Adventures.--Col. Kane.--The Mormons leave Salt
     Lake.--Commissioners appointed by the President.--Peace
     restored.                                                      40


  CHAPTER V.

  POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.

     The Mountain Meadow Massacre, and other Crimes of the Mormons.
     --Attempts to bring the Perpetrators to Justice.--Doings of
     Judge Cradlebaugh.--Governor Cumming and the Military Officers.
     --Judge Sinclair's Court.--Governor Dawson and his Misfortunes.
     --New Governor and Associate Justices appointed.               60


  CHAPTER VI.

  POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.

     Arrival of the New Federal Officers, in July, 1862.--Colonel
     Connor arrives with his Command.--The Message of Governor
     Harding.--The Mormons Indignant.--The Legislature refuse to
     print the Message.--Action of the United States Senate
     thereon.--Forgery in the Mormon Legislature.--Bill of Judge
     Waite to amend the Organic Act.--Indignation Meeting.--
     Governor Harding and Judges Waite and Drake requested to
     leave the Territory.--Their Replies.--Brigham.--The Federal
     Officers.                                                      78


  CHAPTER VII.

  BRIGHAM AS PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH.

     Organization of the Mormon Church.--Functions of the various
     Officers.--The Two Priesthoods.--Mode of treating Dissenters
     or "Apostates."--Divisions in the Church.--The Gladdenites.--
     History of the Morrisites.--The Josephites.--Return to the
     True Mormon Church.                                           114


  CHAPTER VIII.

  BRIGHAM AS TRUSTEE IN TRUST FOR THE CHURCH.

     Nature of the Trusteeship.--The Tithing System.--Brigham's
     Private Speculations.--The Emigration Fund.--The Hand-Cart
     Company.                                                      132


  CHAPTER IX.

  BRIGHAM AS PROPHET, SEER, AND REVELATOR.

     Brigham's Position as Head of the Church.--Mormon Theology.--
     Brigham's Theology, or Utah Mormonism.--Adam as God.--Brigham
     Young as God.--Human Sacrifice.--Introduction of Polygamy.--
     Polygamy no part of the Original Mormon Religion.--The
     Revelation, or Celestial Marriage.--The Ceremony of Sealing.--
     Consequences and Incidents of the Doctrine.--Incest.--Summary
     of the Mormon Religion.                                       153


  CHAPTER X.

  BRIGHAM AS LORD OF THE HAREM.

     Brigham's Block.--The Lion House.--The Tithing-House.--The
     Bee-Hive House, Office, etc.--Description of the Harem.--Plan,
     Rooms, etc., of each Floor, and who occupies the same.--Life
     at the Harem.--Brigham at Home.                               177


  CHAPTER XI.

  THE WIVES OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.

     Mary Ann Angell Young, the first wife.--Her Family.--Lucy
     Decker Seely, the first wife in Plurality.--More of "My
     Women": Clara Decker, Harriet Cook, Lucy Bigelow, Twiss,
     Martha Bowker, Harriet Barney, Eliza Burgess, Ellen Rockwood,
     Susan Snively, Jemima Angell, Margaret Alley, Margaret Pierce,
     Mrs. Hampton, Mary Bigelow, Emeline Free, or the Light of the
     Harem.--Proxy Women: Miss Eliza Roxy Snow, Zina D. Huntington,
     Amelia Partridge, Mrs. Cobb, Mrs. Smith, Clara Chase, the
     Maniac.--Amelia, the last love.--The Prophet in love the
     Thirtieth Time.                                               191


  CHAPTER XII.

  POLYGAMY.

     Condition of Woman among various Heathen Nations.--Influence
     of Christianity.--Mormonism and Woman.--Brigham offers to set
     the Women Free.--Arguments in Favor of Polygamy.--The Argument
     against it.--Abraham and Sarah.--Appeal to Mormon  Women.--
     Their Unhappy Condition.--Evil Effects of the System.--
     Illustrations.                                                215


  CHAPTER XIII.

  THE ENDOWMENT.

     A Mormon Drama.                                               244


  CHAPTER XIV.

  BRIGHAM AS GRAND ARCHEE OF THE ORDER OF THE GODS.

     Organization of the Order of the Archees.--The Grand Archees.
     --The Archees.--The Danites.--Organization of Brigham's
     Celestial Kingdom.--Doctrine of Adoption.--Case of  Dr.
     Sprague.--Description of Leading Danites: Bill Hickman, Porter
     Rockwell, Robert T. Burton.--Affidavits.                      261


  CHAPTER XV.

  RECENT EVENTS.--CONCLUSION.

     Personal Appearance and Character of Brigham Young.--His
     Aims and Purposes.--Solution of the Mormon Question.--New
     Complications.--Military Reviews of Mormons.--Governor Durkee.
     --Counteracting Influences.--The Mines and Miners.--Rev.
     Norman McLeod.--The "Salt Lake Vedette."--Administration of
     General Connor.--Murder of Brassfield.--Order of Young for the
     Expulsion of the Gentiles.--Order for the Murder of Eighty
     Men.--Difficulties concerning the Public Lands.--Murder of Dr.
     Robinson.--The Gentiles flee in Terror.--The Government fails
     to protect its Officers and Citizens.--The Hero of Three Wars
     of the Republic hunted through the Territory.--Rev. Mr. McLeod
     warned not to return to Utah.--The Reign of Terror commenced.
     --The Gentiles call for Help.                                 273




THE MORMON PROPHET




CHAPTER I.

EARLY HISTORY OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.

     The Birth and Parentage of Brigham Young.--His Brothers and
     Sisters.--He embraces Mormonism, and becomes a Leader.--Is
     appointed President of the Twelve, and finally placed at the
     Head of the Church to succeed Joseph Smith.--Establishes the
     Mormons in Salt Lake Valley.


Brigham Young was born at Whitingham, Windham County, Vermont, June 1,
1801. A short sketch of the family of this noted adventurer may not be
uninteresting. The following extract is from his autobiography:--

     "My grandfather, John Young, was a physician and surgeon in
     the French and Indian war.

     "My father, John Young, was born March 7, 1763, in Hopkinton,
     Middlesex County, Massachusetts. He was very circumspect,
     exemplary and religious, and was, from an early period of his
     life, a member of the Methodist Church. At the age of sixteen
     he enlisted in the American Revolutionary War, and served
     under General Washington; he was in three campaigns in his own
     native State, and in New Jersey. In the year 1785 he married
     Nabby Howe, daughter of Phineas and Susannah, whose maiden
     name was Goddard.

     "In January, 1801, he moved from Hopkinton to Whitingham,
     Windham County, Vermont, where he remained for three years,
     opening new farms.

     "He moved from Vermont to Sherburn, Chenango County, New York,
     in 1804, where he followed farming, enduring many hardships
     and privations, incidental to new settlements.

     "My father's family consisted of five sons and six daughters,
     viz.:--

     "Nancy, born in Hopkinton, Middlesex County, Massachusetts,
     August 6, 1786.

     "Fanny, born in the same place, November 8, 1787.

     "Rhoda, born in Platauva District, New York, September 10,
     1789.

     "John, born in Hopkinton, Middlesex County, Massachusetts, May
     22, 1791.

     "Nabby, born in same place, April 23, 1793.

     "Susannah, born in same place, June 7, 1795.

     "Joseph, born in the same place, April 7, 1797.

     "Phineas Howe, born in same place, February 16, 1799.

     "Brigham, born in Whitingham, Windham County, Vermont, June 1,
     1801.

     "Louisa, born in Sherburn, Chenango County, New York,
     September 25, 1804.

     "Lorenzo Dow, born in same place, October 19, 1807."

It is worthy of remark, that all of Brigham's family became Mormons. His
father, John Young, was constituted first patriarch of the church, and
died at Quincy, Illinois, October 12, 1839. His brothers are all at Salt
Lake, and are the devoted followers and satellites of the Prophet.

Through the plurality system, the Youngs have formed connections so
numerous, that almost half the people at Salt Lake are in some way
related to the ruling dynasty. This is striking evidence of Brigham's
ingenuity in consolidating and perpetuating his power.

His early life was that of a farmer's son, but he afterwards acquired
the trade of a painter and glazier, which he followed until his
conversion to Mormonism. In 1832, being then thirty-one years of age, he
heard and embraced this new religion. He was convinced by Samuel H.
Smith, brother to the prophet Joseph, and was baptized by Eleazer
Miller, now living at Salt Lake.

Brigham "gathered" with the saints, at Kirtland, Ohio, and soon became
intimate with Joseph Smith. He was ordained an elder, and began
preaching. His shrewdness, and almost intuitive knowledge of character,
soon attracted the attention of his brethren, and gave him influence and
position in this weak and despised church. They recognized in him a man
born to rule and lead the masses. They were attracted by his strong,
electrical will; and from that time his power in the church has been
undisputed.

In 1835, on the 14th of February, at Kirtland, Brigham Young was
ordained one of the newly-organized quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Armed
with his new power, and fired with a zeal worthy of a better cause, he
went forth, and preached and proselyted with marked success.

Thomas B. Marsh having apostatized, Brigham was chosen to succeed him,
as President of the Twelve Apostles, in 1836.

Then came the dark days of Mormonism. Many of the prominent men of the
church apostatized. The saints were driven from Kirtland. Smith fled to
save his life; Brigham accompanied him, and after many hair-breadth
escapes, many trials and hardships, they again planted a new colony, and
settled in Far West, Missouri.

But the saints were destined again to endure persecution for their
faith. In a few years they were driven from Missouri, seeking a home
this time in Illinois. During all this time Brigham stood firm,
counselling and directing his brethren, and, like the rock amid the
storms, gathering fresh power of resistance as the waves of persecution
increased in fury.

In 1839 he was appointed, with others, to "open up the gospel" to the
inhabitants of the British Isles. They landed at Liverpool on the 6th of
April, 1840, and immediately commenced preaching. Brigham superintended
affairs, issued an edition of the "Book of Mormon," and commenced the
publication of the "Millennial Star," a periodical still living. In 1841
he sailed for New York, having shipped seven hundred and sixty-nine of
the faithful, and leaving many churches, with organizations completed.

Brigham was cordially received by Smith, and the saints generally, who
appreciated and acknowledged his services, and it was evident that his
influence and fame were rapidly increasing.

In 1844 the whole aspect of affairs was changed. Smith was shot, Nauvoo
threatened by a mob, and the Twelve Apostles scattered. Sidney Rigdon
assumed the Presidency, he being Smith's first counsellor. Divisions
were numerous, and the church was in imminent danger of falling into
hopeless ruin.

Brigham, with true Napoleonic foresight, saw his opportunity, and was
not slow to improve it. He came hurriedly to Nauvoo, denounced Rigdon as
an impostor and his revelations as emanations from the Devil, cut off
both him and his adherents from the true church, cursed Rigdon, and
"handed him over to the buffetings of Satan for a thousand years," and
was himself elected President by an overwhelming majority.

This exhibition of energy silenced all opposition. Those who did not
love, feared him; and all suffered themselves to be led, because they
dared not resist, a man so determined to rule.

Thus much accomplished, and visions of future power and aggrandizement,
perchance of temporal sovereignty, floated through the brain of this
modern Mohammed. He dreamed of the kingly robe and the jewelled crown in
some far-off valley of the Rocky Mountains, where gentiles or their laws
could not annoy the saints, or hinder the normal development of
Mormonism. How and in what manner these dreams came so near fulfilment,
will be seen as the reader peruses these pages.

But he did not lose sight of the present in these glowing visions of the
future. He completed the Temple, the Mansion-House was in a forward
state, Nauvoo was increasing rapidly, and with it his power and
popularity.

Brigham, however, with his usual foresight, saw the storm arising. The
saints were again to be driven. So he hurried the people through their
endowments, bound them to him by oaths which made them shudder to
recall, and still, by an art equal to that of Loyola, so inwound himself
in their affections that they loved and reverenced him the more. He
aroused their deepest hatred toward the "gentiles;" wrought upon their
pride, ambition, and revenge, until they were ready to do and dare
anything for their religion and their leader. When his power was thus
fully established, he revealed to them "the will of the Lord concerning
them." They must leave their beautiful Nauvoo, their sacred temple,
their altars and their homes, and follow him as the Moses of the new
dispensation, and he would find for them a Canaan, a land flowing with
milk and honey, where the gentiles should never come. This was a trial
of their faith. Should they yield to the temptation, and, hankering
after the flesh-pots of Egypt, lose their birthright? They wept, they
hesitated, but the strong will and iron nerve of Brigham conquered, and
they obeyed.

In February, 1846, they crossed the Mississippi on the ice, and leaving
home, property, and kindred, they took up their line of march for the
land of the setting sun. As the long trains rolled by, Brigham
comforted, counselled, and blessed the weeping emigrants. He told them
of the land where they should worship "under their own vine and
fig-tree, with none to molest or make them afraid." Alas for their
fainting hearts! Little did they suspect that the cruel ambition of
their God-man would lead them to a land as barren as the Desert of
Sahara, and as devoid of vegetation as the Rock of Gibraltar.

They established themselves in winter-quarters at Kanesville, now
Council Bluffs, Iowa. Here new difficulties arose. The church was poor,
and means were needed to supply the current necessities, as well as to
defray the expense of the journey to their new Zion. Various schemes
were resorted to for the purpose of "raising the wind." A band of
Danites was sent out to steal cattle and horses, and convey them beyond
the jurisdiction of the State authorities. Others were detailed to make
and circulate counterfeit money. While these little speculations were
progressing, Brigham was trying his hand at diplomacy. He is reported to
have sent James C. Little to Washington, to request the privilege of
raising a battalion of Mormons for the Mexican war.

This movement was prompted by several considerations. First, it was
thought necessary for the safety of the church that they should make a
show of patriotism; secondly, these soldiers would draw pay from the
government, which Brigham could appropriate; and thirdly, they were to
be discharged in Mexico, where, at that time, he designed to found his
theocratic monarchy. It has been asserted by some persons that Brigham
received $20,000 from the government, as a bonus, for raising the
battalion; but I find no evidence to substantiate this assertion. The
following affidavit will show in what manner he was benefited by this
transaction:--

     "TERRITORY OF UTAH,    }
       GREAT SALT LAKE CITY.}

     "Alexander McCord says that he was mustered into the U. S.
     service in the Mormon Battalion, August 16th, 1846. That an
     advance of $42.50 was issued by the government per man,
     ostensibly for the purpose of clothing the command, making a
     total to the battalion of $22,500. That this amount was
     received by Parley P. Pratt, and forwarded by him to Brigham
     Young, who proffered to apply the same for the benefit of the
     families of the battalion, who were in a state of destitution.
     That he, Brigham, informed them he would send to St Louis,
     purchase goods, and deal them out for the benefit of said
     families at wholesale prices. Also made a covenant with them,
     calling upon God and angels to witness the same. That he would
     transport their families to them in Mexico, now California,
     even if he had to leave his own family behind; also would
     provide houses for them. That in his public address to the
     battalion, in relation to this subject, he strongly urged the
     advantages that would accrue to his church by their compliance
     with this requisition, making it entirely a matter of
     self-interest, with the sole view of accomplishing certain
     private ends; and not in anywise appealing to their loyalty,
     or setting forth the necessity of rendering assistance to the
     parent government.

     "That he did not fulfil the promises he had made. Some few
     articles were served out to their families at enormous
     rates,--his (McCord's) wife having to take sole-leather, for
     which she had no use. That when their wives appealed to him,
     expecting in good faith to receive according to promise, he
     laughed, mimicked, and made fun of them on the public stand;
     showing how they cried and whined. On the arrival of the money
     at Council Bluffs, some of the women, being entirely
     destitute, desired their husbands' share, and some cried for
     the want of it. Young ridiculed them, and told them if they
     insisted upon having the money, they must not look to him for
     support or protection; thus compelling them to accept of his
     terms.

     "Two agents, John D. Lee and Major Egan, followed the
     battalion to Santa Fe, and there received a draft on
     Leavenworth, for the first month and a half's pay, with the
     understanding from the soldiers it was to be paid to their
     families. The authorities of the church drew the amount, and
     then took out the tithing for themselves, one tenth.

     "One of the inducements held out by the government, was to
     discharge them, with their arms in Mexico, which was done.
     When he (McCord) arrived in Utah, October, 1847, he found his
     family not here, and was prevented by the church authorities
     from going after them; and was not permitted to leave until
     January following. When he reached his family at Winter
     Quarters, Missouri, he found no preparations made for their
     being forwarded to Utah, and there were none made afterwards.

     (Signed,) ALEXANDER MCCORD.

     "_Territory of Utah, ss._

     "Alexander McCord, being duly sworn, says that the facts set
     forth in the foregoing statement by him subscribed, of his own
     knowledge, are true, and those set forth upon information and
     belief he verily believes to be true.

     (Signed,) ALEXANDER MCCORD."

     "Subscribed and sworn to before me, this 4th day of May, 1864.

     "THOMAS J. DRAKE,

     "_Associate Justice U. S. Sup. Court, Utah_."

By this operation, Brigham must have realized the neat little sum of
$10,000. This enabled him to fit out an expedition to explore the
country west of the Rocky Mountains. Accordingly, in the spring of 1847,
with one hundred and forty-three of his tried adherents, he made the
journey to Salt Lake, where they arrived July 24, 1847. A colony was at
once established, and a part of the number left to commence farming
operations. Brigham, with the remainder, returned to "Winter Quarters."
Here he found the people on the point of starvation, while fevers and
the cholera were rapidly thinning their ranks. Brigham at once commenced
alleviating their suffering, and in the excess of their gratitude, these
poor deluded creatures did not see that he was the cause of all their
misery.

Young was now ready to enact another scene in this Mormon drama. He was
ruling the church in the capacity of President of the Twelve Apostles.
He desired greater power; he wished to occupy the place of the Prophet
of the Lord. This was the more difficult, as the people venerated the
memory of Joseph Smith, sanctified as it was by the remembrance of his
cruel and untimely death. Brigham knew well the extent of this feeling,
and that it would be impossible to supplant Joseph in their affections,
and extremely difficult to occupy his position. But his plans demanded
that he should be in form what he was in fact,--the absolute head of the
church. He resolved to execute a brilliant _coup d'état_, and risk the
consequences.

On the morning of the 24th of December, 1847, he ascended the pulpit to
preach; and with that power of mimicry and imitation for which he is so
remarkable, aided, doubtless, by works of art to enable him to represent
the features and _personnel_ of Smith, he so completely assumed the tone
and manner, and presented the appearance of Joseph, that the
congregation believed that their dead prophet stood before them. The
effect was electrical. Women screamed and fainted; strong men wept; the
delusion was complete. "_The mantle of Joseph had fallen upon
Brigham_;" he was henceforth their Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, the
rightful successor to the Presidency. One old brother told me that he
really believed that Joseph was present in the flesh, so strong was the
personal resemblance at the time. As soon as the tumult subsided, the
people elected Brigham "President of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints in all the world." He appointed Heber C. Kimball and
Willard Richards as his counsellors. These three constituted the "First
Presidency." This action was subsequently confirmed, at a conference
held April 6, 1848, at the same place. Brigham was now the nominal as
well as the real leader of this strange community.

A greater trial demanded his forethought. The whole church was to be
removed over a thousand miles, through an almost unknown country, full
of dangers and difficulties.

The following account of the manner in which this difficult undertaking
was executed, is from the pen of John Hyde, Jr.:--

     "Some ability is required to efficiently remove bodies of
     armed troops over such new and pioneering obstacles: well
     supplied, equipped, and mounted, it takes a commander's skill;
     but here were poor, unprovided, feeble men, women, and
     children, shaking with ague, pale with suffering, hollow and
     gaunt with recent hunger. Without strife, without discord,
     almost without a murmur, this heterogeneous mass moved off.
     Many groaned with anguish, but none with complaint. Brigham's
     energy inspired them all; his genius controlled them all.
     Marking their road with their gravestones, they arrived at
     Salt Lake Valley, destitute and feeble, in 1848. The desert to
     which they had come was as cheerless as their past history.
     From cruel foes they had fled to as unfeeling a wilderness.
     Renewed difficulties demanded a renewed effort from Brigham.
     Everything depended on him. Starvation and nakedness stared in
     the gloomy faces of the desponding people. Murmurs and
     complaints were uttered. He quelled everything; scolded,
     plead, threatened, prophesied, and subdued them. With a
     restless but resistless energy he set them to work, and worked
     himself as their example. He directed their labors,
     controlled their domestic affairs, preached at them, to them,
     for them. He told foolish anecdotes to make them laugh,
     encouraged their dancing to make them merry, got up theatrical
     performances to distract their minds, and made them work hard,
     certain of rendering them contented by-and-by. Feared with a
     stronger fear, venerated with a more rational veneration, but
     not loved with the same clinging tenderness that the people
     still felt for Joseph Smith, Brigham swayed them at his will.
     They learned to dread his iron hand, and were daunted by his
     iron heart."[10:A]

While he was thus consolidating his power, laying plans for the
foundation of a monarchy more despotic than that of Austria, important
changes were going on in the political condition of the country. Mexico
was conquered, and much of its territory, including Utah, was annexed to
the United States, and the Mormons thus again brought within the
jurisdiction of the Federal Government.

From this era in Mormon affairs Brigham appears in so many different
characters that his history can only be fully written by considering him
in his various _rôles_,--as "Governor of Utah and Superintendent of
Indian Affairs;" "President of the Church, Prophet, Seer, and
Revelator;" "Trustee in Trust for the Church;" "President of the
Emigration Company;" "Lord of the Harem;" "Eloheim, or Head God;" and
"Grand Archee of the Order of the Gods."


FOOTNOTES:

[10:A] _Mormonism; its Leaders and Designs_, by John Hyde, Jr. New
York: W. P. Fetridge & Co. 1857. Page 144.




CHAPTER II.

POLITICAL.

     Brigham as Governor of Utah and Superintendent of Indian
     Affairs.--Formation of the State of Deseret.--Proceedings of
     the Utah Legislature.--Brigham's Proclamations.--Difficulties
     with the Federal Officers.--Proceedings of the first Judges.


By the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, concluded between the United States
and Mexico in 1848, the country now embraced in the Territory of Utah
was transferred from the jurisdiction of the latter to that of the
former, and on the 9th of September, 1850, Congress passed an Act to
organize the Territory of Utah.

The Mormons arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on the 24th of July, 1847,
while the Territory yet belonged to Mexico. When the peace between the
United States and Mexico was concluded, the Mormons were left without a
government. They took advantage of this opportunity to set up an
independent government.

Early in 1849 they met in convention to frame a constitution for "the
State of Deseret." The following is an abstract of the minutes of that
convention:--

On the 15th of March, 1849, the convention appointed the following
persons a committee to draft a constitution for the State of Deseret, to
wit: Albert Carrington, Joseph L. Heywood, William W. Phelps, David
Fullmer, John S. Fullmer, Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt,
John M. Bernheisel, and Erastus Snow.

March 18, 1849, Albert Carrington, chairman of the committee, reported
the following constitution, which was read, and unanimously adopted by
the convention: [The preamble only is here given.]


     "CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF DESERET.

     "Whereas a large number of the citizens of the United States,
     before and since the treaty of peace with the Republic of
     Mexico, emigrated to and settled in that portion of the
     territory of the United States lying west of the Rocky
     Mountains, and in the great interior basin of Upper
     California; and whereas, by reason of said treaty, all civil
     organization originating from the Republic of Mexico became
     abrogated; and whereas the Congress of the United States has
     failed to provide a form of civil government for the territory
     so acquired, or any portion thereof; and whereas civil
     government and law are necessary for the security, peace, and
     prosperity of society; and whereas it is a fundamental
     principle in all republican governments that all political
     power is inherent in the people, and governments instituted
     for their protection, security, and benefit, should emanate
     from the same:

     "Therefore your committee beg leave to recommend the adoption
     of the following _Constitution_, until the Congress of the
     United States shall otherwise provide for the government of
     the Territory hereinafter named and described, by admitting us
     into the Union.

     "We, the people, grateful to the Supreme Being for the
     blessings hitherto enjoyed, and feeling our dependence on Him
     for a continuance of those blessings, _do ordain and establish
     a free and Independent Government_, by the name of _the State
     of Deseret_; including all the territory of the United States
     within the following boundaries, to wit:" [Here follow the
     boundaries of the proposed new State.]

It will be noticed by the phraseology of the foregoing preamble that
this government was to be "free and independent," and was intended to
remain such until the new State, thus constituted, _should be admitted
into the Union_. In other words, they intended, through the machinery of
this independent State, to harass and annoy the government, and the
gentiles, until the "saints" could force themselves into the Union upon
their own terms. This theory is fully sustained by the subsequent
history of this inchoate State. The very first steps taken were
independent of, and in hostility to, the officers appointed by the
Government of the United States, as will more fully appear in the
following pages.

The formation of this government for the State of Deseret was the first
effort to throw off the yoke of the Federal Government,--an effort which
has been persistently persevered in to the present time.

There never has been a time since Brigham Young crossed the Rocky
Mountains, when he has honestly entertained the idea of being a good and
loyal citizen of the United States.

The following were the first officers of this infant monarchy:--

     Governor, BRIGHAM YOUNG.
     Lieutenant-Governor, HEBER C. KIMBALL.
     Chief Justice, DANIEL H. WELLS.

The Assembly met, and after listening to the Governor's Message,
proceeded to frame a code of laws. This _pseudo_ State government
remained in force until the 22d of September, 1851, when the Territorial
Legislature convened.

In the mean time Brigham, having been appointed Governor of the newly
organized Territory, and Superintendent of Indian Affairs, and seeing a
fair prospect of lining his pockets from the treasury of the United
States, concluded to forego for a time his ambitious projects, and
consented that the new "State" should be merged into a United States
Territory.

The federal officers were appointed during the session of 1850-51, but
owing to the difficulty of transportation, did not arrive until July,
1851. Young, who had been appointed Governor, had, on the 3d of
February, 1851, taken the oath of office before Wells, _Chief Justice of
Deseret_.

The first session of the Territorial Legislature was convened, in
pursuance of the proclamation of the Governor, on the 22d day of
September, 1851, and continued by adjournment from time to time, until
the 18th day of February, 1852. This was succeeded by a special session,
called by proclamation of the Governor, commencing the following day,
and continuing until the 6th day of March, 1852. What there was in the
political condition of this community, subjected as they were, in almost
all the relations of life, to a complete and comprehensive system of
religious government, to require a continuous session of the Territorial
Legislature for nearly six months, has never yet been explained.

The following is extracted from the published proceedings of the first
Legislative Assembly:--

     "REPRESENTATIVES' HALL, Tuesday, Sept 23, 1852.

     "10 o'clock, A. M. Both houses of the Legislative Assembly met
     in joint session, according to previous arrangement. The
     President of the Council in the chair.

     "The committee appointed to that duty appeared, escorting his
     Excellency Brigham Young, Governor of Utah Territory, who was
     seated immediately in front of the Speaker's chair.

     "The joint committee appointed to wait upon the Judges of the
     Supreme Court, and the Secretary of the Territory, appeared,
     escorting the Hon. Z. Snow [Mormon], one of said Judges. They
     reported that they had visited the Hon. Perry E. Brochus, and
     Mr. Secretary Harris. But the answer returned by them was so
     vague and indefinite that they did not know whether they would
     respond to the invitation or not. The committee also reported
     that they did not see the Hon. Judge Brandenburg. The United
     States District Attorney, Seth M. Blair, Esq., [Mormon,] was
     also seated within the bar."

The hostility to the federal officers had already been so openly and
offensively manifested, that the respect which these gentlemen owed to
themselves and the government and people whom they represented, would
not permit them to be present at the first meeting of the Legislative
Assembly. It will be noticed that one of them was not seen at all, and
the reply of the other two was not even reported!

     "The House was called to order by the President of the
     Council, who then informed his Excellency the Governor, that
     the two Houses were now ready to receive any communication he
     might be pleased to make."

The Governor then presented his Message, as follows:--

     "_Fellow-citizens of the Council and House of Representatives
     of Utah Territory_:--

     "Having called you from your various avocations to convene in
     general assembly at an earlier day, and upon shorter notice
     than may appear desirable, I will proceed without delay to lay
     before you the chief reason for so doing, as well as such
     other suggestions as to me shall appear necessary and proper,
     and as shall occur to my mind." . . .

     "Through the munificence of the General Government, we have
     extended unto us increased facilities for spending our time
     for the public weal; for, however much the honest pride of
     gratuitous public service may flatter its humble recipient,
     yet whilst it impoverishes all but his honorable name and his
     country's cause, his anxieties will scarcely be lulled, his
     daily supplies but rarely replenished."

He again addressed them, January 5, 1852:--

     " . . The enjoyment of a _free and independent people_ can be
     accomplished only through this principle: produce what you
     consume. Draw from the native elements the necessaries of
     life; permit no vitiated taste to lead you into expensive
     luxuries, which can only be obtained by involving yourselves
     in debt. Let home industry produce every article of home
     consumption." . .

This Legislature, besides passing a code of laws for the government of
the Territory, sent some twenty memorials to Congress, most of them
calling for appropriations of public money, and divided up the canyons,
ferries, pasture-lands, woodlands, water privileges, and, in fact, all
the most valuable portion of the public domain, among prominent
"saints," giving always to Brigham the "lion's" share. To this he was
entitled by his recognized appellation of "the Lion of the Lord."

To this day he holds, by virtue of an Act of the Legislature, the most
valuable canyon, near Salt Lake, called City Creek, or Brigham's
Canyon,--having taken actual possession of the same, by fencing in the
mouth of the canyon completely, and thus preventing all ingress or
egress, except upon the payment of toll. General Connor, upon his
arrival in Utah, in the fall of 1862, was justly indignant to find
himself fenced out from one of the national thoroughfares, but thought
it prudent not to add to the causes of irritation by interfering.

During this session Brigham issued eight proclamations. The following is
the most celebrated of these _State Papers_:--


     "TERRITORY OF UTAH.

     "_A Proclamation for a Day of Praise and Thanksgiving._

     "It having pleased the Father of all good to make known his
     mind and will to the children of men in these last days, and
     through the administration of his angels to restore the holy
     priesthood unto the sons of Adam, by which the gospel of his
     Son has been proclaimed, and the ordinances of life and
     salvation are administered; and through which medium the Holy
     Ghost has been communicated to believing, willing, and honest
     minds; causing faith, wisdom, and intelligence to spring up in
     the hearts of men, and influencing them to flow together, from
     the four quarters of the earth, to a land of peace and health,
     rich in mineral and vegetable resources, reserved of old in
     the councils of eternity for the purposes to which it is now
     appropriated; a land choice above all other lands; far removed
     from the strife, contentions, divisions, moral and physical
     commotions, that are disturbing the peace of the nations and
     kingdoms of the earth,--

     "I, Brigham Young, Governor of the Territory aforesaid, in
     response to the time-honored custom of our fathers at Plymouth
     Rock, by the governors of the several States and Territories,
     and with a heart filled with humiliation and gratitude to the
     Fountain of all good, for his multiplied munificence to his
     children, have felt desirous to, and do, _proclaim_ Thursday,
     the 1st day of January, eighteen hundred and fifty-two, a _Day
     of Praise and Thanksgiving_, for the citizens of this our
     peaceful Territory, in honor of the God of Abraham, who has
     preserved his children amid all the vicissitudes they have
     been called to pass; for his tender mercies in preserving the
     nation undivided in which we live; for causing the gospel of
     his kingdom to spread and take root upon the earth, beyond the
     power of men and demons to destroy; and that he has promised
     a day of universal joy and rejoicing to all the inhabitants
     who shall remain when the earth shall have been purified by
     fire, and rest in peace.

     "And I recommend to all good citizens of Utah, that they
     abstain from everything which is calculated to mar or grieve
     the Spirit of their Heavenly Father on that day; that they
     rise early in the morning of the first day of the new year,
     _and wash their bodies with pure water_; that all men attend
     to their flocks and herds with carefulness, and see that no
     creature in their charge is hungry, thirsty, or cold; while
     the women are preparing the best of food for their households,
     and their children ready to receive it in cleanliness and
     cheerfulness; then let the head of each family with his
     family, bow down upon his knees before the God of Israel, and
     acknowledge all his sins, and the sins of his household; call
     upon the Father, in the name of Jesus, for every blessing that
     he desires for himself, his kindred, the Israel of God, the
     universe of man; praying with full purpose of heart and united
     faith that the union of the United States may be preserved
     inviolate, against all the devices of wicked men, until truth
     shall reign triumphant, and the glory of Jehovah shall fill
     the earth. Then, in the name of Jesus, ask the Father to bless
     your food; and when you have filled the plates of your
     household, partake with them with rejoicing and thanksgiving;
     and if you feel to make merry in your hearts, sing a song of
     thanksgiving; and lift up your hearts continually, in peace
     and acknowledgment of the unbounded mercies you are
     momentarily receiving.

     "I also request of all good and peaceful citizens, that they
     abstain from all evil thinking, speaking, and acting, on that
     day; that no one be offended by his neighbor; that all jars
     and discords cease; that neighborhood broils may be unknown;
     that tattlers and strife may not be remembered; that evil
     surmising may be forgotten; that all may learn the truth, and
     have no need of priests to teach them; that all may be well,
     and have no need of doctors; that all may cease their
     quarrels, and starve the lawyers; that all may do as they
     would be done unto, so that perfect love, which casteth out
     all fear, may reign triumphant, and there shall be nothing to
     disturb the quiet of an infant in all the Territory of Utah;
     that there be no contention in the land; and that the same
     peace may extend its influence to the utmost bounds of the
     everlasting hills, and from thence to the habitation of every
     man and beast, to the ends of the earth; till the leopard
     shall lie down with the kid, the lion shall eat straw like the
     ox, and the babe shall lay his hand upon the cockatrice's den,
     and find peace to its soul.

     "I further request, that when the day has been spent in doing
     good, in dealing your bread, your butter, your beef and your
     pork, your turkeys, your molasses, and the choicest of all the
     products of the valleys of the mountains, at your command, to
     the poor; that you end the day in the same order, and on the
     same principle that you commenced it; that you eat your supper
     with singleness of heart, as unto the Lord, after praise and
     thanksgiving, and songs of rejoicing; remembering that you
     cannot be filled with the Holy Spirit, and be preparing for
     celestial glory, while the meanest menial under your charge or
     control is in want of the smallest thing which God has given
     you power to supply; remembering that it is dependent on you
     for its comforts, as you are dependent on your God for your
     constant support.

     "Retire to your beds early, that you may be refreshed, and
     rise early again, and so continue, until times and seasons are
     changed; or finally, I say unto you, let the same process be
     continued from day to day, until you arrive unto one of the
     days of Kolob, [where a day is 1000 of our years,] the planet
     nearest to the habitation of the Eternal Father; and if you do
     not find peace and rest to your souls by that time, in the
     practice of these things, and no one else shall present
     himself to offer you better counsel, _I will be there_, and
     knowing more, will tell you what you ought to do next.

     [SEAL.]

     "Done at the Executive Office, Great Salt Lake
     City. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my
     hand and caused the seal of the Territory to be
     affixed, this 19th day of December, A. D. 1851, and
     of the Independence of the United States the
     seventy-sixth.

     "By the Governor,
          BRIGHAM YOUNG.

     "W. RICHARDS, _Sec. pro tem., appointed by the Governor_."

Amidst the verbosity of this singular document will be seen expressions
of attachment to the Federal Union. The sincerity of these professions
must be judged of in the light of his contemporaneous acts. The officers
appointed by the General Government were then in the States, or at
Washington, representing truly the condition of things in Utah, and the
conduct of Brigham and his associates, which effectually obliged them to
leave the Territory, by rendering their presence in Utah not only
useless but dangerous. It is for our readers to say how much weight is
to be given to that portion of the fulmination of the Prophet put forth
under such circumstances.

At this first session of the Legislature, Brigham proceeded to give, in
his Message, his views in relation to African slavery, fully indorsing
it, and prescribing regulations for its establishment in the Territory.
His views upon this subject may be gathered from the following
extract:--

     "Thus while servitude may and should exist, and that too upon
     those who are naturally designed to occupy the position of
     servant of servants, yet we should not fall into the other
     extreme, and make them as beasts of the field, regarding not
     the humanity that is in the colored race; nor elevating them,
     as some seem disposed, to an equality with those whom nature
     and nature's God has indicated to be their masters, their
     superiors."

In accordance with the foregoing suggestions, the Legislature passed a
law regulating slavery in the Territory, and it has existed in full
force and effect to the present time. There are now a considerable
number of African slaves in the Territory, and a large number of
Indians, "held to service."

During the same session, the Legislature memorialized the President,
setting forth that the federal officers had abandoned the Territory;
reciting the formation of the provisional government of Deseret, and
complaining that "all the authorities of the Territory, including the
governor and both houses of the Assembly, and marshal, had been set at
naught as exercising their functions illegally and unconstitutionally."

The causes which led to this petition were as follows:--

When the Territory was organized, in the winter of 1850-51, the
following named officers were appointed:--Brigham Young, Governor;
Lemuel C. Brandenburg, Chief Justice; Perry E. Brochus and Zerubbabel
Snow, Associate Justices; Seth M. Blair, Attorney General, and B. D.
Harris, Secretary. These officers did not arrive in Utah until July,
1851. Previous to their arrival, Brigham Young had issued a proclamation
ordering an election for delegate to Congress and members of the
Legislature, and providing for taking the census.

The Secretary considered that Young had exceeded his authority, and on
this ground refused to pay over the moneys in his hands for the expenses
of the Legislature.

The Supreme Court being then in session, Harris applied to the court for
an injunction to stay the proceedings of the Legislature, which the
court granted. This order, however, was nugatory, as the court had no
power to enforce its judgments. This, of course, enraged the Mormons;
and the Governor instructed Blair, the District Attorney, who was a
Mormon, to sue out a writ of injunction upon the Secretary, to prevent
him from taking the money out of the Territory. The court decided
against the injunction, thus again sustaining the Secretary.

Again, Congress had appropriated $20,000 for the erection of suitable
buildings at the capital of the Territory. Brigham and his tools, the
members of the Legislature, attempted to appropriate this money, and in
exchange, palm off upon the government, for $20,000, a building which
never cost over $8,000.

These circumstances engendered much feeling between the Mormons and the
gentile officers; and this was in nowise lessened by an incident which
occurred about this time.

Hon. Perry E. Brochus, one of the Supreme Judges, in some remarks made
in a Mormon assembly, commented rather severely upon the peculiar
institution. He commenced by addressing the women upon the subject of
spiritual wife-ism; pointing out to them its wickedness and the unhappy
results that must follow to them and to their children, if the practice
should be persisted in. He said it was against the laws of man and God.
This was undoubtedly the first time, at Salt Lake, that a gentile had
ever spoken in public against Mormon institutions.

The women were excited; the most of them were in tears, before he had
spoken many minutes. The men were astonished and enraged, and one word
of encouragement from their leader would have brought on a collision.
Brigham, with his usual shrewdness, saw this, and was equal to the
occasion. When the Judge sat down, he rose, and by one of those strong,
nervous appeals, for which he is so famous among his brethren, restored
the equilibrium of the audience. Those who, but a moment before, were
bathed in tears, now responded to his broad sarcasm and keen wit, in
screams of laughter; and having fully restored the spirits of the
audience, he turned to the Judge, and administered the following rebuke:
"I will kick you," he said, "or any other gentile Judge from this stand,
if you or they again attempt to interfere with the affairs of our Zion."

The Judge saw that he was beaten, and finding his life threatened and in
danger, soon after left the Territory.

After his departure, Brigham preached the following sermon:--

     "I am at the defiance of the rulers of the greatest nations on
     the earth, with the United States all put together, to produce
     a more loyal people than the Latter Day Saints. Have they, as
     a people, broken any law? No, they have not. Have the United
     States? Yes. They have trampled the Constitution under their
     feet with impunity, and ridden recklessly over all law, to
     persecute and drive this people. Admit, for argument's sake,
     that the Mormon elders have more wives than one, yet our
     enemies never have proved it. If I had forty wives in the
     United States, they did not know it, and could not
     substantiate it; neither did I ask any lawyer, judge, or
     magistrate for them. I live above law, and so do this people.
     Do the laws of the United States require us to crouch and bow
     down to the miserable wretches who violate them? No!

     "I defy the world to prove that we have infringed upon that
     law. You may circumscribe the whole earth, and pass through
     every Christian nation, so called, and what do you find? If
     you tell them a 'Mormon' has two wives, they are shocked, and
     call it dreadful blasphemy. If you whisper such a thing in the
     ears of a gentile, who takes a fresh woman every night, he is
     thunderstruck with the enormity of the crime. . . . .

     "Now, let me tell you the great, killing story. 'Governor
     Young has sixteen wives and fourteen babies.' Now, they did
     not see that sight, but the circumstance was as follows: I
     took some of my neighbors into the large carriage, and rode
     down to Father Chase's to eat watermelons. When driving out of
     the gate, in the evening, Brother Babbitt walks up, and I
     invited him into the carriage, and he rode up into the city
     with me, and I suppose he told the United States officers.
     That, I believe, is the way the story of the sixteen wives and
     fourteen children first came into circulation.

     "But this does not begin to be the extent of my possessions,
     for I am enlarging on the right hand and on the left; and
     shall soon be able, Abraham-like, to muster the strength of my
     house, and _take my rights_, asking no favors of judges or
     secretaries."

At another time he used the following language:--

     "When the officers returned from this Territory to the States,
     did we send them away? We did not. I will tell you what I did,
     and what I will do again. I did chastise the poor, mean
     ruffian,--the poor, miserable creature who came here by the
     name of Brochus,--when he arose before this people, to preach
     to them, and tell them of meanness which he supposed they were
     guilty of, and traduce their characters.

     "It is true, as it is said in the report of these officers, if
     I had crooked my little finger he would have been used up. But
     I did not bend it. If I had, the sisters alone felt indignant
     enough to have chopped him in pieces. I did not do it,
     however, but suffered him to fill up the measure of his shame
     and iniquity, until his cup is running over.

     "I have no fears whatever of Franklin Pierce excusing me from
     office, and saying that another man shall be the Governor of
     this Territory. At the beginning of our settlements, when we
     sent Almon W. Babbitt to Washington with our constitution for
     a State government, and to ask leave to adopt it, he requested
     that I should not sign my name to it as Governor; 'for,' said
     he, 'if you do, it will thwart all our plans.' I said, 'My
     name will go as it is in that document, and stay there, from
     this time henceforth and forever. Now,' I continued, 'if you
     do not believe it, you may go to Washington, and give those
     papers to Dr. Bernheisel, and operate against him, and against
     our getting a State government, and you cannot hinder it.'

     "I will be Governor still, after you have done everything you
     possibly can to prevent it. We have got a Territorial
     Government, and I am and will be Governor, and no power can
     hinder it, until the Lord Almighty says, 'Brigham, you need
     not be Governor any longer;' and then I am willing to yield to
     another Governor."

This "sermon" was preached at Great Salt Lake City, June 19, 1853, and
is published in the "Journal of Discourses," vol. i. p. 188.

Brigham had appointed his second counsellor, Willard Richards, to fill
the vacancy occasioned by the departure of Secretary Harris. So the
saints had fairly succeeded in ridding themselves of the obnoxious
officials,--the remaining Judge, and the District Attorney, being
Mormons in good standing.

The Hon. Z. Snow then proceeded to hold his court, unmolested by gentile
law or judges. He tried and convicted several Spaniards of buying Indian
children for slaves, took the children from the Spaniards, and turned
them over to the "brethren."

The Indians now began to be hostile, and the brethren were obliged to
cease pursuing the gentiles, and prepare to defend themselves against
the "Lamanites." During the years 1852-53-54, more or less disturbances
prevailed.

In October, 1852, Judge Shaver arrived, as successor to Judge Brochus;
and Lazarus H. Reed, of New York, was appointed Chief Justice, to
succeed Judge Brandenburg. Judge Reed arrived in the Territory in June,
1853. Of these, Brigham said,--

     "One of our judges, Judge Shaver, has been here during the
     winter, and, as far as he is known, he is a straightforward,
     judicious, upright man, and a good adjudicator in the law. He
     and Judge Reed, who has lately arrived, I believe will do the
     best they can, and all is right."

Judge Snow continued to hold his office until succeeded by Judge Stiles,
in the fall of 1854.

Judge Shaver lived among the saints until his death, and was "buried
with the faithful."

It is currently reported, and believed by many, that Judge Shaver died
from the effects of poison, administered by the hands of a Mormon. He
was a Southerner by birth, agreed very well with the Mormons, gave
suppers, and drank with them, and was considered a "hail-fellow well
met." There was, however, some difficulty between the Judge and the
Prophet, the nature of which was not distinctly known. The difficulty
increased, and one morning the Judge was found dead in his bed. The
heads of the church took great pains to have the affair investigated,
and came to the conclusion that the Judge had died of some "disease of
the head." He was followed to the grave by a large concourse of people,
and preceded by a band of music.

Less regard would be paid to these invidious reports, were it not for
the fact that Brigham Young's connection with the violent death of
divers other persons is too notorious to be denied. To say nothing of
the Mountain Meadow massacre, in which he is distinctly implicated by
evidence of an overwhelming character, there are other cases in which
his agency in causing in some way the death of the party, is scarcely
denied by himself.

For instance, the death of Almon W. Babbitt, at the hands of "Indians,"
on the Plains. In the summer of 1862, Brigham was referring to this
affair, in a tea-table conversation, at which Judge Waite and the writer
of this were present. On that occasion, after making some remarks to
impress upon the minds of those present the necessity of maintaining
friendly relations between the federal officers and the authorities of
the church, he used language substantially as follows:--

     "There is no need of any difficulty, and there need be none,
     if the officers do their duty, and mind their own affairs. If
     they do not, if they undertake to interfere in affairs that do
     not concern them, I will not be far off. _There was Almon W.
     Babbitt. He undertook to quarrel with me, but soon afterwards
     was killed by Indians._ He lived like a fool, and died like a
     fool."

People determined to believe only that Brigham Young is a good citizen,
and that he and his people are mostly in the right in their difficulties
with the federal officers, will doubtless be able to put an innocent
construction upon the foregoing language. But to the minds of those who
heard it, and who were most interested in its meaning, it never had but
one signification, and went far to disclose the dark and damning
character of the man.

But to return to our narrative. Judge Reed seems to have been more
fortunate in his intercourse with these people. The Mormons wished to
eradicate from his mind all unfavorable impressions created by the
sudden departure of his predecessors. They therefore treated him with
marked consideration. They hoped, through his influence, to reinstate
themselves with the authorities at Washington, and they partially
succeeded. The Judge formed quite a favorable opinion of the Mormons,
though not indorsing the administration of Brigham Young. He remained in
the valley about a year, and then went to the States, intending to
return, but died suddenly, while at his home, in Bath, Steuben County,
New York.




CHAPTER III.

POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.

     Col. Steptoe and Brigham Young.--Brigham reappointed Governor.
     --John F. Kinney.--Western Utah, or Nevada.--Letter of Hon.
     James M. Crane.--Judge Stiles and the Records.--W. W. Drummond.


In 1854 Col. Steptoe, with about 300 men, came to Salt Lake. His command
was intended for California and Oregon, but spent the winter of 1854-55
at Salt Lake City.

About this time John F. Kinney, of Iowa, was appointed Chief Justice, to
succeed Reed, and George P. Stiles, Associate Justice; Joseph Hollman,
also of Iowa, Attorney-General, and Almon W. Babbitt, Secretary. In the
spring of 1855, W. W. Drummond, of Illinois, was appointed Associate
Justice.

During the winter of 1854-55, news reached Salt Lake that President
Pierce had commissioned Col. Steptoe as Governor of Utah. This alarmed
the saints exceedingly. The Lion of the Lord was roused. Something must
be done.

Col. Steptoe had the appointment under consideration for several weeks,
and finally _refused to accept it_, and joined with Chief Justice Kinney
and others in recommending the continuance in office of Governor Young.

The question naturally arises, Why did Col. Steptoe refuse to accept the
appointment, and recommend Brigham Young? Mormons would tell you, in
confidence, that Brigham "put a hook in his nose," and he was compelled
to do as he did. The Prophet of the Lord had said he would be Governor,
and no power but the Lord Almighty could hinder it.

Daring and unscrupulous as a brigand, having the means at his command,
and the ingenuity to use them, why should he not outwit the government
and deceive the people of the United States? He was determined not to
relinquish, without an effort to retain them, the power and emoluments
of his position. The following narrative of the manner in which he
accomplished his purposes, has been furnished by a Mormon who was
residing in Salt Lake City at the time, and the employment of similar
appliances on more than one occasion afterward, gives the coloring of
truth to the story.

There were in Salt Lake City, at that time, two beautiful and
fascinating women, one of whom was by marriage nearly related to the
Prophet; the other was an actress in the church theatre. Their husbands
were both "on a mission." These ladies were a great deal in the society
of Col. Steptoe and his officers. Much attention was paid to the
military officers, and it would be but natural that these men should be
both pleased and flattered by the attention of sisters occupying so high
a place in the hierarchy. According to report, however, the character of
these women was not such as their exalted position in the church would
seem to require.

One evening Brigham called "the girls" to him, and explained that he had
a plan in which he needed their assistance. They at once consented to do
anything he might desire. The plan was soon agreed upon. He placed his
Danites at a convenient distance around the Colonel's office, and calmly
awaited developments. In a short time one of the "police" came to the
Prophet, and signified that it was time for him to appear on the field.
He went immediately down to the Colonel's office, which was on Main
Street, and knocked for admittance. For some time no one responded, but
the knocking continuing violently, Col. Steptoe asked who was there.
"Brigham Young," said the angry Prophet; "and I want to come in, and I
will come in." At this Steptoe opened the door, and Brigham entered the
front office. He seemed excited, and without being seated, asked if
Mary and Mrs. ---- were there; adding,--"I want the girls." Steptoe
denied their presence; but could a prophet be deceived? "I know better,"
said he; "I know they are here;" at the same time walking into the back
office. There, on the sofa, sat two young gentlemen dressed in the
highest style, but wearing their hats. Brigham advanced, lifted the hats
of the fancy gentlemen, and the ladies he was seeking sat before him. Of
course, the righteous indignation of the Prophet knew no bounds. He
threatened Steptoe with exposure and prosecution, and told him his life
would not be safe if the friends of the ladies came to hear of the
affair. He censured the girls, and told them to go home, and finally
calmed down, and left the office.

Steptoe was greatly alarmed, and, as a compromise, offered to recommend
Brigham for the appointment which had just been tendered to himself.
With ill-concealed satisfaction on the part of Brigham and his friends,
the proposition was accepted, and "the matter arranged."

Soon after, a petition was sent to the President, dated December 30,
1854, and asking for the reappointment of Young as Governor. This was
signed by Col. Steptoe and most of his officers, and by all the federal
officers then in Utah.

This array of gentile names was not to be disregarded, and Brigham Young
was reappointed Governor of Utah.

In 1854 John F. Kinney was appointed, by Franklin Pierce, Chief Justice
of Utah, and came to the valley with his family and a large stock of
goods the same year. He was known in Iowa as a "Jack Mormon," and
subsequent events have proven that he was such. He sold goods and kept a
boarding-house; and at once entered into favor with the Mormon
administration. He was pecuniarily interested in keeping the good-will
of his trading customers; and this fact, together with his undoubted
sympathy with the church, will satisfactorily account for the course
pursued by him in the complicated condition of the Territory.

It is not our purpose to detract from the merits of any one. We desire
to do justice to all. But the impartial truth of history requires us to
say that the uniform course of Judge Kinney has been to aid and abet
Brigham Young in his ambitious schemes, with but little regard to the
advancement of the interests of the whole country, or the requirements
of indiscriminate justice.

As to his merits as a jurist, the writer of these pages cannot undertake
to decide. But it would seem, to one uninitiated, that a Judge cannot be
very profound who will try, convict, and sentence men not within the
jurisdiction of his court, and even men not in the land of the living.
This was done by Judge Kinney, in the case of the
Morrisites,--dissenters or apostates from the Mormon Church.

In the spring of 1863 a large number of these men were tried, convicted,
and fined $100 each. Many of them were out of the Territory at the time,
and one was dead. This statement is fully substantiated by affidavits
which were taken at the time. Over ninety were tried and convicted,
about twenty of whom were out of the Territory, and one had died before
the trial commenced.

When the cases were called on for trial, it was stated that some of the
accused were absent. The Judge remarked, it made no difference; he was
gratified that so many had made their appearance, and directed the trial
to proceed. All were found guilty, and sentenced to pay a fine of $100
each, except a few of the leaders, who were sentenced to the
penitentiary,--one of them for fifteen years.

These men were accused of resisting the Mormon officers who came to
arrest them. Robert T. Burton, the sheriff of Salt Lake County, who was
the principal one thus "resisted," had shot Morris, their Prophet, in
cold blood, after he and his party had surrendered; and yet, while the
Morrisites were so severely punished, Burton went scot free. The grand
jury of Salt Lake County would not even find a bill of indictment
against him. Burton stands high in the community, and was afterwards
appointed Collector of Internal Revenue.

But this is not all. Not only were all of the accused tried and
convicted, but the bonds of those absent were declared _by the clerk_ to
be forfeited, and execution was issued against those resident in Utah,
to collect the penalty of the bonds. At the same time, _the records
showed no judgments against the delinquents_. One of these Morrisites,
named Abraham Taylor, found his property, worth $2500, suddenly levied
upon, under one of these executions. There being no gentile lawyer at
Salt Lake, he applied to Judge Waite, who investigated the matter, and
found there was no judgment of record. He then advised Mr. Taylor to
apply to Judge Kinney for an injunction against the officer. This was
done; but the application was refused by Judge K. _on the ground that if
there was no judgment he could render one, as the court had not
permanently adjourned, but only to meet on his own motion_. This
response to the application of a suitor is a sufficient indication of
the ability of Judge Kinney, and of his desire to administer impartial
justice.

The result of the whole matter was, that the homestead of Mr. Taylor was
sold under the execution, _to the clerk of Judge Kinney's court, for
$200_; the family of Taylor impoverished, and literally turned into the
street. After remaining out of doors, in front of the house, for a day
or two, they took refuge at the camp of Gen. Connor.

In his personal appearance Judge Kinney is pompous and conceited. He is
of the medium size, rather stout, with dark complexion. Brusque and
ready in conversation, and never declining to drink when invited, he is
well adapted to the country in which he resides, and is immensely
popular in the community in which he was placed "to administer the law,"
and which he now represents in Congress. He is an open apologist and
advocate of polygamy.

Mrs. Kinney is a sister of Judge Hall, of Iowa, and an accomplished
lady. She was utterly disgusted with Mormon society, and returned, with
her daughters, to the States.

Judge Kinney remained in Utah until 1856. In 1860 he was reappointed.
Thus he was absent from the Territory during all the exciting scenes of
1857-8 and 9, and returned after something like harmony had been
restored in the affairs of the Territory. He managed, however, by having
his leave of absence extended from time to time, to retain the office
and its emoluments until 1858. Since 1860 he has been back and forth,
spending about half his time in either portion of the country, but
retaining his position as Chief Justice, until elected to Congress in
1863.

Judge Stiles, who was appointed to succeed Snow, was assigned to the
third, or Carson District. He immediately proceeded to his district, and
held a term of court.

The present Territory of Nevada was included mostly in the third
judicial district, and much difficulty occurred between Mormons and the
miners in that section.

A full account of the proceedings which go to make up the history of
this part of Utah, will be found in a letter from the Hon. James M.
Crane to Hon. William Smith, published in 1859.

This letter is so complete and truthful in its statements, and presents
such a correct view of the character and tendencies of Mormonism, that
we insert it, nearly entire:--

     "WASHINGTON, January 17, 1859.

     "DEAR SIR,--

     "As you may need some facts not reported at length in the
     memorial and other documents, relating to the proposed
     Territory of Nevada, I herewith submit them.

     "The Mormons and Anti-Mormons began the settlement of Western
     Utah in the latter part of 1854. The former, however,
     succeeded, in 1855, in obtaining a numerical majority; and the
     Legislature of Utah, on being informed of this fact, organized
     the whole western part of the Territory, under the name of
     Carson County, and Governor Young appointed Orson Hyde, the
     President of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, its Probate Judge.
     Soon after the Judge arrived, adventurers from California, as
     well as from the Atlantic States, settled in Carson and other
     valleys on the eastern side of the Sierra Nevada, for the
     purpose of mining, farming, and raising stock. As they
     increased very fast, the Mormons became alarmed, and
     determined to expel them.

     "They therefore ordered them to leave the country. Of course
     the Christians, or Anti-Mormons refused to do so. The Mormons
     then assembled their forces, and attempted to expel them, _vi
     et armis_. The Anti-Mormons also organized, and fortified
     themselves, with a view of defending their lives and property
     against their assailants.

     "For two weeks their armies camped nearly in sight of each
     other, without coming to a direct battle.

     "By this time, news had reached the miners in California of
     this state of affairs, and a large number had determined to
     cross the mountains, and afford protection to the
     Anti-Mormons. On hearing this, the Mormons became satisfied
     that, unless they retraced their steps, they would be driven
     themselves from the country, instead of the Anti-Mormons. They
     therefore proposed a truce, and agreed that all should enjoy a
     common heritage in that part of the Territory.

     "The Mormons now became satisfied that the Christians not only
     could, but would occupy these fertile valleys, on the ground
     that they were the common property of the United States. When
     the Legislature of Utah heard of this affair, that body, in
     violation of every constitutional right, repealed the county
     organization, recalled the Probate Judge, and removed all the
     county and court records to Salt Lake City, where they have
     ever since remained. Amongst these records were several
     indictments against certain persons for high crimes and
     misdemeanors. By this flagrant violation of all sacred,
     individual, collective, and constitutional rights, the people
     of Western Utah were not only denied all legal protection to
     life and property, but they were disfranchised. They have ever
     been unrepresented in the Legislature and in Congress. The
     history of our country presents no such a record of open
     defiance of law, and such cruelties to men under the form of
     laws.

     "For years the Anti-Mormons have been applying, both to the
     Territorial Legislature and to Congress, for protection,
     without success.

     "Their situation has ever been, and still is, peculiarly
     unsafe and annoying. Recently a Probate Judge was
     surreptitiously appointed for Carson Valley, with a view of
     reorganizing the county of Carson, and thus extend over the
     people there the Mormon statutes of the Territory.

     "The Judge, soon after he received his commission, undertook
     to force on an election of county officers. Enough of the
     Anti-Mormons, however, turned out, to defeat his purpose, by
     the election of an opposite ticket, who, on being elected,
     refused to qualify, because they were required to obey the
     Mormon statutes. The Judge has been notified that if he
     undertakes to enforce the Mormon statutes he will be
     resisted,--peaceably if they can, forcibly if they must.

     "They will not introduce, nor permit others to introduce among
     them, the vices of that wicked, perverse, and adulterous
     generation, who have so long wielded the sceptre of authority
     in the Great Basin. They will not allow, with impunity, their
     wives and daughters to be kidnapped, dishonored, and defiled;
     nor submit to laws made by such a people, nor allow themselves
     to be ruled by men who practise and uphold vices and crimes so
     revolting to the moral sense of the world; and if the Mormons
     persist in their present course, blood will flow.

     "The only loyal people of Utah are oppressed, annoyed, and
     scandalized, by a government intended by Congress to secure
     them in their rights, and to protect them in their property;
     and while the present Territorial organization exists, the
     Mormons, who have control of the Legislature, will never 'let
     up on the gentiles.'

     "The only remedy for this unnatural war, now raging between
     the Mormons and the Anti-Mormons in Utah, is to be found in
     the immediate separation of these people under two distinct
     governmental organizations. One thing is inevitable,--the
     Mormons and Anti-Mormons will never, and can never live
     together in peace, under one government. The conflicts which
     took place between them in Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, and Iowa,
     and which are now going on in Utah, ought to convince any
     intelligent man of the justice and truth of this declaration.
     Indeed, the Mormons themselves acknowledge it; and so long as
     they adhere to their belief,--a belief founded upon their own
     scriptures,--that an absolute theocracy is the only government
     under which they can and should live, they never will be loyal
     to our government and countrymen, and hence their hostility to
     our institutions and people, and their inflexible devotion to
     their own.

     "In every State where the Mormons have lived, it has cost the
     loyal people of the State thousands of dollars, as well as the
     loss of many lives, to compel them to obey the laws. In every
     instance they have resisted our laws, and in every State
     necessity demanded their expulsion.

     "In Utah, while they were charged with the administration of
     the government and execution of the laws, they proved
     themselves not only traitors to our people, but treacherous to
     the government, and openly rebelled against them and defied
     their authority, and it cost the Federal Government millions
     to conquer them. They have still control of the Territory, and
     they are inflexibly bent upon subduing the Anti-Mormons of
     Western Utah; and if the latter are not separated from them,
     and protected by law, it will require the expenditure of
     millions more to restore order in Utah. Congress can count the
     cost in this matter, while we will have the melancholy duty of
     burying our dead. The people of Nevada will never be
     conquered,--never be ruled by the Mormons. Come what will,
     they will resist to the bitter end. They prefer death to
     dishonor, and the government may choose which of these shall
     be meted out to them.

     "In addition to the above considerations, which should, I
     believe, present conclusive and imposing evidence,
     sufficiently satisfactory to induce Congress to organize the
     Territory of Nevada, I may likewise mention others.

     "While the people of Western Utah have, in the Mormons, open
     and avowed enemies, they have likewise the savage tribes to
     defend themselves against. Some of these tribes are professed
     Mormons, while others are under their influence. Many
     conflicts have taken place between the Christians and some of
     these tribes, as well as between the emigrants, while crossing
     the Plains to the North Pacific, and the aforesaid savages;
     and there is no hope of establishing amicable relations with
     these Indian tribes, until they are brought under other and
     better relations with the Anti-Mormons of Utah. Peace does not
     reign in Utah, and never will, under the present order of
     things. . . . .

     "When our common country shall call forth her sons to defend
     her rights, the people of Nevada will come forth. They will be
     ready and willing to meet the enemy, on the beach and on the
     frontier, with a sword in one hand and a torch in the other.
     They will dispute every inch of ground, burn every blade of
     grass, and the last intrenchment of liberty will become their
     graves, rather than permit a foreign enemy to contaminate the
     soil of our country. Can this be said of the Mormons? I think
     not. If we can protect our countrymen abroad, why should we
     not, on our own soil?

     "Very respectfully, yours,

     "JAMES M. CRANE,

     "_Delegate elect from Nevada_.

     "To Hon. Wm. Smith."

            *       *       *       *       *

     "Having read the above statement of Judge Crane, delegate from
     the proposed Territory of Nevada, I will state from my own
     observation, having resided in the Territory of Utah for over
     three years, for a portion of which time I was in Carson
     Valley, that I heartily concur with him, and fully indorse his
     statement in relation to the condition of things in Western
     Utah, and seriously believe that the wants and necessities of
     the people of that portion of the Territory demand its
     immediate organization.

     "GEORGE P. STILES,

     "_Late Associate Justice for Utah_."

Nevada was erected into a Territory, and has made rapid and gigantic
strides in all the essentials of a high civilization. Her mines are
celebrated throughout the world, and she annually adds millions of
dollars to the circulation of the country.

Already are her valleys teeming with the life of the husbandman, and her
soil yielding up its rich harvests of golden grain, for the sustenance
of her brave and patriotic sons. She has sent several hundred men into
the field, and with unshaken loyalty stands ready to send more, if the
cause of her country calls,--thus literally fulfilling the promise of
Judge Crane made in the foregoing letter. Mark the contrast between
loyal and Christian Nevada, and disloyal and Mohammedan Utah! One
rushing on to a glorious and happy destiny, and the other falling
rapidly back into the habits and customs of heathen nations. The genius
of Liberty sits enthroned among the mountains of free Nevada, while
despotism of the most hideous character clanks her chains in Utah. May
the day of deliverance for the oppressed thousands of Utah soon dawn.
Then will she take her place among her sisters in the family of States,
and the hand of oppression be no more felt in all her fair borders.

When Brigham Young found that the gentile element was gaining ground
rapidly in Carson County, his Legislature attached it to Great Salt Lake
County, for judicial and other purposes. A large number of Mormons were
sent on to colonize, and if possible to retain, the fertile Valley of
Nevada. These missionaries were recalled in 1857, as well as many
others, who were settling in different parts of California.

Slowly and sullenly they relinquished their hold upon this rich and
prosperous portion of the Republic. It rapidly advanced in population,
and not only prospered as a Territory, as already mentioned, but has
lately been admitted as one of the States of the Union. The admission of
Nevada, carved out of Utah, while the mother Territory still remains out
in the cold, ought to be a sufficient hint that Congress and the people
of the United States are not yet prepared for the establishment in their
midst of a polygamic monarchy.

Judge Stiles returned to Salt Lake City, and there held several courts.

In the fall of 1856 a conflict arose, in regard to the jurisdiction of
the United States Marshal. Heretofore this officer had acted with the
Mormons, and all had passed off smoothly. But a real gentile was now
appointed, and this was the signal for Mormon opposition. The Mormons
claimed that the Territorial Marshal, instead of the United States
Marshal, should act in the United States courts when doing territorial
business. The United States Marshal contended that he should officiate
in all business transacted in the United States courts, whether sitting
as federal or territorial courts. Judge Stiles issued certain writs,
directed to the officer, which he found it impossible to serve. The
people, instigated by the Mormon leaders, refused to obey the precepts
of the court, and set at naught its authority, proclaiming that the
time had come when their laws, and none others, should be enforced in
Utah.

The question of jurisdiction was brought before the court, and James
Ferguson, Hosea Stout, and J. C. Little, Mormon lawyers, loudly demanded
that the Judge should decide in their favor. Ferguson, backed by an
armed mob, told Judge Stiles, in open court, that if he dared to decide
contrary to their wishes, he "would take him from the bench d--d quick";
that the boys were there to do it, and he, with others, by threats and
intimidations, finally compelled the Judge to adjourn his court.

Judge Stiles then appealed to Brigham Young, as Governor of the
Territory, to sustain him, and protect him in the discharge of his
duties. In reply, he was coolly told that "the courts had already cost
him [Brigham] too much trouble; that the boys had got their spunk up,
and he would not interfere." He advised him, "if he could not sustain
and enforce their [the United States] laws and institutions, the sooner
he adjourned his court the better."

These proceedings had a tendency to bring the Judge into disrepute with
the Mormons. Thomas Williams, a lawyer, had his office with Judge
Stiles, on Main Street. Williams, though a Mormon, was an independent
man, and had openly opposed Brigham on some question of politics. He had
also denounced some prominent murders, and was becoming obnoxious, and
even dangerous, to Brigham and his compeers. The Prophet once said to
Williams's father and mother: "If Tom don't behave himself better, and
stop causing me trouble, I must attend to him." Soon after, Williams
apostatized, and started for California, intending to remain, and send
back for his family. He met the fate of Babbitt. He was waylaid and
killed by "Indians" on the Plains. It is well understood at Salt Lake
that these were white Indians, and that Williams was put to death by
order of the church authorities.

The records of the United States District Courts were in Judge Stiles's
office. He, and Williams also, had a good many law books, which were
private property. Brigham asserted that the records were suffered to
"lie around loose," and suggested to the boys that they had better be
cared for. This was sufficient, and "the boys" proceeded to "'tend to
it." James Ferguson, Hiram B. Clawson, and several others, repaired to
the office of the Judge when he was absent, and stationing one of the
number to watch, they gathered up the records of the courts, first of
all, and conveyed them to a fire-and-burglar-proof-safe, belonging to
Young, and under the control of Clawson, who was his confidential clerk
and son-in-law.

Having deposited them safely, they returned, and taking some of the
Judge's papers, tore them in pieces, and scattered them over the floor,
and in the direction of an outhouse. About the same time a large number
of the law books found their way into the houses of certain Mormon
lawyers, where they have ever since remained. They then took some of the
books from the office, and placed them in the outhouse, set fire to the
building, and burned it to the ground.

When Judge Stiles returned he found the office robbed, and the books and
papers, as he supposed, burned.

Thus all business was suspended, and the records of the United States
Courts and government property burned and stolen from the custody of the
legal authorities.

Judge Stiles left Utah in the spring of 1857, and when in Washington,
made affidavit to the foregoing facts. It may be well here to state that
Judge S. was entirely conscientious in making his affidavit, and the
prevailing impression in the community was that the records had been
destroyed.

In the summer of 1855 W. W. Drummond, of Illinois, arrived in Utah, as
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. The Mormons allege that he
deserted his wife, and brought with him a mistress. This caused much
righteous indignation among the saints! The Judge also professed to be
a warm friend and advocate of Senator Douglas, whom the Mormons hate.

When Drummond was about to hold court, he intimated that he would set
aside all judgments rendered by probate Judges, and annul all their
proceedings, except such as pertained to the usual and legitimate
business of the probate courts. Here was a direct issue, and a conflict
was inevitable.

The court being about to be held in Fillmore, a Jew was hired for $25 to
quarrel with Drummond. As a part of the programme, also, he was to
strike the Judge. The Jew played his part, except the blow, which, for
want of opportunity or courage, was omitted. Instead of this he sent to
the Judge an insulting message, by the hands of a colored "boy"
belonging to Drummond. The boy was sent back with a raw hide, and
instructions to "lay on" the same to the back of the Israelite, which
Cuffy obeyed with much spirit. Complaint was made by the Jew to a local
magistrate. A warrant was issued, and Drummond and his negro were both
arrested.

The result of this _émeute_ was a sort of compromise, in which it was
understood that the Judge should not interfere with the probate courts,
and he was set at liberty.

After adjourning his court at Fillmore, Drummond located in Utah County
in the winter of 1856. The following summer he went to Carson to hold
court for Judge Stiles. Thence he proceeded to California and to the
States, and as the Mormons allege "contributed largely to the getting up
of Buchanan's crusade."




CHAPTER IV.

POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.--THE MORMON WAR.

     Report of the Secretary of War.--Proclamation of Gov. Brigham
     Young declaring Martial Law.--Correspondence.--Sermons of
     Young and Kimball.--Proclamation of Gov. Cumming.--His Echo
     Canyon Adventures.--Col. Kane.--The Mormons leave Salt Lake.--
     Commissioners appointed by the President.--Peace restored.


By these and similar outrages the Mormons had succeeded in ridding
themselves of all the federal authorities, and were really in open
rebellion against the Federal Government.

As Congress was not in session, the matter was taken in hand by Floyd,
Secretary of War, and President Buchanan.

After due consultation it was deemed advisable to appoint new men to all
the civil offices of the Territory, and to accompany them with a
military force sufficient for their protection and the enforcement of
the laws. Accordingly, President Buchanan, during the summer of 1857,
made the following appointments for Utah:--Governor, A. Cumming; Chief
Justice, D. R. Eckels; Associate Justices, John Cradlebaugh and Charles
E. Sinclair; Secretary, John Hartnett.

An army of about 3000 men was armed and equipped, and ordered to march
for Utah, early in the fall of 1857.

Brevet Brigadier-General W. S. Harney was originally named as commander
of this force, but it was subsequently deemed inadvisable to detach that
officer from the special duties of his department in Kansas, and the
troops sent to Utah were placed under the orders of Col. A. S. Johnson.

The Secretary of War, in his report, dated December 5, 1857, says:--

     "The Territory of Utah is peopled almost exclusively by the
     religious sect known as Mormons. . . . They have substituted
     for the laws of the land a theocracy, having for its head an
     individual whom they profess to believe a prophet of God.

     "This Prophet demands obedience, and receives it implicitly
     from his people, in virtue of what he assures them to be
     authority derived from revelations received by him from
     Heaven. Whenever he finds it convenient to exercise any
     special command, these opportune revelations of a higher law
     come to his aid. From his decrees there is no appeal; against
     his will there is no resistance. . . .

     "From the first hour they fixed themselves in that remote and
     almost inaccessible region of our territory, from which they
     are now sending defiance to the sovereign power, their whole
     plan has been to prepare for a successful secession from the
     authority of the United States, and a permanent establishment
     of their own. . . .

     "This Mormon brotherhood has scarcely preserved the semblance
     of obedience to the authority of the United States for some
     years past; not at all indeed, except as it might confer some
     direct benefit upon themselves, or contribute to circulate
     public money in their community. . . . I need not here recite
     the many instances in their conduct and history on which these
     general allegations are founded, especially the conduct they
     have adopted within the last twelve months towards the civil
     authorities of the United States.

     "It has, nevertheless, always been the policy and desire of
     the Federal Government to avoid collision with this Mormon
     community. It has borne with the insubordination they have
     exhibited, under circumstances when respect for its own
     authority has frequently counselled harsh measures of
     discipline. And this forbearance might still be prolonged, and
     the evils rife among them be allowed to work out their own
     cure, if this community occupied any other theatre, isolated
     and remote from the seats of civilization, than the one they
     now possess.

     "But, unfortunately for these views, their settlements lie in
     the great pathway which leads from the Atlantic States to the
     new and flourishing communities growing up upon the Pacific
     seaboard. They stand a lion in the path; not only themselves
     defying the civil and military authorities of the government,
     but encouraging, if not exciting, the nomad savages who roam
     over the vast, unoccupied regions of the continent, to the
     pillage and massacre of peaceful and helpless emigrant
     families traversing the solitudes of the wilderness. The rapid
     settlement of our Pacific possessions; the rights, in those
     regions, of emigrants, unable to afford the heavy expenses of
     transit by water and the Isthmus; the facility and safety of
     military, political, and social intercommunication between our
     eastern and western populations and States,--all depend upon
     the prompt, absolute, and thorough removal of a hostile power
     besetting this path, midway of its route, at a point where
     succor and provisions should always be found, rather than
     obstruction, privation, and outrage. . . .

     "From all the circumstances surrounding this subject at the
     time, it was thought expedient, during the past summer, to
     send a body of troops to Utah, with the civil officers
     recently appointed to that Territory. . . . Great care has been
     taken, in preparing for the march to Utah, that nothing should
     seem to excite apprehension of any action on the part of the
     army in the least conflicting with the fixed principle of our
     institutions, by which the military is strictly subordinate to
     the civil authority. The instructions of the commanding
     officer were deliberately considered, and carefully drawn, and
     he was charged not to allow any conflict to take place between
     the troops and the people of the Territory, except only in
     case he should be called upon by the Governor for soldiers to
     act as a _posse comitatus_ in enforcing obedience to the laws.

     "In conformity with this sentiment, and to assure these people
     of the real intention of the movement, an active, discreet
     officer was sent in advance of the army to Utah, for the
     purpose of purchasing provisions for it, and of assuring the
     people of the Territory of the peaceful intentions of the
     Government. This officer found, upon entering the Territory,
     that these deluded people had already, in advance of his
     arrival, or of any information, except as to the march of the
     column, determined to resist their approach, and prevent, if
     possible, and by force, the entrance of the army into the
     Valley of Salt Lake. Supplies of every sort were refused him.

     "The day after his departure from the city, on his way back,
     Brigham issued his Proclamation, substantially declaring war
     against the United States, and at the same time putting the
     Territory under martial law."

The following is a copy of this celebrated document:--


     "PROCLAMATION

     "OF GOVERNOR BRIGHAM YOUNG.

     "_Citizens of Utah_,--We are invaded by a hostile force, who
     are evidently assailing us to accomplish our overthrow and
     destruction. For the last twenty-five years we have trusted
     officials of the Government, from constables and justices, to
     judges, governors, and presidents, only to be scorned, held in
     derision, insulted, and betrayed. Our houses have been
     plundered and then burned, our fields laid waste, our
     principal men butchered, while under the pledged faith of the
     Government for their safety; and our families driven from
     their homes, to find that shelter in the barren wilderness,
     and that protection among hostile savages, which were denied
     them in the boasted abodes of Christianity and civilization.

     "The Constitution of our common country guarantees unto us all
     that we do now, or have ever claimed. If the constitutional
     rights which pertain unto us as American citizens were
     extended to Utah, according to the spirit and meaning thereof,
     and fairly and impartially administered, it is all that we
     could ask,--all that we have ever asked.

     "Our opponents have availed themselves of prejudice existing
     against us, because of our religious faith, to send out a
     formidable host to accomplish our destruction. We have had no
     privilege or opportunity of defending ourselves from the
     false, foul, and unjust aspersions against us, before the
     nation.

     "The Government has not condescended to cause an investigating
     committee, or other persons, to be sent to inquire and
     ascertain the truth, as is customary in such cases. We know
     those aspersions to be false, but that avails us nothing. We
     are condemned unheard, and forced to an issue with an armed,
     mercenary mob, which has been sent against us at the
     instigation of anonymous letter-writers, ashamed to father the
     base, slanderous falsehoods which they have given to the
     public; of corrupt officials, who have brought false
     accusations against us, to screen themselves in their own
     infamy; and of hireling priests and howling editors, who
     prostitute the truth for filthy lucre's sake.

     "The issue which has thus been forced upon us compels us to
     resort to the first great law of self-preservation, and stand
     in our own self-defence,--a right guaranteed to us by the
     genius of the institutions of our country, and upon which the
     Government is based. Our duty to ourselves--to our
     families--requires us not to tamely submit to be driven and
     slain, without an attempt to preserve ourselves. Our duty to
     our country--our holy religion--our God--to freedom and
     liberty, requires that we should not quietly stand still, and
     see those fetters forging around us, which are calculated to
     enslave and bring us in subjection to an unlawful military
     despotism, such as can only emanate, in a country of
     constitutional law, from usurpation, tyranny, and oppression.

     "Therefore, I, Brigham Young, Governor and Superintendent of
     Indian Affairs for the Territory of Utah, in the name of the
     people of the United States in the Territory of Utah,
     forbid,--

     "_First._ All armed forces, of whatever description, from
     coming into this Territory, under any pretence whatever.

     "_Second._ That all the forces in said Territory hold
     themselves in readiness to march at a moment's notice, to
     repel any and all such invasion.

     "_Third._ Martial law is hereby declared to exist in this
     Territory, from and after the publication of this
     proclamation; and no person shall be allowed to pass or
     repass, into, or through, or from this Territory, without a
     permit from the proper officer.

     "Given under my hand and seal, at Great Salt Lake City,
     Territory of Utah, this fifteenth day of September, A. D.
     eighteen hundred and fifty-seven, and of the Independence of
     the United States of America the eighty-second.

     "BRIGHAM YOUNG."

This proclamation was forwarded to the commander of the United States
forces, then on the Plains. It was accompanied by the following
letter:--

     "FORT BRIDGER, September 3, 1857.

     "SIR,--I have the honor to forward you the accompanying letter
     from his Excellency Governor Young, together with two copies
     of his proclamation, and a copy of the Laws of Utah, 185,
     chap. 7, containing the Organic Act of the Territory.

     "It may be proper to add, that I am here to aid in carrying
     out the instructions of Governor Young. General Robinson will
     deliver these papers to you, and receive such communication as
     you may wish to make.

     "Trusting that your answer and action will be dictated by a
     proper respect for the rights and liberties of American
     citizens, I remain,

     "Very respectfully,

     "DANIEL H. WELLS,

     "_Lieut.-General commanding Nauvoo Legion_."


     "GOVERNOR'S OFFICE, UTAH TERRITORY,
       GREAT SALT LAKE CITY, September 29, 1857.

     "Sir,--By reference to the Act of Congress, passed September
     9, 1850, organizing the Territory of Utah, published in a copy
     of the Laws of Utah, herewith, p. 146, chap. 7, you will find
     the following:--

          "'SEC. 2. _And be it further enacted_, That the
          executive power in and over said Territory of Utah
          shall be vested in a governor, who shall hold his
          office for four years, _and until his successor
          shall be appointed and qualified_, unless sooner
          removed by the President of the United States. The
          governor shall reside within said Territory, shall
          be commander-in-chief of the militia thereof,' &c.,
          &c.

     "I am still the Governor and Superintendent of Indian Affairs
     for this Territory, no successor having been appointed and
     qualified, as provided by law, nor have I been removed by the
     President of the United States.

     "By virtue of the authority thus vested in me, I have issued
     and forwarded you a copy of my proclamation, forbidding the
     entrance of armed forces into this Territory. This you have
     disregarded. I now further direct that you retire forthwith
     from the Territory by the same route you entered. Should you
     deem this impracticable, and prefer to remain until spring in
     the vicinity of your present encampment, Black Fork, or Green
     River, you can do so in peace, and unmolested, on condition
     that you deposit your arms and ammunition with Lewis Robinson,
     Quartermaster-General of the Territory, and leave in the
     spring, as soon as the condition of the roads will permit you
     to march. And should you fall short of provisions, they can be
     furnished you by making the proper applications therefor.

     "Gen. D. H. Wells will forward this, and receive any
     communications you may have to make.

     "Very respectfully,

     "BRIGHAM YOUNG;

     "_Governor and Superintendent of
       Indian Affairs, Utah Territory_

     "To the Officer commanding the Forces
       now invading Utah Territory."

The legitimate result of this violent and treasonable proclamation, as
might be supposed, was to incite the people to revenge and bloodshed.
Every man who could bear arms was at once taken from his usual avocation
and trained in the art of war. Clothing was at this time very scarce, as
no trains of goods had arrived from the States. The "sisters" were
called upon to make up every article which they could possibly spare
into uniforms for the troops. Accordingly the "brethren" appeared
arrayed in pieces of bed-quilts, carpets, and old clo' made over, and
presented to the eye as motley and miserable a crew as those of "the
right valiant Sir John Falstaff." If we look at the leaders of these
classical armies, however, the parallel fails. The chivalric Jack had at
least the courage to march at the head of his soldiers; while Brigham,
who acknowledges himself to be a natural coward, preferred to remain
snugly ensconced among his numerous wives and children. The Lion of the
Lord, though seemingly aroused, only shook himself and roared loudly
several times. He then quietly lay down, and remained thenceforth
_couchant_ during the war. With all the assurance and assumption of
Joseph Smith, he lacked his personal courage and manly daring.

But the rank and file of these "warriors of the Lord" lacked neither
courage nor enthusiasm. Their Zion was threatened,--their institutions
in danger,--and with the fire of revenge burning in their hearts, at the
remembrance of former injuries, they rushed forth, to conquer or to die.

Many joined their brethren in Echo Canyon, without even shoes to their
feet, wading through snows several feet deep. Such devotion and heroism
were worthy of a better cause.

The feeling and determination of the people cannot be better expressed
than by extracts from the sermons of their leaders at this critical
period.

Sunday morning, September 16, 1857, Brigham Young, in his public
discourse, said:--

     "This people are free; they are not in bondage to any
     government on God's footstool. We have transgressed no law,
     and we have no occasion to do so, neither do we intend; but as
     for any nation's coming to destroy this people, God Almighty
     being my helper, they cannot come here. [The congregation
     responded a loud 'Amen.'] . . .

     "We have borne enough of their oppression and hellish abuse,
     and we will not bear any more of it, for there is no just law
     requiring further forbearance on our part. And I am not going
     to have troops here to protect the priests and hellish rabble
     in efforts to drive us from the land we possess; for the Lord
     does not want us to be driven, and has said, 'If you will
     assert your rights, and keep my commandments, you shall never
     again be brought into bondage by your enemies.' . . .

     "They say that their army is legal; and I say that such a
     statement is as false as hell, and that they are as rotten as
     an old pumpkin that has been frozen seven times, and then
     melted in a harvest sun. Come on with your thousands of
     illegally ordered troops, and I will promise you, in the name
     of Israel's God, that you shall melt away as the snow before a
     July sun. . . .

     "You might as well tell me that you can make hell into a
     powder-house, as to tell me that you could let an army in
     here, and have peace; and I intend to tell them, and show them
     this, if they do not stay away. . . . And I say our enemies
     shall not slip the bow on old 'Bright's neck' again. God bless
     you. Amen."

In the afternoon of the same day, the "lion" again roars, as follows:--

     "There cannot be a more damnable, dastardly order issued, than
     was issued by the Administration to this people, while they
     were in an Indian country in 1846. Before we left Nauvoo, not
     less than two United States Senators came to receive a pledge
     from us that we would leave the United States; and then, while
     we were doing our best to leave their borders, the poor, low,
     degraded curses sent a requisition for five hundred men to go
     and fight their battles! That was President Polk; and he is
     now weltering in hell, with old Zachary Taylor, where the
     present Administration will soon be, if they do not repent.

     "Liars have reported that this people have committed treason,
     and upon their lies the President has ordered out troops to
     aid in officering this Territory; and if those officers are
     like many who have previously been sent here,--and we have
     reason to believe that they are, or they would not come where
     they know they are not wanted,--they are poor, miserable
     blacklegs, broken down political hacks, robbers and
     whoremongers; men that are not fit for civilized society; so
     they must dragoon them upon us for officers. I feel that I
     won't bear such cursed treatment, and that is enough to
     say,--for we are just as free as the mountain air. . .

     "I have told you that if this people will live their religion,
     all will be well; and I have told you that if there is any man
     or woman who is not willing to destroy anything or everything
     of their property that would be of use to an enemy if left, I
     wanted them to go out of the Territory. And I again say so
     to-day; for when the time comes to burn and lay waste our
     improvements, if any man undertakes to shield his, he will be
     sheared down; for 'judgment will be laid to the line, and
     righteousness to the plummet.'

     "Now, the faint-hearted can go in peace; but should that time
     come, they must not interfere. Before I will suffer what I
     have in times gone by, there shall not be one building, nor
     one foot of lumber, nor a stick, nor a tree, nor a particle of
     grass or hay that will burn, left in reach of our enemies. I
     am sworn, if driven to extremity, to utterly lay waste, in the
     name of Israel's God."

On the same subject, Heber C. Kimball, first counsellor to Brigham, used
the following language:--

     "Is there a collision between us and the United States? No; we
     have not collashed; that is the word that sounds nearest to
     what I mean. But now the thread is cut between them and us,
     and we will never gybe again,--no, never, worlds without end.
     [Voices, 'Amen.'] . . .

     "Do as you are told, and Brigham Young will never leave the
     governorship of this Territory, from this time henceforth and
     forever. No, never. And there shall no wicked Judge with his
     w---- ever sit in our courts again; for all who are against
     Israel are an abomination to me and to our God.

     "The spirit that is upon me this morning is the Spirit of the
     Lord, that is, the Holy Ghost,--though some of you may think
     that the Holy Ghost is never cheerful. Well, let me tell you,
     the Holy Ghost is a man; he is one of the sons of our Father
     and our God, and he is that man that stood next to Jesus
     Christ,--just as I stand by brother Brigham. . . . You think
     our Father and our God is not a lively, sociable, and cheerful
     man; he is one of the most lively men that ever lived. . . .
     Brother Brigham is my leader, he is my Prophet and my Seer, my
     Revelator; and whatever he says, that is for me to do, and it
     is not for me to question him one word, nor to question God a
     minute."[49:A]

Many sermons were delivered, composed, throughout, of such material as
the foregoing extracts. The genius of Mormonism is here fully
displayed,--implicit obedience to their leaders, and especially to the
teachings of Brigham Young. The people were commanded to be ready to
leave their homes at an hour's notice, and flee to the mountains,--and
this too, as the snows of winter were falling around them. They were
commanded to have the torch ready to set fire to their dwellings, and
the axe to cut down all their fruit-trees; and they were ready to obey!
The question naturally presents itself, Can blind faith and fanaticism
thus lead and control a whole community? That some should be thus
blindly infatuated, is not strange; but that a whole community should
thus lose their reason, and be willing to beggar themselves and
families, in obedience to the call of their leader, is almost beyond
belief.

It is safe to say, had the Mormons been left free to choose, at least
one half would have remained at home, and even welcomed the troops into
the city.

But the fiat of despotism had gone forth. "When the time comes to burn
and lay waste our improvements, if any man undertakes to shield his, he
will be sheared down; for 'judgment will be laid to the line, and
righteousness to the plummet.'" This means, in plain English, that any
man who refused to obey Young should be put to death; and the people
well understood it. As it was certain death to resist his will, they
vied with each other in seeming to render a willing obedience to a
tyrant whom many hated, and all feared.

They fortified Echo Canyon, a narrow pass, about eighteen miles in
length, eastward from the city. Piles of huge stones were heaped up
along the borders of the precipices, ready to be dashed against the
troops, as they should essay to pass the gorge. Intrenchments were
thrown up, and such other warlike preparations made as their facilities
afforded.

The United States troops had entered the Territory of Utah, and were
encamped in Green River County, near Fort Bridger, a distance of 118
miles from Salt Lake City. From this place Governor Cumming issued the
following proclamation:--

     "GREEN RIVER COUNTY, near Fort Bridger,   }
       UTAH TERRITORY, 21st November, 1857.    }

     "_To the People of Utah Territory_:--

     "On the 11th day of July, 1857, the President appointed me to
     preside over the executive department of the government of
     this Territory. I arrived at this point on the 17th of this
     month, and shall probably be detained some time, in
     consequence of the loss of animals during the recent
     snow-storm. I will proceed at this point to make the
     preliminary arrangements for the temporary organization of the
     territorial government. Many treasonable acts of violence have
     recently been committed by lawless individuals, supposed to
     have been commanded by the late executive. Such persons are in
     a state of rebellion.

     "Proceedings will be instituted against them in a court
     organized by Chief Justice Eckels, held in this county, which
     court will supersede the necessity of appointing military
     commissions for the trial of such offenders.

     "It is my duty to enforce unconditional obedience to the
     Constitution, and the organic law of this Territory, and to
     all the other laws of Congress applicable to you.

     "To enable me to effect this object, I will, in the event of
     resistance, rely first upon a _posse comitatus_ of the
     well-disposed portion of the inhabitants of this Territory,
     and will only resort to a military _posse_ in case of
     necessity. I trust this necessity will not occur. I have come
     among you with no prejudices or enmities; and by the exercise
     of a just and firm administration I hope to command your
     confidence.

     "Freedom of conscience, and the use of your own peculiar mode
     of serving God, are sacred rights, the exercise of which is
     guaranteed by the Constitution, and with which it is not the
     province of the Government or the disposition of its
     representatives in this Territory to interfere. In virtue of
     my authority as commander-in-chief of the military of this
     Territory, I hereby command all armed bodies of individuals,
     by whomsoever organized, to disband, and return to their
     respective homes.

     "The penalty of disobedience to this command will subject the
     offenders to the punishment due to traitors.

     "A. CUMMING,

     "_Governor of Utah Territory_."

During this time the Mormon troops were busy stealing stock, burning
supply-trains, and in every way weakening and embarrassing the United
States forces. Being familiar with the country, they had greatly the
advantage; and could break suddenly upon a herding party, from some side
canyon, capture their stock, and before the alarm could be given, be
safely ensconced in their own quarters. Much valuable stock was acquired
in this way.

     "Forts Bridger and Supply were vacated and burned down. Orders
     were issued by Daniel H. Wells (Lieut.-General Nauvoo Legion,)
     to stampede the animals of the United States troops on their
     march, to set fire to their trains, to burn the grass and the
     whole country before them and on their flanks, to keep them
     from sleeping by night surprises, and to block the roads by
     felling trees, and destroying the fords of rivers.

     "On the 4th of October, 1857, the Mormons, under Capt. Lot
     Smith, captured and burned, on Green River, three of our
     supply trains, consisting of seventy-five wagons, loaded with
     provisions and tents for the army, and carried away several
     hundred animals."

Late in the fall of 1857 "the Army of Utah" arrived at Bridger, and made
an encampment, which was called Camp Scott.

As the winter was severe, and the snow very deep, little progress was
made by the army in quelling the Mormon rebellion, while much suffering
was endured by the soldiers. Some time during the winter of 1857-58 Col.
Kane set out for Utah, to ascertain, if possible, the exact state of
affairs in that Territory. He was not sent as the agent of the
Government, as is generally supposed, but his mission was approved by
President Buchanan, and the War Department. He went _incognito_, and by
the southern route, and arrived in Utah in the month of January. He was
accompanied by a servant only, and while on the desert to the south of
Salt Lake City, was taken sick, and came near losing his life. Amasa
Lyman and others were out exploring, with a view of ascertaining whether
the Mormons could be attacked from the south. They found Col. Kane and
his man on the desert. Lyman took him into his carriage, "laid hands on
him, and administered unto him." Kane still remained unknown to him, but
told him that he had business of importance to transact at Salt
Lake,--important both to the Mormons and to the nation. He was
immediately taken to Salt Lake, where, for the first time, he made known
his business and his name.

Brigham was agreeably surprised to find an old friend and _quasi_ Mormon
in his guest, and of course treated him with the greatest consideration.
It was well understood at Salt Lake that Col. Kane was baptized by the
Elders some years before, while on a tour of exploration to the Rocky
Mountains.[52:A] How much of Mormonism he imbibed is not known, but
certain it is, that the saints rely on his aid and influence, under all
circumstances.

The negotiations were of the most friendly character, and Kane proceeded
soon after, in his character as pacificator, to the "Head-quarters of
the Army of Utah," at Fort Bridger. He was escorted by Porter Rockwell,
and Daniel Kimball past the limits of the Mormon camp. He held
interviews with the officers of the army and with Governor Cumming, and
succeeded in inducing the Governor to accompany him to Salt Lake.

Of this journey Governor Cumming says:--

     "I left camp on the 5th, _en route_ for this city, accompanied
     by Col. Kane, as guide, and two servants. . . . I was escorted
     from Bear River Valley to the western end of Echo Canyon,--the
     journey through the canyon being performed, for the most part,
     in the night; it was about eleven o'clock when I arrived at
     Weber Station.

     "I have been everywhere recognized as the Governor of Utah,
     and, so far from having encountered insults and indignities, I
     am gratified in being able to state that, in passing through
     the settlements, I have been universally greeted with such
     respectful attentions as are due to the representative of the
     executive authority of the United States. . . .

     "When it was arranged with the Mormon officer in command of my
     escort that I should pass through Echo Canyon in the night, I
     inferred that it was with the object of concealing the
     barricades and other defences. I was therefore agreeably
     surprised by an illumination in honor to me. The bonfires
     kindled by the soldiers, from the base to the summit of the
     hills, completely illuminated the valley, and disclosed the
     snow-covered mountains which surrounded us."

The following is the Mormon account of the _entrée_ of Governor Cumming
into the Valley of Salt Lake, and may go to explain to him why the
journey was made through Echo Canyon in the night.

Upon entering the Mormon lines they were rejoined by Rockwell and
Kimball, who commanded the Governor's escort to Salt Lake City. Echo
Canyon is a narrow pass, about eighteen miles in length, and commands
the entrance to Salt Lake Valley from the east. The Mormons had
fortified this canyon at several points. They also had four camps, or
places of rendezvous, at convenient distances. Upon arriving at Cache
Cave, the first "post," the party of the Governor came to a halt. His
Excellency was escorted into camp with due honor, and an ox was slain to
celebrate the occasion. After partaking of a sumptuous repast, the
troops were ordered out for the Governor to review. About 150 men were
"drawn up," and after the review, the Governor "made a speech." He
complimented "the boys" on their order, discipline, and skill.

Col. Kimball then proceeded to read various orders to the troops.
Various imaginary companies were ordered to relieve various other
imaginary companies. Several new posts were ordered to be established,
and others abandoned. Meanwhile, the Governor, _not to be deceived_, was
noting down the different companies as they were called. This done, they
again took the road. It was now about sundown; and as they passed the
stations, the troops were arranged on each side of the road, to salute
the Governor, and be reviewed by him. Everything passed off smoothly
until they reached the third station, when it suddenly occurred to Col.
Kimball that the pickets at that post had not been apprised of their
coming. He remarked, on nearing the camp, that "he saw no pickets, and
he guessed the boys were in ambush." He therefore mounted a horse, and
telling the driver to be sure and "halt" as soon as he heard the word,
rode off. In a moment more, the guard shouted, "Halt! who goes
there?"--and before a reply could be given, the crack of a rifle was
heard. The Governor, trembling with fright, cried out, "I am your
friend, the Governor of Utah; don't fire, boys; for God's sake, don't
fire!" "I know nothing about Governors, nor anybody else," replied the
picket; "I must do my duty. This way, Sergeant of the Guard." By this
time quite a company rode up, and, as the Governor supposed, he was
about to be taken prisoner. Col. Kimball now appeared, explained the
whole matter, and relieved his Excellency from his embarrassing
position. But the Governor was entirely innocent of the joke, and
believes, to this day, that he had a hair-breadth escape.

They then passed on to the mouth of Echo Canyon, where the troops were
again reviewed; and as the party bivouacked for the night, hundreds of
camp-fires gleamed along the rugged sides of the canyon, furnishing
incontestable evidence of the great number of the Mormon soldiers. There
were at this time about 150 men, all told, in the canyon, and _these the
Governor had reviewed at every station_.

The next morning the Governor proceeded on his journey, prepared to
assert that the Mormons had from two to three thousand men under arms in
and near Echo Canyon. When the company arrived at Sessions, ten miles
from Salt Lake City, they were met by a large concourse of citizen
soldiery, preceded by a band of music, accompanied by the roaring of
cannon. The Echo Canyon boys were also there, to see the fun. The
Governor was quite bewildered by all this parade, and made up his mind
that the Mormons were very numerous, and both ready and willing to "wipe
out" the handful of Government soldiers, whenever they could get
permission from their leader.

Upon arriving at the "Holy City," the best lodgings and the best brandy
were provided for his Excellency. Brigham called in due time, and paid
his compliments; invited Governor Cumming to his office, and tendered to
him "the hospitalities of the city." Governor Cumming was delighted, and
in a few days called at the office of Governor Young. This wily
personage put on one of his blandest smiles, resigned his office of
Governor, turned over the papers and documents of the office to his
legal successor, and, to crown all, produced the _records of the
courts_, in the highest state of preservation.

Governor Cumming was perfectly amazed. Was it possible his eyes did not
deceive him? Were these the veritable records about which so much had
been said? They were; and the Mormons had been belied, and the
Government deceived. He immediately wrote to the President and to Col.
Johnson, and explained how matters stood.

The gifted and accomplished Col. Kane was the bearer of these documents
to his venerable friend James Buchanan, who read with delight these
"signs of repentance" on the part of his dear children, and immediately
commenced writing their pardon.

It has been supposed by many that Col. Kane was, at that time, acting as
the agent of the United States Government. But the following extract
from a letter to him, written by President Buchanan, dated December 31,
1857, will at once determine the position which the Colonel occupied:--

     "MY DEAR SIR,--You furnish the strongest evidence of your
     desire to serve the Mormons, by abandoning the comforts of
     friends, family, and home, and voluntarily encountering the
     perils and dangers of a journey to Utah, at the present
     inclement season of the year, at your own expense, and without
     official position. . . . Nothing but pure philanthropy, and a
     strong desire to serve the Mormon people, could have dictated
     a course so much at war with your private interests."

While the President was penning his proclamation of pardon, the Mormons
were leaving their property and homes, and taking up their line of march
for the South. Governor Cumming was unable to control the movements of
Col. Johnson, who was acting under instructions from the Secretary of
War. Hence Cumming could not save to Brigham, however much he might feel
disposed to do so, the humiliation of seeing the streets of the city
filled with the federal soldiers, against whom he had been hurling his
anathemas. Finding this catastrophe could not possibly be averted, he
promulgated an order, purporting to emanate from the Almighty,
commanding the people to leave their homes and start for the South. This
order was prompted partly by the fact that the "President of the Church"
was committed to this course by his repeated declarations, and partly
by the wish on his part to test his power over "this people." It was
readily and implicitly obeyed by his deluded followers. They knew not
where they were going. Many believed they were destined for Sonora. They
only knew the Prophet of the Lord had spoken, and they must obey.

On the 6th of April, 1858, their long trains moved southward, taking
with them their household goods, and provisions for the journey.
Brigham, Heber, and the principal men, also removed their families from
their comfortable homes, again to encounter the toils and privations
incident to life on the Plains. They went to Provo, 50 miles from the
city, and there halted. The snow was still on the ground, and the
pilgrims suffered much from the inclemency of the weather.

On the 12th of April, Mr. Buchanan appointed L. W. Powell, of Kentucky,
and Ben McCulloch, of Texas, Commissioners to Utah, and by them sent on
his proclamation of pardon. They reached Salt Lake on the 7th of June,
and immediately made known their business to the Mormon authorities.
They were instructed to say to the Mormons, in the language of the
proclamation, "If you obey the laws, keep the peace, and respect the
just rights of others, you will be perfectly secure, and may live in
your present faith, or change it for another at your pleasure. Every
intelligent man among you knows very well that the Government has never,
directly or indirectly, sought to molest you in your worship, to control
you in your ecclesiastical affairs, or even to influence you in your
religious opinions."

The following extracts from the report of the Commissioners will serve
to show the result of their mission:--

     "We stated that we wished a free conference with them, and
     were ready to hear what they had to say. Ex-Governor Brigham
     Young, Lieut.-Governor Wells, and others, spoke. They
     expressed their gratification that the President had sent
     commissioners to Utah. They stated that they were attached to
     the Constitution and the Government of the United States; they
     spoke harshly of many of the officials who had held office in
     the Territory; they spoke of the wrongs and injuries hitherto
     done them; they said they desired to live in peace, under the
     Constitution of the United States. They denied that they had
     ever driven any officials from Utah, or prevented any civil
     officer from entering the Territory. They admitted that they
     burned the army trains, and drove off the cattle from the army
     last fall, and for that act they accepted the President's
     pardon. All the charges that had been made against them,
     except the one last named, they denied. . . . We are pleased
     to state that the conference resulted in their agreeing to
     receive, quietly and peaceably, all the civil officers of the
     Government, and not to resist them in the execution of the
     duties of their offices; and to yield obedience to the
     authorities and laws of the United States.

     "That they would offer no resistance to the army; that the
     officers of the army would not be resisted in the execution of
     their orders within the Territory. In short, they agreed that
     the officers, civil and military, of the United States, should
     enter the Territory without resistance, and exercise,
     peaceably and unmolested, all the functions of their various
     offices."

The Mormons, on their part, stipulated that the army should not be
encamped within forty miles of the city; that they should protect
private property; that they should march directly through the city,
without halting; and should not encamp until they crossed the Jordan.
These conditions were substantially complied with. "On the 26th of June
General Johnson marched the army under his command through Salt Lake
City, and encamped on the banks of the river Jordan, just without the
city limits. The place selected for a permanent camp was in Cedar
Valley, about forty miles south of Great Salt Lake City, and known as
Camp Floyd, now Fort Crittenden."

On the 5th of July, 1858, the Mormon refugees received orders to return
to their homes. With joy and alacrity they prepared to obey the welcome
summons.

Governor Cumming had frequently urged them to return, without avail. But
when the "mighty man of God" sent forth his mandate, each man sprang to
his feet as if by magic, rushed to his teams, and before the morning
sun gilded the eastern hills, "the faithful" were again returning to
their Mecca.

A company of United States troops were stationed on what was called "the
Dug Out," to prevent collision with the Mormons on their return to Salt
Lake. The officer commanding related to me the following incident:--

     "I witnessed the most extreme destitution among the returning
     emigrants. I saw a number of women cooking around a camp-fire,
     and their clothing was extremely scanty. The supply of a
     family of fourteen persons could have been compressed into a
     small-sized trunk. One evening I saw two or three women
     cooking supper, and observing that they had neither tea nor
     coffee, I questioned them, and they replied they had had none
     for two or three years. At this time, according to report, it
     took a four-mule team to draw the Prophet's gold and silver,
     besides some that went in other conveyances."

The saints again entered into possession of their deserted homes, and
began, as well as the lateness of the season would permit, to cultivate
their farms and gardens.

Thus ended this crusade against the modern Mohammed and his followers.


FOOTNOTES:

[49:A] _Deseret News_, November 18, 1857.

[52:A] John Hyde, Jr., in his work on Mormonism, page 146, says:
"Fillmore, by the advice and intercession of Col. Kane, _who had
embraced Mormonism in Iowa_, appointed Brigham as the Governor of
Utah."




CHAPTER V.

POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.

     The Mountain Meadow Massacre and other Crimes of the Mormons.
     --Attempts to bring the Perpetrators to Justice.--Doings of
     Judge Cradlebaugh.--Governor Cumming and the Military Officers.
     --Judge Sinclair's Court.--Governor Dawson and his Misfortune.
     --New Governor and Associate Justices appointed.


The darkest chapter of Mormon history is now before us. It becomes my
duty to relate one of the most perfidious acts of cruelty and wholesale
butchery to be found in the annals of this or any other country. In
doing so, free use will be made of the statements of Judge Cradlebaugh
and others who were thoroughly conversant with all the facts.

The following is from the able speech of Judge Cradlebaugh, delivered in
the House of Representatives on the 7th of February, 1863:--

     "As one of the Associate Justices of the Territory of Utah, in
     the month of April, 1859, I commenced and held a term of the
     District Court for the Second Judicial District, in the city
     of Provo, about sixty miles south of Salt Lake City. Upon my
     requisition, Gen. A. S. Johnson, in command of the military
     department, furnished a small military force for the purpose
     of protecting the court. A grand jury was empanelled, and
     their attention was pointedly and specifically called to a
     great number of crimes that had been committed in the
     immediate vicinity,--cases of public notoriety, both as to the
     offence and the persons who had perpetrated the same; (for
     none of these things had "been done in a corner"). Their
     perpetrators had scorned alike concealment or apology, before
     the arrival of the American forces. The jury thus instructed,
     though kept in session two weeks, utterly refused to do
     anything, and were finally discharged, as an evidently useless
     appendage of a court of justice. But the court was determined
     to try a last resource, to bring to light and to punishment
     those guilty of the atrocious crimes which confessedly had
     been committed in the Territory, and the session continued.
     Bench warrants, based upon sworn information, were issued
     against the alleged criminals, and United States Marshal
     Dotson, a most excellent and reliable officer, aided by a
     military _posse_, procured on his own request, had succeeded
     in making a few arrests. A general stampede immediately took
     place among the Mormons, and what I wish to call your
     attention to, as particularly noticeable, is the fact that
     this occurred more especially among the church officials and
     civil officers. . . .

     "Sitting as a committing magistrate, complaint after complaint
     was made before me of murders and robberies. Among these I may
     mention, as peculiarly and shockingly prominent, the murder of
     Forbes, the assassination of the Parrishes and Potter, of
     Jones and his mother, of the Aiken party, of which there were
     six in all; and, worst and darkest in the appalling catalogue
     of blood, the cowardly, cold-blooded butchery and robbery at
     the Mountain Meadows. At that time there still lay, all
     ghastly, under the sun of Utah, the unburied skeletons of one
     hundred and nineteen men, women, and children, the hapless,
     hopeless victims of the Mormon creed. . . .

     "The scene of this horrible massacre at the Mountain Meadows
     is situate about three hundred and twenty miles west of south
     from Great Salt Lake City, on the road leading to Los Angelos,
     in California. I was the first federal Judge in that part of
     the Territory after the occurrence,--my district extending
     from a short distance below Salt Lake City to the south end of
     the Territory. I determined to visit that part of my district,
     and, if possible, expose the persons engaged in the massacre,
     which I did in the early part of the year 1859. I accordingly
     embraced an opportunity of accompanying a small detachment of
     soldiers, who were being sent to that section by Gen.
     Johnson,--having requested the Marshal of the Territory to
     accompany, or to send a deputy. He accordingly sent deputy
     William H. Rodgers, who went with me.

     "The command went as far south as the St. Clara, twenty miles
     beyond the Mountain Meadows, where we camped, and remained
     about a week. During our stay there I was visited by the
     Indian chiefs of that section, who gave me their version of
     the massacre. They admitted that a portion of their men were
     engaged in the massacre, but were not there when the attack
     commenced. One of them told me, in the presence of the others,
     that after the attack had been made, a white man came to their
     camp with a piece of paper, which, he said, _Brigham Young had
     sent_, that directed them to go and help to whip the
     emigrants. A portion of the band went, but did not assist in
     the fight. He gave as a reason, that the emigrants had long
     guns, and were good shots. He said that his brother [this
     chief's name was Jackson] was shot while running across the
     Meadow, at a distance of two hundred yards from the corral
     where the emigrants were. He said the Mormons were all
     painted. He said the Indians got a part of the clothing; and
     gave the names of John D. Lee, President Haight, and Bishop
     Higbee, as the big captains. It might be proper here to remark
     that the Indians in the southern part of the Territory of Utah
     are not numerous, and are a very low, cowardly, beastly set,
     very few of them being armed with guns. They are not
     formidable. I believe all in the southern part of the
     Territory would, under no circumstances, carry on a fight
     against ten white men.

     "From our camp on the St. Clara we again went back to the
     Mountain Meadows, camping near where the massacre had
     occurred. The Meadow is about five miles in length and one in
     width, running to quite a narrow point at the southwest end,
     being higher at the middle than either end. It is the divide
     between the waters that flow into the Great Basin and those
     emptying into the Colorado River. A very large spring rises in
     the south end of the narrow part. It was on the north side of
     this spring the emigrants were camped. The bank rises from the
     spring eight or ten feet, then extends off to the north about
     two hundred yards, on a level. A range of hills is there
     reached, rising perhaps fifty or sixty feet. Back of this
     range is quite a valley, which extends down until it has an
     outlet, three or four hundred yards below the spring, into the
     main meadow.

     "The first attack was made by going down this ravine, then
     following up the bed of the spring to near it, then at
     daylight firing upon the men who were about the
     camp-fires,--in which attack ten or twelve of the emigrants
     were killed or wounded; the stock of the emigrants having
     been previously driven behind the hill, and up the ravine.

     "The emigrants soon got in condition to repel the attack,
     shoved their wagons together, sunk the wheels in the earth,
     and threw up quite an intrenchment. The fighting after
     continued as a siege; the assailants occupying the hill, and
     firing at any of the emigrants that exposed themselves, having
     a barricade of stones along the crest of the hill as a
     protection. The siege was continued for five days, the
     besiegers appearing in the garb of Indians. The Mormons,
     seeing that they could not capture the train without making
     some sacrifice of life on their part, and getting weary of the
     fight, resolved to accomplish by strategy what they were not
     able to do by force. The fight had been going on for five
     days, and no aid was received from any quarter, although the
     family of Jacob Hamlin, the Indian agent, were living in the
     upper end of the Meadow, and within hearing of the reports of
     the guns.

     "Who can imagine the feelings of these men, women, and
     children, surrounded, as they supposed themselves to be, by
     savages? Fathers and mothers only can judge what they must
     have been. Far off, in the Rocky Mountains, without
     transportation,--for their cattle, horses and mules had been
     run off,--not knowing what their fate was to be,--we can but
     poorly realize, the gloom that pervaded the camp.

     "A wagon is descried, far up the Meadows. Upon its nearer
     approach, it is observed to contain armed men. See! now they
     raise a white flag! All is joy in the corral. A general shout
     is raised, and in an instant, a little girl, dressed in white,
     is placed at an opening between two of the wagons, as a
     response to the signal. The wagon approaches; the occupants
     are welcomed into the corral, the emigrants little suspecting
     that they were entertaining the fiends that had been besieging
     them.

     "This wagon contained President Haight and Bishop John D. Lee,
     among others of the Mormon Church. They professed to be on
     good terms with the Indians, and represented the Indians as
     being very mad. They also proposed to intercede, and settle
     the matter with the Indians. After several hours of parley,
     they, having apparently visited the Indians, gave the
     ultimatum of the Indians; which was, that the emigrants should
     march out of their camp, leaving everything behind them, even
     their guns. It was promised by the Mormon bishops that they
     would bring a force, and guard the emigrants back to the
     settlements.

     "The terms were agreed to,--the emigrants being desirous of
     saving the lives of their families. The Mormons retired, and
     subsequently appeared at the corral with thirty or forty armed
     men. The emigrants were marched out, the women and children in
     front, and the men behind, the Mormon guard being in the rear.
     When they had marched in this way about a mile, at a given
     signal, the slaughter commenced. The men were most all shot
     down at the first fire from the guard. Two only escaped, who
     fled to the desert, and were followed 150 miles before they
     were overtaken and slaughtered.

     "The women and children ran on, two or three hundred yards
     further, when they were overtaken, and with the aid of the
     Indians they were slaughtered. Seventeen only of the small
     children were saved, the eldest being only seven years. Thus,
     on the 10th day of September, 1857, was consummated one of the
     most cruel, cowardly, and bloody murders known in our history.
     Upon the way from the Meadows, a young Indian pointed out to
     me the place where the Mormons painted and disguised
     themselves.

     "I went from the Meadows to Cedar City; the distance is
     thirty-five or forty miles. I contemplated holding an
     examining court there, should Gen. Johnson furnish me
     protection, and also protect witnesses, and furnish the
     Marshal a _posse_ to aid in making arrests. While there I
     issued warrants, on affidavits filed before me, for the arrest
     of the following named persons:--

     "Jacob Haight, President of the Cedar City Stake; Bishop John
     M. Higbee and Bishop John D. Lee; Columbus Freeman, William
     Slade, John Willis, William Riggs, ---- Ingram, Daniel
     McFarlan, William Stewart, Ira Allen and son, Thomas
     Cartwright, E. Welean, William Halley, Jabes Nomlen, John
     Mangum, James Price, John W. Adair, ---- Tyler, Joseph Smith,
     Samuel Pollock, John McFarlan, Nephi Johnson, ---- Thornton,
     Joel White, ---- Harrison, Charles Hopkins, Joseph Elang,
     Samuel Lewis, Sims Matheney, James Mangum, Harrison Pierce,
     Samuel Adair, F. C. McDulange, Wm. Bateman, Ezra Curtis, and
     Alexander Loveridge.

     "In a few days after arriving at Cedar City, Capt. Campbell
     arrived, with his command, from the Meadows; on his return, he
     advised me that he had received orders, for his command
     entire, to return to Camp Floyd; the General having received
     orders from Washington that the military should not be used in
     protecting the courts, or in acting as a _posse_ to aid the
     Marshal in making arrests.

     "While at Cedar City I was visited by a number of apostate
     Mormons, who gave me every assurance that they would furnish
     an abundance of evidence in regard to the matter so soon as
     they were assured of military protection. In fact, some of the
     persons engaged in the act came to see me in the night, and
     gave a full account of the matter,--intending when protection
     was at hand, to become witnesses. They claimed that they had
     been forced into the matter by the bishops. Their statements
     corroborated what the Indians had previously said to me. Mr.
     Rodgers, the Deputy Marshal, was also engaged in hunting up
     the children, survivors of the massacre. They were all found
     in the custody of the Mormons. Three or four of the eldest
     recollect and relate all the incidents of the massacre,
     corroborating the statements of the Indians, and the
     statements made by the citizens of Cedar City to me.

     "These children are now in the south part of Missouri, or
     north part of Arkansas; their testimony could soon be taken,
     if desired. No one can depict the glee of these infants, when
     they realized that they, were in the custody of what they
     called 'the Americans,'--for such is the designation of those
     not Mormons. They say they never were in the custody of the
     Indians. I recollect of one of them, 'John Calvin Sorrow,'
     after he found he was safe, and before he was brought away
     from Salt Lake City, although not yet nine years of age,
     sitting in a contemplative mood, no doubt thinking of the
     extermination of his family, saying: 'Oh, I wish I was a man;
     I know what I would do; I would shoot John D. Lee; I saw him
     shoot my mother.' I shall never forget how he looked.

     "Time will not permit me to elaborate the matter. I shall
     barely sum up, and refer every member of this House, who may
     have the least doubt about the guilt of the Mormons in this
     massacre, and the other crimes to which I have alluded, to the
     evidence published in the appendix hereto."

To the foregoing thrilling recital, I will only add:--The train
consisted of 40 wagons, 800 head of cattle, and about 60 horses and
mules. As near as can be ascertained, there were about 150 men and
women, besides many children. They passed through Salt Lake City, and
were there joined by some few Mormons, who were disaffected, and sought
to travel under their protection.

A revelation from Brigham Young, as Great Grand Archee, or God, was
despatched to President J. C. Haight, Bishop Higbee, and J. D. Lee,
commanding them to raise all the forces they could muster and trust,
follow those cursed gentiles (so read the revelation), attack them,
disguised as Indians, and with the arrows of the Almighty make a clean
sweep of them, and leave none to tell the tale; and if they needed any
assistance, they were commanded to hire the Indians as their allies,
promising them a share of the booty. They were to be neither slothful
nor negligent in their duty, and to be punctual in sending the teams
back to him before winter set in, for this was the mandate of Almighty
God.

On the following day a council of all the faithful was held at Cedar
City. Many attended from the neighboring settlements; the revelation was
read, and the destiny of the unsuspecting emigrants sealed. Plans were
suggested, discussed, and adopted, and the men designated to carry out
their hellish designs. Instructions were given for them to assemble at a
small spring, but a short distance to the left of the road leading into
the Meadows,--a number of intervening hills rendering it a fit place for
concealment. Here they painted and disguised themselves as Indians, and
when ready to commence operations, by a well-known Indian trail
proceeded to the Meadows.

For the benefit of those who may still be disposed to doubt the guilt of
Young and his Mormons in this transaction, the testimony is here
collated, and circumstances given, which go, not merely to implicate,
but to fasten conviction upon them, by "confirmations strong as proofs
from Holy Writ."

1. The evidence of Mormons themselves, engaged in the affair, as shown
by the statements of Judge Cradlebaugh and Deputy-Marshal Rodgers.

2. The statements of Indians in the neighborhood of the massacre: these
statements are shown, not only by Cradlebaugh and Rodgers, but by a
number of military officers, and by J. Forney, who was, in 1859,
Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Territory. To all these were
such statements freely and frequently made by the Indians.

3. The testimony of the children saved from the massacre.

4. The children and the property of the emigrants found in possession of
the Mormons, and that possession traced back to the very day after the
massacre.

5. The failure of Brigham Young to embody any account of it in his
Report as Superintendent of Indian Affairs. Also his failure to make any
allusion to it whatever from the pulpit, until several years after the
occurrence.

6. The failure of the "Deseret News," the Church organ, and the only
paper then published in the Territory, to notice the massacre, until
several months afterward, and then only to deny that Mormons were
engaged in it.

7. The flight to the mountains of men high in authority in the Mormon
Church and State, when this affair was brought to the ordeal of a
judicial investigation.

8. The testimony of R. P. Campbell, Capt. 2d Dragoons, who was sent in
the spring of 1859 to Santa Clara, to protect travellers on the road to
California, and to inquire into Indian depredations.

In his report to Major E. J. Potter, Assistant Adjutant-General U. S.
Army, dated July 6, 1859, he says:--

     "These emigrants were here met by the Mormons (assisted by
     such of the wretched Indians of the neighborhood as they could
     force or persuade to join), and massacred, with the exception
     of such infant children as the Mormons thought too young to
     remember, or tell of the affair.

     "The Mormons were led on by John D. Lee, then a high dignitary
     in the self-styled Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
     Saints, and Isaac Haight, now a dignitary in the same."

Again, after relating briefly the massacre, he says:--

     "These facts were derived from children who did remember, and
     could tell of the matter; from Indians, and from the Mormons
     themselves."

9. The testimony of Hon. J. Forney, Superintendent of Indian Affairs.

In his letter to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs at Washington, dated
Provo City, U. T., March, 1859, he says:--

     "Facts in my possession warrant me in estimating that there
     was distributed, a few days after the massacre, among the
     leading church dignitaries, $30,000 worth of property."

Again, in another letter to the Commissioner, written from Great Salt
Lake City, in August of the same year, he says:--

     "From the evidence in my possession, I am justified in the
     declaration that this massacre was concocted by white men, and
     consummated by whites and Indians. The names of many of the
     whites engaged in this terrible affair have already been given
     to the proper legal authorities. . . . The children were sold
     out to different persons in Cedar City, Harmony, and Painter
     Creek. Bills are now in my possession from different
     individuals, asking payment from the Government. I cannot
     condescend to become the medium of even transmitting such
     claims to the Department."

The following is from the Annual Report of Superintendent Forney, made
in September, 1859:--

     "Mormons have been accused of aiding the Indians in the
     commission of this crime. I commenced my inquiries without
     prejudice or selfish motive, and with the hope that, in the
     progress of my inquiries, facts would enable me to exculpate
     all white men from any participation in this tragedy, and
     saddle the guilt exclusively on the Indians; but,
     unfortunately, every step in my inquiries satisfied me that
     the Indians acted only a secondary part. . . . White men were
     present, and directed the Indians. John D. Lee, of Harmony,
     told me in his own house, last April, in presence of two
     persons, that he was present three successive days during the
     fight, and was present during the fatal day." . . .

We close the testimony of Forney, by giving entire a letter from him to
the Department at Washington,--

     "SUPERINTENDENT'S OFFICE, UTAH,             }
       GREAT SALT LAKE CITY, September 22, 1859. }

     "Sir,--Your letter dated July 2, in which you request me to
     ascertain the names of white men, if any, implicated in the
     Mountain Meadow massacre, reached me several weeks since,
     about 300 miles west of this city.

     "I gave, several months ago, to the Attorney-General, and
     several of the United States Judges, the names of those who I
     believed were not only implicated, but the hell-deserving
     scoundrels who concocted, and brought to a successful
     termination the whole affair.

     "The following are the names of the persons the most guilty:
     Isaac T. Haight, Cedar City, president of several settlements
     south; Bishop Smith, Cedar City; John D. Lee,[69:A] Harmony;
     John M. Higby, Cedar City; Bishop Davis, David Tullis, Santa
     Clara; Ira Hatch, Santa Clara. These were the cause of the
     massacre, aided by others. It is to be regretted that nothing
     has yet been accomplished towards bringing these murderers to
     justice. I remain,

     "Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

     "J. FORNEY,

     "_Sup't of Indian Affairs, Utah Territory_.

     "Hon. A. B. Greenwood,

     "_Commiss'r Indian Affairs, Washington, D. C._"

So far as Brigham Young himself is concerned, the evidence is not so
direct, but is scarcely less conclusive.

In addition to the circumstances mentioned, of his failing to report the
massacre, or to make any mention of it in his public discourses, and the
testimony of the Indians, already referred to; in addition also to the
facts concerning the revelation sent from him,--facts communicated by
one intimately acquainted with the secret history of the church; in
addition to these things, if we reflect for a moment upon the framework
of the Mormon Church, we will find therein still more cogent evidence.

The organization of the church is such, that no project of importance is
ever undertaken without the express or implied consent of Young, who is
in temporal, as well as spiritual matters, the head and source of all
authority. Now here was a large train which had lately passed through
the place where Young resided, and his feelings and views in relation to
it would be well known to the leaders of the church. Can it for a moment
be admitted, that members of a community so organized would undertake so
important a project as the destruction of that train, requiring, as it
did, the concerted action of forty or fifty persons, without the express
or implied sanction of him who sat at the head of the community,
controlling its every action?

And if such a thing can be supposed possible, would not the perpetrators
be immediately called to account for assuming so much responsibility?
Reason and evidence all point one way; and add this to the many other
acts which stamp Brigham Young as a murderer of the deepest dye,--adding
to the guilt of homicide that of blasphemy and hypocrisy.

What was the motive which prompted the act? Partly revenge. These
emigrants were from Missouri and Arkansas, the scenes of the alleged
injuries and persecutions of the Mormons. It was soon after the killing
of Parley P. Pratt, in Arkansas, by McLane, whose wife Pratt had
abducted. It was at the time, too, when the United States troops were
marching to Utah, and a feeling of revenge and retaliation was
prevalent, and was, as has been shown, fostered and encouraged by
Brigham in his sermons.

But the principal motive was plunder. The train was a very wealthy one.
The spoil of the gentile was before them, and it must be appropriated by
the Lord's people.

A great portion of the property was taken to Cedar City, deposited in
the tithing office, and there sold out. Forney says, in the Annual
Report already quoted from,--

     "Whoever may have been the perpetrators of this horrible deed,
     no doubt exists in my mind that they were influenced chiefly
     by a determination to acquire wealth by robbery."[71:A]

It is not within the scope of this work to enter into a relation of the
many other murders and outrages committed by the authority or connivance
of the Mormon Church. This is given as the most notable one,--"_ex uno
disce omnes_." Those who wish to examine into these crimes more fully,
are referred to the appendix to the printed speech of Judge Cradlebaugh.

The "Mormon War" having closed, the federal officers, as soon as
practicable, assumed their functions, and proceeded to transact
business. Federal courts were held, and the authority of the United
States again, at least nominally, established in Utah.

In October, 1858, Judge Sinclair opened his court in Salt Lake City.
Efforts were made to bring several noted criminals to justice, but
everything failed. In the grand jury-room no indictments were found, and
murderers and thieves were allowed to go "scot free."

At this term of court a motion was made to expel James Ferguson from the
bar, for contempt of court. Ferguson offered to retire from the bar,
which was not accepted. He then proposed to plead guilty; but the Judge
said, as it was alleged that a Judge of the United States had been
insulted and intimidated, when in the discharge of his official duty,
it was important that the country be put in possession of the facts, and
no plea of crimination or stultification should prevent an exposure.

The grand jury did, finally, in this case, make the following
presentment:--

     "The grand jury find, that James Ferguson, of G. S. L. City,
     U. T., did use language and threats calculated to intimidate
     Judge George P. Stiles, U. S. District Judge, while in the
     discharge of his official duties, and presiding as Judge of
     this District Court, at the February Term, 1857.

     "ELEAZER MILLER, _Foreman_."

The right of trial by jury is one guaranteed by the Constitution, and
with which it would be highly dangerous to interfere, except in cases of
extreme necessity, involving the safety of a whole people or community.
The Mormons, with their usual shrewdness, take advantage of this, and
manage to control the United States Courts through the grand and petit
juries. The following extracts will show how it is done.

March 2d, 1856, in his remarks, made in the Tabernacle, Jedediah M.
Grant, then one of the "President's" counsellors, said:--

     "Last Sunday, the President chastised some of the Apostles and
     Bishops, who were on the grand jury. Did he fully succeed in
     clearing away the fog which surrounded them, and in removing
     blindness from their eyes? No, for they could go to their room
     and again disagree; though to their credit it must be admitted
     that a brief explanation made them unanimous in their action."

Again, in the same connection, Grant, speaking of a trial-jury,
continues,--

     "Several have got into the fog, to suck and eat the filth of a
     gentile court; _ostensibly_ a court in Utah."

Here is the highest evidence of the direct interference of Brigham
Young with the right of trial by jury, and the prostitution of the
jury-box to the accomplishment of his schemes. How could he strike a
more fatal blow at our free institutions, or at the rights and liberties
of American citizens who may happen to live within the sphere of his
influence? For this alone he should be hurled from the defiant position
he occupies, and brought to the bar of impartial justice.

Though the evidence was perfectly plain and conclusive in the case of
Ferguson, he was acquitted. Comment is unnecessary.

The Judge, finding all efforts to bring criminals to justice unavailing,
adjourned his court _sine die_.

The Mormon Legislature had never made provision for defraying the
expenses of the United States Courts, while doing territorial business,
though their attention had frequently been called to the necessity of so
doing. Their object was to throw all the business into the probate
courts; and in this they eventually succeeded, except in the court
presided over by Judge Kinney,--the only one, after the "war," which
acted simply as an adjunct and instrument of the church authorities.

     "During the sitting of Judge Sinclair's court, the Mormon
     grand jury promptly found a bill of indictment against one
     Ralph Pike, a sergeant in Company I, of the 10th Infantry,
     United States Army, for an assault with intent to kill,
     committed upon one Howard Spencer, the son of a Mormon bishop,
     at the military reserve, in Rush Valley. Upon _capias_ issued,
     Pike was arrested, and brought to Great Salt Lake City. The
     day following, August 11, 1858, about twelve o'clock, M., as
     Pike was entering the Salt Lake House, on Main Street, Spencer
     stepped up to him from behind, saying, 'Are you the man that
     struck me in Rush Valley?' at the same time, drawing his
     pistol, shot him through the side, inflicting a mortal wound.
     Spencer ran across the street, mounted his horse, and rode
     off, accompanied by several noted 'Danites.' Pike lingered in
     dreadful agony, two days, before he died. The 'Deseret News,'
     in its next issue, lauded young Spencer for his courage and
     bravery.

     "A man by the name of Drown, brought suit upon a promissory
     note for $480, against the Danite captain, Bill Hickman. The
     case being submitted to the court, Drown obtained a judgment.
     A few days afterwards, Drown and a companion, named Arnold
     were stopping at the house of a friend in Salt Lake City, when
     Hickman, with some seven or eight of his band, rode up to the
     house, and called for Drown to come out. Drown, suspecting
     foul play, refused to do so, and locked the doors. The Danites
     thereupon dismounted from their horses, broke down the doors,
     and shot down both Drown and Arnold. Drown died of his wounds
     next morning, and Arnold a few days afterwards. Hickman and
     his band rode off unmolested.

     "Thus, during a single term of the court, held in a Mormon
     community, the warm life-blood of three human victims is shed
     upon the very threshold of the court; and although the grand
     jury is in session, no prosecution is attempted, and not one
     of the offenders brought to justice."

Judge Cradlebaugh was assigned to the Second Judicial District, and held
his first term of court in Provo City, commencing April 8th, 1859. An
account of his efforts to bring to justice the Mountain Meadow and other
murderers has already been given in his own language.

The following notice of this bold and energetic man is from the "Nevada
Territorial Enterprise":--

     "Judge Cradlebaugh, of the United States Court of Utah, is
     making his mark in that Territory, if half that is written of
     him is true. . . . . Satisfied that many of the leading
     Mormons had taken part in or instigated the Mountain Meadow
     massacre, and the murder of Jones, Potter, Forbes, Parrish,
     and a dozen others, he determined to bring them to punishment.
     . . . He spoke and acted with the fearlessness and resolution
     of a Jackson; but the jury failed to indict, or even report on
     the charges, while threats of violence were heard in every
     quarter, and an attack on the troops intimated, if he
     persisted in his course.

     "Finding that nothing could be done with the juries, they were
     discharged, with a scathing rebuke from the Judge. Sitting as
     a committing magistrate, he commenced his task alone. He
     examined witnesses, made arrests in every quarter, and created
     a consternation in the camps of the saints, greater even than
     was occasioned by the arrival of the troops within the walls
     of Zion. At last accounts, terrified elders and bishops were
     decamping to save their necks; and developments of the most
     startling character were being made, implicating the highest
     church dignitaries in the many murders and robberies committed
     upon the gentiles during the past eight years."

Governor Cumming did not sustain Judge Cradlebaugh, but, under the
pretence of impartiality, sought to screen the Mormons from the demands
of justice.

Hence various differences between Cumming on one side, and Johnson and
Cradlebaugh on the other; and on one occasion the Governor went so far
as to publish his protest against the use of the troops in aid of
Cradlebaugh's proceedings.

Cumming was a native of Georgia. He had married a daughter of one of the
most distinguished physicians of Boston, a lady of many accomplishments,
who accompanied him to Utah.

During the dreadful reign of the cholera in 1836 he was Mayor of
Augusta, Ga., and is said to have rendered efficient service in saving
the lives of the citizens.

For some years he was stationed at Jefferson Barracks, Missouri. At the
commencement of the Mexican war he was at Point Isabel, and afterwards
on the Southern line, attached to General Scott's staff. Subsequently he
was detailed by the Government to visit several tribes of Indians in the
far West.

He had performed some service to the country, and was a man of many good
qualities; but was very vain, and fond of attention, and was unable to
withstand the seductive influences which the Mormons know so well how to
bring to bear upon persons of his organization.

Cradlebaugh, finding he was not supported by Buchanan's administration,
left Utah, and settled in the Territory of Nevada; whence he has been
twice sent as delegate to Congress, and we look to see him, at no
distant day, represent the new State of Nevada in the Senate of the
United States.

In 1860 John F. Kinney was reappointed Chief Justice, succeeding Judge
Eckels; and Judges Crosby and Flenniken were appointed Associate
Justices, to succeed Sinclair and Cradlebaugh. Judge Cradlebaugh did not
resign, and not recognizing the right of the President to remove the
Judges, he continued to perform the duties of his office for some time
afterward.

On the 3d of October, 1861, John W. Dawson, of Indiana, was appointed by
President Lincoln Governor of Utah, to succeed Cumming, who had left the
Territory some months previous.

In the appointment of Dawson, Lincoln, to use his own language, was
"imposed on." The Senate relieved him from the imposition, by refusing
to confirm the appointment.

The Mormons, however, anticipated the action of the Senate, and speedily
ejected Dawson from the governorship. The history of this _émeute_ is
briefly as follows:--

Dawson arrived at Salt Lake about the commencement of the session of the
Legislature. Having some notions of his own concerning legislative
affairs, and not yielding, like his predecessor, to all the views of
Brigham Young, he soon became involved in difficulties from which he was
unable to extricate himself. He had not the nerve and ability to sustain
himself in his position. The Mormons saw this, and at once resolved
upon, planned, and accomplished a brilliant _coup d'état_, similar to
that practised upon Steptoe. Without going into details, the plan may be
seen by the result; which was the affidavit of a widow woman named
Williams, to the effect that Dawson had insulted her, by making improper
advances, which, of course, she had scornfully repelled and rejected.

The indignation of the Mormons was aroused to the highest pitch by this
base attempt upon Mormon virtue. Threats were made so freely, that the
Governor became very much alarmed, and precipitately fled the
Territory. Not satisfied with this, the "boys" waylaid him at one of the
stations, and gave him a severe beating.

In contemplating this serio-comic affair, one hardly knows which most to
condemn, the lawless spirit which prompted such treatment, or the
timidity and weakness which would submit to it.

About the 1st of February, 1862, Judges Flenniken and Crosby left Salt
Lake City, and the federal officers there immediately advised the
President of the fact by telegraph, and recommended the appointment of
their successors. Accordingly on the 3d of February, 1862, Thomas J.
Drave, of Michigan, and Charles B. Waite, of Illinois, were appointed
Associate Justices, and on the 31st of March following, Stephen S.
Harding, of Indiana, was appointed Governor, to succeed Dawson.


FOOTNOTES:

[69:A] John D. Lee is an adopted son of Brigham Young.

[71:A] Several years after the massacre, Major, now General Carlton,
visited that region and erected a monument to the memory of the slain.
"It was constructed by raising a large pile of rock, in the centre of
which was erected a beam, some twelve or fifteen feet in height. Upon
one of the stones he caused to be engraved, 'Here lie the bones of one
hundred and twenty men, women, and children, from Arkansas, murdered
on the 10th day of September, 1857.' Upon a cross-tree, on the beam,
he caused to be painted: 'Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I
will repay it.' This monument is said to have been destroyed the first
time Brigham visited that part of the Territory."




CHAPTER VI.

POLITICAL HISTORY CONTINUED.

     Arrival of the New Federal Officers in July, 1862.--Colonel
     Connor arrives with his Command.--The Message of Gov. Harding.
     --The Mormons Indignant.--The Legislature refuse to print the
     Message.--Action of the United States Senate thereon.--Forgery
     in the Mormon Legislature.--Bill of Judge Waite to amend the
     Organic Act.--Indignation Meeting.--Governor Harding and
     Judges Waite and Drake requested to leave the Territory.--
     Their Replies.--Brigham.--The Federal Officers.


Judges Drake and Waite arrived in Salt Lake City on the 11th of July,
1862. Governor Harding had arrived a few days previous.

For several months everything passed off smoothly, and Brigham was more
than once heard to say the officers now in the Territory were "good
men." No circumstances occurred to develop any differences, and it was
hoped by the federal officers themselves that none would arise.

In the mean time, in October of the same year, Colonel (now General)
Connor marched into and through Salt Lake City with his command, and
established his camp on the "bench," or high land, about three miles
east of the city. His forces at that time consisted of the Third
Regiment of Infantry, California Volunteers, and the Second Regiment of
Cavalry, under command of Col. George S. Evans.

Some little excitement was caused by the entrance of the troops, and
rumors were rife of threats having been made by the Mormons that the
volunteers should never "cross the Jordan," a stream a few miles south
of the city, and which was directly on their line of march. But the
Jordan was crossed, the camp established, and everything went on as
usual, until the meeting of the Territorial Legislature in December.

Then the pent-up fires began to break forth. The first pretext used by
the Mormons for indulging in words and acts of hostility was the Message
of Governor Harding to the Legislature. Therein he called the attention
of the people, through their representatives, to the practice of
polygamy in their midst, to the anomalous state of society it tended to
establish, to its incompatibility with our free institutions, and
especially to its violation of an Act of Congress recently passed.

The following are the portions of the Message which gave most offence:--


     "_Polygamy._

     "It would be disingenuous if I were not to advert to a
     question which, although seemingly it has nothing to do in the
     premises, yet is one of vast importance to you as a people,
     and which cannot be ignored. I mean that institution which is
     not only commended but encouraged by you, and which, to say
     the least of it, is an anomaly throughout Christendom. I mean
     polygamy, or, if you prefer the term, plurality of wives. In
     approaching this delicate subject, I desire to do so in no
     unkind or offensive spirit; yet the institution, founded upon
     no written statute of your Territory, but upon custom alone,
     exists. . . .

     "I lay it down as a sound proposition, that no community can
     happily exist with an institution so important as that of
     marriage wanting in all those qualities that make it
     homogeneal with institutions and laws of neighboring civilized
     communities having the same object.

     "Anomalies in the moral world cannot long exist in a state of
     mere abeyance; they must, from the very nature of things,
     become aggressive, or they will soon disappear, from the force
     of conflicting ideas.

     "This proposition is supported by the history of our race, and
     is so plain that it may be set down as an axiom. If we grant
     this to be true, we may sum up the conclusion of the argument
     as follows: either the laws and opinions of the communities by
     which you are surrounded must become subordinate to your
     customs and opinions, or, on the other hand, yours must yield
     to theirs. The conflict is irrepressible.

     "But no matter whether this anomaly shall disappear or remain
     amongst you, it is your duty at least to guard it against
     flagrant abuses. That plurality of wives is tolerated and
     believed to be right, may not appear so strange; but that a
     mother and her daughters are allowed to fulfil the duties of
     _wives_ to the same husband, or that a man could be found in
     all Christendom who could be induced to take upon himself such
     a relationship, is, perhaps, no less a marvel in morals than
     in matters of taste.

     "The bare fact that such practices are tolerated amongst you
     is sufficient evidence that the human passions, whether
     excited by religious fanaticism or otherwise, must be
     restrained and subjected to laws, to which all must yield
     obedience. No community can long exist, without absolute
     social anarchy, unless so important an institution as that of
     marriage is regulated by law. It is the basis of our
     civilization, and in it the whole question of the descent and
     distribution of real and personal estate is involved.

     "Much to my astonishment, I have not been able to find any law
     upon the statutes of this Territory regulating marriage. I
     earnestly recommend to your early consideration the passage of
     some law that will meet the exigencies of the people.


     "_Act of Congress against Polygamy._

     "I respectfully call your attention to an Act of Congress,
     passed the 1st day of July, 1862, entitled 'An Act to punish
     and prevent the practice of polygamy in the Territories of the
     United States, and in other places, and disapproving and
     annulling certain Acts of the legislative assembly of Utah,'
     (chap. cxxvii. of the Statutes at Large of the last session of
     Congress, page 501.) I am aware that there is a prevailing
     opinion here that said Act is unconstitutional, and therefore
     it is recommended by those in high authority that no regard
     whatever should be paid to the same; and still more to be
     regretted, if I am rightly informed, in some instances it has
     been recommended that it be openly disregarded and defied,
     merely to defy the same.

     "I take this occasion to warn the people of this Territory
     against such dangerous and disloyal counsels. Whether such Act
     is unconstitutional or not, is not necessary for me either to
     affirm or deny. The individual citizen, under no
     circumstances whatever, has the right to defy any law or
     statute of the United States with impunity. In doing so he
     takes upon himself the risk of the penalties of that statute,
     be they what they may, in case his judgment should be in
     error.

     "The Constitution has amply provided how and where all such
     questions of doubt are submitted and settled, namely, in the
     courts constituted for that purpose. To forcibly resist the
     execution of that Act would be, to say the least, a high
     misdemeanor; and if a whole community should become involved
     in such resistance, would call down upon it the consequences
     of insurrection and rebellion.

     "I hope and trust that no such rash counsel will prevail. If,
     unhappily, I am mistaken in this, I choose to shut my eyes to
     the consequences.


     "_Liberty of Conscience._

     "Amongst the most cherished and sacred rights secured to the
     citizen of the United States, is the right to worship God
     according to the dictates of conscience. . . .

     "Religion was left a matter between man and his Maker, and not
     between man and the Government.

     "But here arises a most important question,--a question
     perhaps that has never yet been asked or fully answered in
     this country,--How far does the right of conscience extend? Is
     there any limit to this right?--and if so, where shall the
     line of demarcation be drawn, designating that which is not
     forbidden from that which is? This is, indeed, a most
     important question, and from the tendency of the times, must
     sooner or later be answered. I cannot, and will not, on this
     occasion, pretend to answer this question; but will venture
     the suggestion, that when it is answered, the same rules will
     be adopted as if the freedom of speech and of the press were
     involved in the argument.

     . . . "There can be no limit beyond which the mind may not
     dwell, and our thoughts soar in our aspirations after truth.
     We may think what we will, believe what we will, and speak
     what we will, on all subjects of speculative theology. . . .
     But when religious opinions assume new manifestations, and
     pass from the condition of mere sentiment into overt acts,--no
     matter whether they be acts of faith or not,--they must not
     outrage the opinions of the civilized world, but, on the
     other hand, must conform to those usages established by law,
     and which are believed to underlie our very civilization."

In the same Message, the Governor, after giving his views upon the
national topics of the day, fully sustaining the Administration and the
war, proceeded to discuss all the more prominent subjects of local
interest in the Territory. He referred to the attempts to procure the
admission of the State of Deseret into the Union,--giving it as his
opinion that those attempts were premature. He referred to provisions of
the Organic Act, and claimed the right to nominate to the Council all
general territorial officers. These had formerly been elected by the
Legislature.

He recommended a thorough revision and codification of the statutes; a
change in the mode of voting; referred to the financial condition of the
Territory; adverted to the Indian troubles; advised the organization of
a common-school system, and closed by assuring them of his willingness
and desire to work with them for the common good and welfare of the
people of the Territory.

The question of polygamy was boldly met and temperately discussed in
this Message, and the people warned against the consequences of
disobedience to the Act of Congress. Anything less than this on the part
of the Governor would have been simply a neglect of duty.

Yet the Mormons were very indignant, and professed to look upon that
portion of the Message as exceedingly hostile and offensive in its
character. Their religion had been attacked by the federal authorities!

It may be well here to remark, for the benefit of the tender-footed upon
this subject, that polygamy is no part of the Mormon religion, so far as
the same has any history, and can be distinguished from the personal
edicts of Brigham Young. It is not only not permitted but explicitly
condemned in the "Book of Mormon" and the "Book of Doctrines and
Covenants," which are the Old and New Testaments of Mormonism. This
subject is more fully examined in the last chapter of this work.

From the delivery of this Message, the treatment which the Governor
received at the hands of the Mormons was entirely changed. From respect
it was immediately changed to disrespect and contumely. No contemptuous
treatment was too marked, no indignity was too great, to be heaped upon
him, for this simple performance of his duty as a sworn officer of the
United States Government.

The Message was never printed by the Legislature. The Journals did not
even show that the Governor ever appeared before that body for any
purpose whatever.

The fact that the Message was not published having been communicated to
Washington, a resolution was introduced into the Senate of the United
States on the 16th of January, 1863, instructing the Committee on
Territories to inquire and report whether the publication of the Message
of the Governor of the Territory of Utah to the Territorial Legislature
had been suppressed, and if so by what causes, and what was the Message.

In response to this resolution Mr. Wade, chairman of the Committee, on
the 13th of February, submitted a Report, accompanied by a resolution,
which was adopted, that one thousand copies of the Message be printed,
and sent to the Governor for distribution.

This Report of the Committee was less complimentary to the Mormons than
the Message itself.

The following extracts will indicate the character of the document:--

     "In pursuance of the instruction contained in this resolution,
     your committee have the honor to report, that they have
     collected all the facts, and taken all the testimony within
     their reach,--the substance of which, together with a copy of
     the Message, is herewith presented.

     "These sources of information disclose the fact, that the
     customs which have prevailed in all our other Territories in
     the government of public affairs have had but little
     toleration in the Territory of Utah; but in their stead there
     appears to be, overriding all other influences, a sort of
     Jewish theocracy, graduated to the condition of that
     Territory.

     "This theocracy, having a supreme head who governs and guides
     every affair of importance in the Church, and, practically, in
     the Territory, is the only real power acknowledged here, and
     to the extension of whose interests every person in the
     Territory must directly or indirectly conduce. . . .

     "We have here the first exhibition, within the limits of the
     United States, of a Church ruling the State. . . .

     "Another opinion--the subject of both public and private
     teaching--is, that the Government of the United States will
     not and ought not to stand. They make a difference between the
     Constitution and the Government of the United States; to the
     Constitution they claim to be very loyal.

     . . . "Because the Governor, in his Message, has animadverted
     upon some of the customs of the Mormons, and has recommended
     that steps be taken to Americanize the same, he has given
     offence, and has had his Message suppressed.

     "Polygamy of the most unlimited character, sanctioning the
     cohabitation of a man with the mother and her daughters
     indiscriminately, is not the only un-American thing among
     them.

     . . . "The Message, on examination, is found to contain nothing
     that should give offence to any legislature willing to be
     governed by the laws of morality.

     "It is the opinion of your Committee that the Message is an
     able exposition of the manners and customs of the people in
     that Territory, and as such, brought down the censure of the
     leaders of the Mormon Church, and were it not for the
     animadversions therein contained, it would not have been
     suppressed."

The printing and distribution of the Message is then recommended.

During the session of the Legislature an event occurred which caused
much indignation among the federal officers, and served to render
somewhat mutual the feelings of hostility which the leading saints
already entertained. This was nothing less than a forgery committed in
the Legislature upon a bill relating to the terms of one of the District
Courts.

The facts were as follows:--

The Territory was divided into three judicial districts. The First,
sometimes called the Provo District, comprised a number of counties
carved out of the centre of the Territory. This had been assigned to
Judge Drake. The Second, called the "Cotton District," was assigned to
Judge Waite, and consisted of the three southernmost counties, Beaver,
Iron, and Washington. The Third District, Chief Justice Kinney's,
comprised the northern part of the Territory, including Salt Lake City.

On the 14th of January, 1863, the Legislature passed a bill, which was
signed by the Governor, changing the county seat of Washington County
from Washington to St. George, and in the same bill it was provided that
the United States Court for the transaction of territorial business,
should be held at St. George, on the third Monday of May. This time was
the same as that provided by the law previously in force.

This was before the assignment of the Judges had been made.

After Judge Waite had been assigned to the Second District [in which
many murders had been committed, and the murderers still at large], the
Legislature concluded they did not want court held in that district
until fall. They accordingly passed a bill, providing, among other
things, for holding the court at St. George on the third Monday of
October. But as they had already passed a bill fixing the term of court
in May, and as the Judge preferred to hold the term in May, that being
near the time when he was intending to hold court for the transaction of
United States business in the same district, the Governor declined
signing the second bill.

Soon after, having occasion to examine the first bill for another
purpose, he went to the Secretary's office and called for the bill, and
behold, _the word May had been erased, and the word October inserted
instead_! It appeared to have been done by the same hand which had
penned the body of the bill. This had been written by one of the clerks
of the House of Representatives. The Governor, after signing the bill,
had inadvertently returned it to the Legislature, and it had been sent
from that body to the Secretary's office, where it should have been sent
by the Governor. It had been recorded in that office before the forgery
was discovered.

The Governor immediately caused the record to be corrected, changed the
bill back from October to May, by erasing the word "October" and
interlining the word "May." He then made a statement of the forgery and
its detection, over his own signature, on the margin of the bill.

He then sent a special Message to the Legislature, calling their
attention to the fact that a forgery had been committed; but, instead of
taking steps to ferret out the guilty party, the Legislature made an
issue of fact with the Governor, and endeavored to make out that it was
all the time October, and that no forgery had been committed. When the
matter was up in the House the second time, one member actually produced
a paper which he averred was the original draft, and which had October
in it. And this in the face of the fact, that five persons had seen the
bill in the Governor's office when the word May was in it, and that the
bill showed plainly, upon inspection, that it had been changed; the
outline of the letter "y," in the word erased, being distinctly visible.

Thus the Legislature, by their collective action, implicated themselves
all in the forgery.

On the 16th of January the Legislature adjourned, without printing the
Governor's Message, or sending any appropriation bills for his
signature.

The day following, "the Legislature of the State of Deseret" met, and
commenced doing business under Brigham Young, as Governor. A Message was
delivered, and all the forms of legislation gone through with; in
reality, this _de facto_ government was the only one for which the
Mormons maintained even the show of respect.

The judicial system of the Territory was manifestly very defective, and
as constituted under the Organic Act of 1850, as the same had been
construed by the Federal Judges, was inadequate to the administration of
justice.

The greatest difficulty was experienced in the formation of juries, and
in the extraordinary jurisdiction assumed by the Probate Judges, all of
whom were Mormons.

The jurisdiction of the Probate Court, in the words of the Organic Act,
was to be "as prescribed by law." Under this provision several of the
United States Judges had held that it was competent in the Legislature
to confer upon the Probate Courts any jurisdiction they pleased. The
Mormons, never behind in availing themselves of all advantages, had
accordingly granted to the Probate Courts concurrent jurisdiction with
the District Courts, in all cases civil and criminal.

Again; the juries had been selected by these courts acting with other
county authorities, and it was contended that the United States Courts
could only try causes before juries thus selected.

To remedy these defects, and to remove all doubt as to these complicated
questions, a bill was drawn by Judge Waite, for an Act of Congress
amendatory of the Organic Act of 1850. It provided for the selection of
United States juries by the Marshal, under the direction of the court,
as in other district and territorial courts of the United States.

The question of jurisdiction was to be settled by an express provision
that the Probate Court should have no jurisdiction to try any civil
action whatsoever. It was to do the usual probate business, and have a
limited criminal jurisdiction, subject to appeal to the District Court.
The bill also provided for an organization of the militia of the
Territory, under the Governor, and contained several other wholesome and
salutary provisions.

The bill was carefully drawn, and was submitted to the inspection of his
associate, Judge Drake, and of Governor Harding,--Judge Kinney being
absent from the Territory. It received the unqualified approval of Drake
and Harding, and, with their indorsement upon it, was sent to
Washington. In due time it was introduced in Congress by Senator
Browning, and referred to the proper committee.

The introduction of this bill was the signal for another outbreak. The
news was telegraphed to Salt Lake, and immediately Brigham called a
meeting at the Tabernacle.

The meeting was held on the 3d of March 1863. Notice having been
extensively circulated, some two or three thousand persons assembled,
excited by exaggerated statements concerning attempts upon the part of
the federal officers to "interfere with their rights."

Speeches of the most inflammatory character were made at this meeting,
and the resentment and indignation of the ignorant masses of the people
were excited to the highest pitch. The following will serve as a
specimen of these harangues.

Elder John Taylor said:--

     "It has already been stated that these documents speak for
     themselves. They come from those who are ostensibly our
     guardians, and the guardians of our rights. They come from men
     who ought to be actuated by the strictest principles of honor,
     truth, virtue, integrity, and honesty, and whose high official
     position ought to elevate them above suspicion,--yet what are
     the results?

     "In relation to the Governor's Message, enough, perhaps, has
     already been said. . .

     "We had a right to look for a friend in our Governor, who
     would, at least, fairly represent us. Instead, we have had a
     most insidious foe, who, through misrepresentations, base
     insinuations, and falsehood, is seeking with all his power,
     privately as well as officially, not only to injure us before
     the Government, but as well to sap the very foundations of our
     civil and religious liberties; he is, in fact, in the
     furtherance of his unhallowed schemes, seeking to promote
     anarchy and rebellion, and dabbling in your blood. [Cries of
     'hear, hear.'] Such, it would seem, were the Governor's
     feelings and intentions when he concocted his Message, and
     such his purposes when he read it before the Legislature. That
     document was not hastily written, as it shows upon its face
     that it had been well digested, and every word and sentence
     carefully weighed.

     . . . "That he is the most vindictive enemy we have, is shown
     by the statement of our representatives at Washington.

     "He is the only man, it would seem, who is industriously
     striving to sap the interests of our people, and to injure
     their reputation, and yet, as our Governor, he professes to
     feel a deep interest in our welfare, and to represent our
     wishes.

     "Let us, for a short time, investigate the results of his
     acts, should his purposes be successful, leaving the
     allegations of treason from our consideration. [It was
     contended that the Governor and Judges had committed _Treason
     against the Territory_.]

     "We have thought that we were living under a republican form
     of government, and had the right of franchise; that we had the
     privilege of voting for whom we pleased, and of thus saying
     whom we would have represent us; but it may be that we are
     laboring under a mistake, and that it is but a political
     illusion. We have likewise thought that if any one among us
     was accused of crimes, it was his privilege to be tried by a
     jury of his peers, among whom he had lived, who would
     undoubtedly be the best judges of his actions.

     "We have further been of the opinion that while acting in a
     military capacity, when called into service to stand in
     defence of our country's rights, we had the right of selecting
     our own officers. We have always had this privilege, in
     accordance with republican usage; but we can do so no longer
     should the plotting of Governor Harding and our Honorable
     Judges be carried into effect. We shall be deprived of
     franchise, of the right of trial by an impartial jury, and
     shall be placed, in a military capacity, under the creatures
     of Governor Harding, or of his successors. In other words, we
     shall be forever deprived of all the rights of freemen, and
     placed under a military despotism; such would be the result of
     the passage of this Act.

     "Again, in regard to juries, already referred to, you know
     what, as regards this matter, the usage has always been. The
     Governor and Judges want to place the power in the hands of
     the United States Marshal of selecting such jurors as he
     pleases, and that, too, without reference as to who they are,
     or whence they come. This is what is attempted to be done by
     our honorable Judges and Governor. Your rights as freemen, and
     your liberties, are aimed at; and you are to be disfranchised,
     and your liberties trampled under foot, by strangers, and you
     will have blacklegs and cut-throats sit upon your juries. Mr.
     Harding wants to select his own military, and have officers of
     his own selection to lead them, and then if you do not submit,
     he will have the authority to say, 'I will make you.'
     [Uproarious applause, and cries all over the house of 'Can't
     do it.'] We all know he can't do it, but this is what he is
     aiming at [Clapping of hands, and great cheering.] When these
     rights are taken away, what rights have we left? [Cries of
     'None.']

     "It can scarcely be credited or believed, that any man in his
     position could so far degrade himself as to introduce such
     infamous principles, and it is equally a lamentable fact to
     reflect upon, that men holding the high and responsible
     position of United States Judges could so far forget
     themselves as to descend to such depravity, corruption, and
     injustice. [Applause.] These things are so palpable, that 'he
     that runneth may read,' and any man with five grains of common
     sense can readily comprehend them. It is for you to say
     whether you are willing to sustain such men in the capacity
     they act in, or not." [Loud clapping of hands, and a universal
     and emphatic cry of "No!" on the part of the audience.]


     BRIGHAM YOUNG'S SPEECH.

At the close of Elder Taylor's speech Brigham arose, and on advancing to
the speaker's desk was greeted with vociferous applause, and immediately
proceeded to address the assemblage as follows:--

     "I have no intention of delivering a lengthy address, but
     while I am speaking I desire the audience to remain quiet. I
     know well your feelings, but much prefer that you should
     suppress any demonstrations of applause to other times and
     places, when you may have less business and greater leisure.

     "You have just heard read the Message of Governor Harding,
     delivered to the last Legislative Assembly of this Territory.
     You will readily perceive that the bread is buttered, but
     there is poison underneath. When he came to Utah last July,
     the Governor sought to ingratiate himself into the esteem of
     our prominent citizens, with whom he had early intercourse,
     and professed great friendship and attachment for the people
     of the Territory. He was then full of their praises, and said
     he was ready to declare that he would stand in the defence of
     polygamy, or that he should have to deny the Bible; and stated
     that he had told the President, prior to leaving Washington,
     that if he were called upon to discuss the question, he would
     have to take the side of polygamy, or to renounce the
     authority of the Scriptures.

     "In the face of all these professions, what has been his
     course? While being fair of speech, and specious of promise,
     and lavish in his expressions of good-will toward us, he has
     been insidiously at work to prejudice the General Government
     against us, and in the secrecy of his private room has
     concocted measures which he urged upon Congress to pass,
     which, if successful, would deprive us of the dearest rights
     of freemen, and render us the abject subjects of this man, who
     has been sent here to govern the Territory. Man, did I
     say?--thing, I mean,--a nigger-worshipper,--a black-hearted
     abolitionist is what he is, and what he represents; and that I
     do naturally despise. He wants to have the telegraph torn
     down, and the mails stopped and turned by the way of Panama.
     Do you acknowledge this man Harding for your Governor? [Voices
     all through the audience responded, 'No, you are our
     Governor.'] Yes, I am your Governor; and I will let him know
     that I am Governor; and if he attempts to interfere in my
     affairs, 'Woe, woe unto him!' [Shaking his uplifted fist in a
     very excited manner, which was responded to with loud
     applause, and cries of 'Yes, you are our Governor.']

     "Will you allow such a man to remain in the Territory?
     [Voices, 'No; put him out.'] Yes, I say put him out. Judges
     Waite and Drake are perfect fools, and the tools of Governor
     Harding, and they too must leave. If all three do not resign,
     or if the President does not remove them, the people must
     attend to it.

     "If they could get the power, as they want to do, to have the
     Marshal choose jurors of cut-throats, blacklegs, soldiers, and
     desperadoes from California, and we are to be tried by such
     men, what would become of us?

     "In regard to the war now desolating the country, it is but
     the fulfilment of the prophecies of Joseph Smith, which he
     told me thirty years ago. Brother Joseph said that the South
     would rise against the North, and the North against the South,
     and that they would fight until both parties were destroyed;
     and for my part I give it God speed; for they have spilt the
     blood of the Prophet. [To which the audience responded
     vociferously, 'Amen!']

     "I would like to live in peace with the Government of the
     United States, but have no desire to live with the people who
     have brought ruin and disgrace upon their own heads. I do not
     wish to live in, or have anything to do with the United
     States; I will have a free and independent government for
     myself, where I may live and enjoy my civil and religious
     liberties. [Loud cries of 'Amen,' and 'Yes, yes,' on the part
     of the entire assemblage.]

     "When our rights, and the protection of our liberties are
     taken from us, what is there remaining? [Voices, 'Nothing,'
     'Nothing.'] Yes, service to despots,--service to tyrants."

Brigham also said that money had been appropriated for the purpose of
turning the mail by the way of Panama; and these men were not above
taking money for such a purpose, under pretence of other business.

The injustice and falsity of these statements concerning the bill
introduced into Congress, and which was the immediate cause of this
outbreak, will be manifest, when it is stated that so far from
authorizing soldiers to sit as jurymen, it was expressly prohibited in
the bill itself. Again; the right of suffrage was actually extended by
the bill, because, while by one section the militia officers were to be
appointed by the Governor, the bill in other sections provided that
nearly all civil officers of the Territory, who were before elected by
the Legislature, should be elected by the people.

The effect of the bill would have been, to enable the people, when they
became generally dissatisfied with the spiritual tyranny to which they
were submitting, as many of them were already, to throw off the yoke of
despotism, by having every question that might arise fairly and
impartially adjudicated upon in the courts. This was foreseen by
Brigham. He saw that he was about to lose the powerful enginery of the
judicial system of the Territory, then under his control. Hence the
demonstration.

There are but two ways in which this theocratic despotism can be met and
overthrown. One is, by the people of the Territory, aided by some such
legislation as that proposed. The other is by the strong arm of military
power. The former would be more congenial to our institutions.

Time only can determine which must be resorted to. Doubtless the
employment of force will become necessary in either case,--as the course
taken by Young and his associates on this occasion shows that a
peaceable remedy will be forcibly resisted.

After listening to such speeches, the audience were, of course, ready to
adopt or approve of anything; and the following resolutions, prepared
for the occasion, were passed without a dissenting voice:--

     "_Resolved_, That we consider the attack made upon us by His
     Excellency Governor Harding, wherein our loyalty is impugned,
     as base, wicked, unjust, and false; and he knew it to be so
     when uttered.

     "_Resolved_, That we consider the attempt to possess himself
     of all military authority and dictation, by appointing all the
     militia officers, is a stretch of military despotism, hitherto
     unknown in the annals of our Republic.

     "_Resolved_, That we consider his attempt to control the
     selection of juries as so base, unjust, and tyrannical, as to
     deserve the contempt of all free men.

     "_Resolved_, That we consider the action of Judges Waite and
     Drake, in assisting the Governor to pervert justice, and
     violate the sacred palladium of the people's rights, as
     subversive of the principles of justice, degrading to their
     high calling, and repulsive to the feelings of honest men.

     "_Resolved_, That we consider that a serious attack has been
     made upon the liberties of this people, and that it not only
     affects us as a Territory, but is a direct assault upon
     Republican principles in our own nation and throughout the
     world; and that we cannot either tamely submit to be
     disfranchised ourselves, nor witness, without protest, the
     assassin's dagger plunged into the very vitals of our national
     institutions.

     "_Resolved_, That while we will, at all times, honor and
     magnify all wholesome laws of our country, and desire to be
     subservient to their dictates, and the equitable
     administration of justice, we will resist, in a proper manner,
     every attempt upon the liberties, guaranteed by our fathers,
     whether made by insidious foes or open traitors.

     "_Resolved_, That a committee be appointed by the meeting to
     wait upon the Governor, and Judges Waite and Drake, to request
     them to resign their offices and leave the Territory.

     "_Resolved_, That John Taylor, Jetu Clinton, and Orson Pratt,
     Sen., be that committee.

     "_Resolved_, That we petition the President of the United
     States to remove Governor Harding, and Judges Waite and Drake,
     and to appoint good men in their stead."

The following is the petition to the President, which was signed by
several thousand persons:--


     "_To His Excellency Abraham Lincoln, President of the United  States_:--

     "Sir,--We, your petitioners, citizens of the Territory of
     Utah, respectfully represent that,

     "_Whereas_, From the most reliable information in our
     possession, we are satisfied that His Excellency Stephen S.
     Harding, Governor, Charles B. Waite and Thomas J. Drake,
     Associate Justices, are strenuously endeavoring to create
     mischief and stir up strife between the people of the
     Territory of Utah and the troops now in Camp Douglas,
     (situated within the limits of Great Salt Lake City,) and, of
     far graver import in our nation's difficulties, between the
     people of the aforesaid Territory and the Government of the
     United States:

     "_Therefore_, We respectfully petition your Excellency to
     forthwith remove the aforesaid persons from the offices they
     now hold, and to appoint in their places men who will attend
     to the duties of their offices, honor their appointments, and
     regard the rights of all, attending to their own affairs and
     leaving alone the affairs of others; and in all their conduct
     demeaning themselves as honorable citizens and officers worthy
     of commendation by yourself, our Government, and all good men;
     and for the aforesaid removals and appointments your
     petitioners will continue most respectfully to pray.

     "_Great Salt Lake City, Territory of Utah_, March 3, 1863."

The best reply to the charges contained in the foregoing petition, is
the counter-petition sent to the President by the military officers of
General Connor's command, of which the following is a copy:--

     "HEADQUARTERS, COLUMN FOR UTAH, CAMP DOUGLAS,         }
       UTAH TERRITORY, NEAR SALT LAKE CITY, March 8, 1863. }

     "_To His Excellency Abraham Lincoln, President of the United
     States_:--

     "It is an unusual proceeding for officers of the army to join
     in representing to the Government their knowledge of facts and
     opinion of proceedings, having reference to civil authority,
     or to the actions of the people for expressing their
     displeasure at the conduct of their officers.

     "The condition of affairs in the Territory of Utah, however,
     and the result of this condition of affairs, which culminated
     in a mass meeting in Salt Lake City on the 3d inst., in our
     opinion demands from us a respectful statement to your
     Excellency of the matter having allusion to ourselves, simply
     as an act of duty we owe to our Government.

     "We do not propose to inquire into recommendations affecting
     the laws of the Territory, made by the Governor and Associate
     Judges of the Supreme Court of Utah. The Government must know,
     as regards the justice or injustice of the proposed amendments
     to existing laws, made by the officers above named.

     "But when the community residing in Salt Lake City solemnly
     declare in their petition to your Excellency, that Governor
     Harding, and Judges Waite and Drake are studiously endeavoring
     to create mischief and stir up strife between the people of
     the Territory and the troops now at Camp Douglas (situated
     within the limits of Salt Lake City), they simply assert a
     base and unqualified falsehood.

     "On the contrary, it has been the aim of these gentlemen to
     preserve friendly relations between the people of Utah and the
     troops, who have also labored to the same end, now stationed
     at Camp Douglas.

     "And further; during a period of nearly five months, we know
     that Governor Harding, and Judges Drake and Waite 'have
     attended to the duties of their offices, honored their
     appointments, regarded the rights of all, attended to their
     own affairs,' and have not disturbed or interfered with the
     affairs of others, outside of their legitimate duty to the
     Government; 'and in all their conduct,' His Excellency
     Governor Harding, and Judges Drake and Waite, have, during our
     acquaintance with them, 'demeaned themselves as honorable
     citizens, and officers worthy of commendation by your
     Excellency, our Government, and all good men.'

     "And we further represent to your Excellency that these
     officers have been true and faithful to the Government, and
     fearless in the discharge of their duties to all. They have,
     on all proper occasions, spoken plainly to the people of their
     duty. They have not been subservient to any person or persons,
     and they stand proudly preëminent as in contrast with other
     officers who have represented in the past, and who do now
     represent, the Federal Government in this Territory.

     "Our respectful opinion is, that there is no good and true
     cause for the removal of His Excellency Governor Harding, and
     Judges Drake and Waite, from the offices they now hold.

     "With much respect, we have the honor to remain your
     Excellency's obedient servants,--

     "P. Edward Connor, Colonel 3d Infantry, California Volunteers,
     commanding District of Utah; Geo. S. Evans, Colonel 2d
     Cavalry, Cal. Vol.; P. A. Gallagher, Major 3d Infantry, C. V.;
     J. M. Williamson, Surgeon, 2d Cavalry, C. V.; Robert K. Reid,
     Surgeon 3d Infantry, C. V.; George Wallace, Capt. and Asst. Q.
     M. U. S. A.; Thomas B. Gately, 1st Lieut. and Reg. Q. M.;
     William L. Ustick, 1st Lieut. and Adjt. 3d Infantry, and A. A.
     A. G.; T. S. Harris, 1st Lieut. and Adjt. 2d Cavalry, C. V.;
     Henry R. Miller, 2d Lieut. and Reg. C. S., 2d Cavalry, C. V.;
     F. A. Peel, 2d Lieut. and Reg. Q. M. 2d Cavalry, C. V.;
     Charles Tupper, Captain 3d Infantry, C. V.; John B. Urmy,
     Captain 3d Infantry, C. V.; Samuel N. Hoyt, Captain 3d
     Infantry, C. V.; David Black, Captain 3d Infantry, C. V.; S.
     P. Smith, Captain 2d Cavalry, C. V.; Daniel McLane, Captain
     2d Cavalry, C. V.; George F. Price, Captain 2d Cavalry, C.
     V.; David J. Berry, Captain 2d Cavalry, C. V.; Josiah Hosmer,
     1st Lieut. 3d Infantry, C. V.; James W. Stillman, 1st Lieut.
     3d Infantry, C. V.; Lysander Washburn, 2d Lieut. 3d Infantry,
     C. V.; Michael McDermott, 1st Lieut. 3d Infantry, C. V.; John
     Quinn, 1st Lieut. 2d Cavalry, C. V.; Cyrus D. Clark, 1st
     Lieut. 2d Cavalry, C. V.; Francis Honeyman, 2d Lieut. 3d
     Infantry, C. V.; S. E. Joslyn, 2d Lieut. 3d Infantry, C. V.;
     James Finnerty, 2d Lieut. 3d Infantry, C. V.; Edward Ingham,
     2d Lieut. 3d Infantry, C. V.; Anthony Ether, 2d Lieut. 2d
     Cavalry, C. V.; J. Bradley, 2d Lieut. 2d Cavalry, C. V.; Geo.
     D. Conrad, 2d Lieut. 2d Cavalry, C. V."[97:A]

But to return to the meeting, and subsequent proceedings:--

The next morning, the Committee appointed to wait upon the officers and
"request" them to resign and leave the Territory, called upon Governor
Harding, at his residence, and presented him with a copy of the "Deseret
News," containing the reported proceedings of the meeting.

The Governor treated them with much courtesy, and after examining the
paper, addressed the Committee, as follows:--

     "Gentlemen, I believe I understand this matter perfectly. You
     may go back and tell your constituents that I will not resign
     my office, and will not leave this Territory, until it shall
     please the President to recall me. I came here a messenger of
     peace and good-will to your people, but I must confess that my
     opinions have changed in many respects. But I came also, sirs,
     to discharge my duties honestly and faithfully to the
     Government, and I intend to do so to the last. It is in your
     power to do me personal violence,--to shed my blood; but this
     will not deter me from my purpose. If the President can be
     made to believe that I have been unfaithful to the trust he
     confided to me, he will doubtless remove me; and I then shall
     be glad to return to my home in the States, and will do so,
     carrying with me no unjust resentments towards you or any one
     else.

     "But I will not be driven away; I will not cowardly abandon
     my post. I may be in danger in staying; but my purpose is
     fixed. I desire to have no trouble; I am anxious to live and
     again meet my family,--but if necessary, an administrator can
     settle my affairs.

     "Your allegations in this paper are false,--without the shadow
     of truth. You call my Message insulting, and you dare not
     print it for fear your people may read it for themselves. To
     say that I have wronged you when I said that you are disloyal,
     is simply preposterous. Your own people--your public teachers
     and bishops--admit the fact.

     "Let me say to you in conclusion,--and as this is said to be a
     land of prophets, I too will prophesy,--If, while in the
     discharge of my duties, one drop of my blood be shed by your
     ministers of vengeance, that it will be avenged, and not one
     stone or adobe in this city will be left upon another. I have
     now done, and you understand me."

During this reply the Committee sat quiet, with the exception of Elder
Taylor, who several times attempted to make some explanation; but the
Governor refused to hear him, and went through with his remarks without
stopping to listen, or reply to any new matter.

Elder Taylor then turned to Judge Drake, and remarked that he might
consider the resolutions as addressed also to him.

The Judge responded as follows:--

     "The communications you have made are of some importance, and
     as they are intended to affect me, I desire to say something
     before you go.

     "It is no small thing to request a citizen to leave his
     country. Are you aware of the magnitude or of the baseness of
     what you have undertaken? I deny that you have any cause for
     such conduct toward me. I am an American citizen, and as such
     have a right to go to every part of the Republic. I have the
     right to petition, or ask the Government to pass laws; or to
     amend them. You, Taylor and Pratt, are men of experience, and
     reputed to be men of learning, and ought to know better than
     to insult a man by such means.

     "It is mean and contemptible. On your part, Taylor, a
     foreigner, it is impudence unequalled; and Pratt, a citizen,
     ought to know better than to trample on the rights of a
     citizen by engaging in such a dirty enterprise. Your
     resolutions are false, and those who drafted them knew them to
     be so; and I am informed that in the meeting at the
     Tabernacle, Brigham Young called me a fool, and a tool of the
     Governor. [Here Taylor admitted that such was the fact.]

     "Go back to Brigham Young, your master,--that embodiment of
     sin and shame and disgust,--and tell him that I neither fear
     him, nor love him, nor hate him,--that I utterly despise him.
     Tell him, whose tools and tricksters you are, that I did not
     come here by his permission, and that I will not go away at
     his desire, or by his directions. I have given no cause of
     offence to any one. I have not entered a Mormon's house since
     I came here; your wives and daughters have not been disturbed
     by me, and I have not even looked upon your concubines and
     lewd women.

     "I am no skulk from the punishment of crimes. I tell you, if
     you, or the man whom you so faithfully serve, attempt to
     interfere with my lawful business, you will meet with trouble
     of a character you do not expect.

     "A horse-thief or a murderer has, when arrested, a right to
     speak in court; and unless in such capacity, or under such
     circumstances, don't you ever dare to speak to me again."

The Committee rose to depart, and one of them said, "We have our
opinions." "Yes," replied the Judge, "thieves and murderers can have
opinions;" and thus closed the interview.

The Committee then proceeded to call on Judge Waite at his residence,
where they were received politely and with due consideration. In answer
to their request for his resignation and withdrawal from the Territory,
he replied as follows:--

     "To comply with your wishes, gentlemen, under such
     circumstances, would be to admit, impliedly at least, one of
     two things,--either that I was sensible of having done
     something wrong, or that I was afraid to remain at my post and
     perform my duty.

     "I am not conscious either of guilt or fear. I must therefore
     respectfully decline to accede to your request."

These replies were published in California, and in the Eastern papers,
and gave general satisfaction. The people rejoiced that at last the
Government had representatives in Utah who could neither be wheedled nor
bullied out of their rights, nor frightened from the performance of
their duty.

In Utah the excitement for a time ran high, and doubtless nothing but
the presence of the military saved the federal officers from personal
violence.

The state of popular feeling there is well shown by the following
extracts from the correspondence of the "Chicago Tribune":--

     "Excitement ran high, and groups of men were to be seen on the
     corners of the various streets, busily engaged in canvassing
     the subject, their earnest gestures and eager attitudes
     portraying the depth and intensity of the frenzied feeling
     which actuated them.

     "One of the Judges sought to be ostracised (Judge Waite) was
     accosted, while passing quietly along the sidewalk, by a group
     of excited men, and threats of an alarming character made use
     of to intimidate him.

     . . . "The few 'gentiles' resident here were also to be
     observed in earnest discussion of the question, and with
     compressed lip and countenance, on which 'thought sat sedate,'
     awaited, cold and determined, the approach of coming events. I
     opine that many a bowie and revolver were hastily examined and
     adjusted, of which the passer-by had no thought or knowledge,
     which, in an emergency, might have been made useful.

     "It was a spectacle of true courage to see these federal
     officers, clothed with important duties, stand up and assert
     their rights, when they knew but too well that this 'request'
     upon the part of the meeting and the Committee had a far more
     grave significance, if that request were not complied with.

     "They have been called on by a number of citizens and
     gentlemen since the visit of the Committee, and have received
     but one expression of opinion as to what has passed; and that
     is, that the proceedings throughout were an outrage, and only
     intended to get rid of men who cannot be used against the
     interest of the General Government, and whose fidelity to duty
     makes them alike hated and feared by the Mormon leaders."

The following, from the same correspondence, will show the conduct of
Young during this emergency:--

     "While the objects of all this wrath pursue the even tenor of
     their way, and sleep soundly, with scarce a casement barred,
     unmindful of the threatened storm without, yet not so with
     him, 'the Lord's Anointed,' who appears to dream dreams and
     see visions, that to his distempered fancy seem to foreshadow
     the 'handwriting on the wall,' at the great day of his
     judgment which is to come. Like unto the great magician, the
     famous Fakir, who upon a time, by his incantation, raised a
     demon which he could not control, which would not 'lay' at the
     conqueror's command, and from which he fled in dismay; so, in
     the present instance, the 'Lion of the Lord' is sorely
     affrighted at the hideous aspect of the devil ('of a muss') he
     has raised, which, he has the sagacity to see, may not 'down'
     at his bidding, but may return to plague the inventor.

     "There is abundant evidence to show that he is alarmed at his
     own creation, and foreseeing that he has provoked justice,
     incensed mercy, seeks to guard against the retribution which
     he knows the offended majesty of loyalty and law should visit
     upon him.

     "The night succeeding the action of the mass meeting, some
     fifty armed sentinels or guards were on duty, in and about
     Brigham's premises, which number has since been augmented to
     several hundreds, a portion of whom serve as pickets, or
     night-patrol, on the different streets leading toward Camp
     Douglas. It has been currently reported that orders have been
     issued to arrest Brigham and his counsellors, and hence these
     precautionary measures to guard against any sudden inroad of
     troops from Col. Connor's command. . . .

     "On the 8th inst., the Sabbath succeeding the date of the mass
     meeting, Brigham delivered a very treasonable and violent
     harangue in the Tabernacle, to an immense audience, which
     filled almost to suffocation that capacious structure. . . .
     'We have always,' he said, 'done everything in our power to
     show our loyalty. Is there anything that could be asked that
     we would not do? Yes; let the present Administration ask us
     for a thousand men, or even five hundred, and I'd see them
     damned first, and then they couldn't have them! What do you
     think of that? [Loud cries of "Good, good!" and great
     applause.] We have liars, murderers, and thieves among us, who
     are watching us, to report something against our loyalty.
     Their object is to send another army here to "wipe us out";
     but let me tell them that cannot be done; "they can't come
     it,"--putting his thumb to his nose, and making the peculiar
     gyrating movement with the fingers, so very expressive among
     rowdies and shoulder-hitters. At this antic, a long, and loud,
     and universal shout and laughter went up from all parts of the
     house, joined with clapping of hands, and stamping of the
     feet, in one general din and uproar.

     "'It was said that we were disloyal because we burned some
     seventy government wagons, at the time Johnston's army came
     here. Well, let me ask, _what the devil were they doing out
     here_? Coming here to destroy, and wipe us from the face of
     the earth; and we only took and destroyed some of their good
     things, so that they had to _gnaw mules' bones_, and eat
     cattle which had frozen to death; that's what they did.

     "'I swear some, my brethren and sisters; but it is always in
     the pulpit,--never anywhere else.'

     "Following Brigham came 'brother Heber,' a large, gross man,
     bald-headed, and with a harsh and disagreeable voice, and
     apparently fast approaching the age of 'the lean and slippered
     pantaloon.' His remarks were in the main but a re-hash of
     those made by Brigham, save in one or two noticeable points,
     as follows:--'They say I am a secessionist, _but that's a
     lie_. Then they say I have more than one wife; well, I _have_
     several wives, and lots of children, and by the help of the
     Lord I'll have many more of them!'

     "Speaking about anticipated trouble with the General
     Government, he said:--'The entire power of the United States
     cannot destroy us, for the Lord will fight our battles.'


     "_Brigham fears Arrest._

     "Yesterday Col. Connor rode into the city, and called on Judge
     Waite at his residence, and made a stay of perhaps an hour or
     so. Immediately after his departure, a signal of distress was
     hastily thrown to the breeze, from a small flag-staff on
     Brigham's 'Lion House.' . . . . Immediately a commotion was
     seen, and soon armed men began to pour along the different
     streets, and the report was carried, as on the wings of
     lightning, to the uttermost parts of the city, that an order
     was being made out for the arrest of Brigham and his
     counsellors, and that Col. Connor had been down to make
     arrangements for enforcing the writ. Men with muskets and
     rifles,--some few with antiquated swords,--of all ages, from
     the brawny youth to the old white-haired sexagenarian, came
     pouring along, singly and in groups, by twos, by threes, and
     the half-dozen or more, pressing hurriedly on towards
     Brigham's premises, zealous, and ready to yield up life, if
     need be, in defence of the 'Prophet of the Lord.' Altogether
     some two thousand 'citizen soldiery' collected, and stood
     guard during the watches of the night, over the beloved
     Brigham and his harem. Verily, 'The wicked flee when no man
     pursueth.'"

That Brigham really feared arrest at this time, and believed that a
movement was on foot for that purpose, is evident from the following,
taken from the "Latter Day Saints' Millennial Star," published in
London. It is a portion of a letter written for that magazine by David
O. Calder, a clerk in the tithing-office:--


     "AMERICA. GREAT SALT LAKE CITY, March 13th, 1863.

     "_President G. Q. Cannon_:

     "Dear Brother,--You of course have learned through the New
     York press of our 'expected collision between the military and
     citizens of Utah,' and will learn through Capt. Hooper, (he
     being just informed by telegraph to write to you,) that
     comparative peace is restored. I shall now give you some
     details of the trouble.

     "As you are aware, we have been of the opinion that the
     mission of the troops despatched from California last year was
     not altogether to be confined to the guarding of the mail and
     telegraph lines, and the protection of the California
     emigration, and consequently have been watchful of their
     proceedings; the more so, that they made their winter-quarters
     within the city limits, and on one of the most commanding
     benches above the city, instead of being distributed at the
     several posts along the line of travel.

     "We also have been made acquainted with the doings of Governor
     Harding, and Judges Waite and Drake; that they were
     corresponding with the authorities at Washington, and moving
     everything that could be moved to bring the army here in
     contact with the people, and to have the War Department send
     on two or three thousand more troops.

     "These and other movements compelled the citizens to be on
     their guard, and prepared for any emergency. On Monday last, a
     reliable person overheard Colonel Connor and Judge Waite in
     conversation. The Colonel says, 'These three men must be
     surprised.' The Judge replied, 'Colonel, you know your duty.'
     In half an hour after, from a signal given, which was
     previously understood, about one thousand citizens were armed,
     and on duty, and in another half hour another thousand men
     were on duty. This sudden demonstration proved to them that
     their secret was known, and that we were fully prepared for
     them. In the mean time our 'outside' friends in this city
     telegraphed to those interested in the mail and telegraph
     lines, that they must work for the removal of the troops,
     Governor Harding, Judges Waite and Drake, _else there would be
     difficulty, and the mail and telegraph lines would be
     destroyed_. Their moneyed interest has given them great energy
     in our behalf. They have placed their line at the disposal of
     President Young, to be used to Washington, or New York. We
     fully expect the Colonel, Governor, and Judges will be
     recalled."

Here, it will be noticed, is the same covert threat contained in Brigham
Young's speech, that the mail and telegraph lines would be destroyed, if
the federal officers should be retained at their posts. It is to be
regretted that this standing menace should so far have had its effect,
as to induce the President, some two or three months afterward, to
recall Governor Harding from his position. It is true, by transferring
him to the Chief Justiceship of Colorado Territory, his removal was
disconnected with any censure of his administration. It still remained,
however, a substantial yielding to the arbitrary demands of Brigham
Young, and as such, had a direct tendency to encourage him in his
lawless proceedings, and to postpone for years the solution of the Utah
problem.

Judges Waite and Drake had, immediately after the demonstration of the
3d of March, written to the President, giving it as their opinion that
the laws were nugatory, and the Organic Act entirely inoperative in the
Territory, and declining to hold any terms of the District Court in
their respective districts until they should be properly supported by
the military power of the Government; at the same time giving it as
their opinion, that such a support should be at least five thousand men,
well armed, equipped, and provided.

The failure to furnish this force, and the subsequent change in the
governorship of the Territory, satisfied them that the Government was
not then prepared to meet the questions which had arisen in such a
manner as the dignity and honor of the nation required, and accordingly
all effort to further counteract the evil effects of this intolerant
theocracy were, for the time, abandoned.

Judge Waite, after holding, with his associates, in July, 1863, a term
of the Supreme Court, _at which there was not a single case on the
docket_, left the Territory in disgust, and established himself in the
practice of his profession in Idaho City, Idaho Territory. He resigned
his office, and was succeeded, in the spring of 1864, by Judge McCurdy,
the present incumbent.

[Illustration: James Duane Doty]

Governor Harding was succeeded, in May, 1863, by James Duane Doty, who,
at the time of his appointment, was Superintendent of Indian Affairs.
Governor Doty is a man of sound judgment, and of large experience in
public affairs; and does as well as any man could in his embarrassing
position. But his governorship is merely nominal. With the form and
semblance, he lacks all the substance of power; and where he should
_order_, he must satisfy himself with request and expostulation.

Judge Drake still remains in Utah, and with all the talent, energy, and
experience necessary to fill his position to the great benefit of the
people, he is obliged to remain entirely inactive, and goes through the
forms of holding court, with scarcely an attempt to administer justice
to the whole people, so well persuaded is he that all such attempts are
futile in the present condition of affairs.

Gen. Connor also remains, and, considering the small force at his
command, has accomplished wonders. By his bold and fearless vindication
of the rights and interests of the Government, guided, at the same time,
in all his acts by great discretion and moderation, he has compelled
some show of respect for the federal authority.

Neither Gen. Connor nor Judge Waite had the slightest intention of
arresting Brigham Young at the time alluded to in March, 1863. The
astute leader of the Mormons had a spy listening to the conversation of
those gentlemen, and the spy aforesaid heard some things, and thought he
heard others. He reported to headquarters the supposed result of his
discoveries, and it must be admitted that those who had been placed
under this insulting espionage took no great pains to correct the
impression which prevailed, and which so quickly and so thoroughly
developed the disloyal sentiments which the people had imbibed under the
infamous teachings of Brigham and his corrupt priests, apostles, and
bishops.

Mark the language used by Mr. Calder. "On Monday last, a reliable person
overheard," &c. Here the infamous system of espionage maintained over
the federal officers by Young, stands plainly confessed. But the fact
was well known, and he reaped no great benefit from it.

So thoroughly was he frightened, that, to save himself the ignominy and
humiliation of a public and forcible arrest, he went privately to his
friend, Chief Justice Kinney, and gave his bonds for his appearance at
Kinney's court, to answer to any indictment that _might be_ found
against him for polygamy.

The grand jury, of course, found no indictment, and the incident is only
worth mentioning as curiously illustrative of the extent to which he was
operated on by his fears on that occasion.

A brief notice of the federal officers stationed and residing in Utah,
while the writer was living in that Territory, will close the present
chapter.

Hon. Stephen S. Harding, who was Governor from the spring of 1862 for
about one year, is from Milan, Indiana. He is about fifty years of age;
is a sound lawyer, and a man of extraordinary energy and decision of
character. These traits are modified, in some degree, by considerable
ambition, and great love of approbation. In his administration of Utah
affairs, so far as he was governed by this feeling, he labored for the
respect and approval of the great body of the American people, rather
than of the masses by whom he was immediately surrounded.

That he possesses much personal courage is evidenced by many of his
official acts, some of which he had reason to believe would subject him
at once to personal danger. The presence of the military in the
immediate neighborhood was sufficient to prevent any open outbreak;
still there were many ways in which his personal safety might be
jeopardized, without subjecting the perpetrators of the acts to
punishment.

So well is this understood in Salt Lake, that it requires a high degree
of moral courage to enable one to do any act offensive to "the powers
that be" in the Holy City.

Every attempt was made to seduce him from the path of duty, not omitting
the same appliances which had been brought to bear upon Steptoe and
Dawson, but all in vain.

His family remained at Milan, except his son, Attila, who was with the
Governor at Salt Lake, and acted as his private secretary.

Hon. James Duane Doty, the successor of Harding, and the present
Governor of the Territory, was, for nearly two years previous to
receiving the appointment of Governor, Superintendent of Indian Affairs
for the Territory. He was appointed to succeed Harding in April or May,
1863.

James Duane Doty, Governor of Utah, was born at Salem, in the County of
Washington and State of New York, on the 5th day of November, A. D.
1799, the last year of the last century.

He emigrated to Detroit, Michigan, where he was admitted to the Supreme
Court, and settled in the practice of the law in the year 1818, and was
one of the earliest emigrants to that State.

The next year he was elected Clerk of the Common Council of the City,
and appointed Secretary to the Legislature, which was then composed of
the Governor and Judges of the Supreme Court; and was also appointed a
Notary Public, and soon afterwards Clerk of the Supreme Court of the
Territory by the Judges of that court.

In 1820 he accompanied Governor Cass, as Secretary, in his expedition to
the sources of the Mississippi, travelling a distance of over four
thousand miles through the Indian Country in a birch-bark canoe, from
the 20th of May to the 20th of November.

In this year he revised the laws of the Territory, which were published
by the authority of the Legislature.

In 1821 he was admitted an attorney of the Supreme Court of the United
States at Washington.

In 1823 the country north of lakes Huron and Michigan, and west of lakes
Michigan and Superior, was made by Congress a judicial district, and he
was appointed by James Monroe its Judge, with the title of "an
additional Judge of the Territory of Michigan." He performed the duties
of this office until the year 1832,--having married, and fixed his
residence at Green Bay, then the largest settlement in the country north
or west of Detroit.

In 1832 he was appointed by the Secretary of War a Commissioner to
locate Military Roads from Fort Howard, at Green Bay, to Fort Crawford
on Prairie du Chien, and to Fort Dearborn at the mouth of Chicago Creek,
now the site of the city of Chicago,--between which points there were
then scarcely twenty white inhabitants.

In 1834 and 1835 he served in the Legislative Council of Michigan,
having been elected by the voters west of the Lake; and introduced the
measure of a State government, which was adopted by the Council.

He contended for the right of the people to form a government for
themselves, under the provisions of the Ordinance of 1787.

By this measure a territorial government was obtained for Wisconsin, and
a permanent separation from Michigan of the country west of Lake
Michigan, which had been attached to that Territory in 1818, when
Illinois was admitted into the Union. It had been sought in vain of
Congress from the year 1825,--the application having been successfully
opposed by the party averse to laying the foundation of new
non-slaveholding States.

In 1837 he was elected Delegate to Congress from Wisconsin, and
continued to serve in that office by reëlection until the year 1841,
when he was appointed Governor and Superintendent of Indian Affairs in
that Territory; and as Commissioner held treaties at Oeyoowurah, on
Minnesota River, with the Dakotahs, and with the bands of that nation on
the Mississippi River.

It was in 1837 that he laid out the town of Madison, and succeeded in
making it the seat of government,--one of the most valuable services
which he ever rendered that State. It is now considered one of the most
beautiful sites for a town. When selected by him there was not a white
settler within forty miles, and it was occupied by Winnebago Indians.

He was elected and served as a member of the Convention to form a State
Constitution in 1846 for Wisconsin.

In 1849 he was elected in the Third District of Wisconsin a
Representative in Congress, and was reëlected in 1851,--serving on
several committees. It was during his first term as a member that he was
declared an Abolitionist--now no longer a term of reproach--by Father
Ritchie and the Southern leaders, because he declined to vote for a
repeal of the duty on lead.

In 1861 he was appointed Superintendent of Indian Affairs in the
Territory of Utah; and in 1862 was appointed a Commissioner to negotiate
treaties with the Shoshonees,--which were held by him in 1863. These
were the first treaties ever made by the United States with this nation
of Indians.

In May, 1863, he was appointed Governor of the Territory of Utah. During
his long public service he has had the acquaintance, and enjoyed the
friendship, of most of the eminent men connected with the Government of
our country. Of those who were on the stage when he entered public life,
it is believed that but one is now living,--Gen. Cass, who was his
generous patron in boyhood, and has been his friend during this long
period of an eventful life.

He is now believed to be the oldest pioneer living west of Lake
Michigan. In the performance of his duties he has traversed the
Continent,--having stood on the shores of the Atlantic and Pacific; on
the latter of which he reached the point in his westward march, where,
when the eye is directed over that vast ocean towards the East Indies,
the West appears to terminate and the East begins.

Hon. Thomas J. Drake, Associate Justice, is from Pontiac, Michigan,
where he had resided from early manhood. He is now over sixty years of
age. He has a thin, wiry frame, dark hair, and a nervous, bilious
temperament.

His mind is vigorous and clear, and his virtue and integrity of the old
Roman order. Of blameless life and manners, all the shafts of his
accusers fall harmless at his feet.

The wrongs and iniquities he has witnessed, added to personal
ill-treatment, has engendered an intense hatred of the despots who sit
enthroned over the people of Utah, but he has the most kindly feelings
toward the great body of the people.

Lacking all adequate power, he is obliged to sit quietly by, and see
wrongs perpetrated, which he is utterly unable to redress.

Judge Waite, the Associate of Harding and Drake, was from the State of
Illinois, where he had resided since the year 1840.

At the time of his appointment, in February, 1862, he was thirty-eight
years of age. He was then living near Chicago, in which city he had
resided and practised law since 1853.

Of Chief Justice Kinney mention has already been made. Suffice it to
add, he was, in the summer of 1863, elected as Delegate to Congress from
Utah, and took his seat the following winter. He doubtless aspires to
still higher honors from the same Territory.

Hon. John Titus, who succeeded Kinney, and is the present Chief Justice
of the Territory, is somewhat past fifty years of age,--a gentleman of
much dignity and urbanity of manners. He is large and well formed, and
has an active temperament.

His duties as yet have been exceedingly light, and will probably
continue so while he remains in the Territory. The Mormons withhold from
him all the cases they can control. He is outspoken against polygamy,
making no reserve whatever of his opinions on that question.

Chief Justice Titus was appointed from the Philadelphia bar.

Dr. Frank Fuller was Secretary of the Territory about two years, and was
succeeded by Mr. Reed, in the fall of 1863.

Dr. Fuller is from New Hampshire, and a dentist by profession and
practice. He was attentive and obliging in his official intercourse with
all parties. He is a polished gentleman also in social intercourse.

He was one of the few federal officers in Salt Lake at that time who was
so fortunate as never seriously to offend Brigham Young. Doubtless his
position brought him less in collision with that gentleman than was the
case with other officers. If he saw any difficulties approaching, by a
little shrewd management he carefully avoided them. If in thus steering
between Scylla and Charybdis he did not always meet the approbation of
his fellow-officers, he managed at least to avoid any open differences,
and thus kept up the appearance of friendship with all.

He enjoyed for a long time the confidence and apparent respect of
Brigham, to a greater degree, perhaps, than Kinney himself.

From Salt Lake he went to San Francisco, where he engaged in dealing in
mining stocks.

From the time of Dawson's hasty departure in the fall of 1861, until
Governor Harding's arrival in July, 1862, he acted as Governor of the
Territory, and his administration gave general satisfaction to the
Mormons.

Amos Reed, Esq., who succeeded Dr. Fuller as Secretary in 1863, and who
now holds that position, came into the Territory with Governor Doty from
Wisconsin.

During the winter of 1863-64, while Governor Doty was absent in
Washington, Reed was the acting Governor, and as such evinced a high
order of administrative talent. The affairs of the Territory were,
during that time, conducted with much discretion and judgment, and so
far as was in his power, the rights and interests of all classes were
respected.

[Illustration: General P. Edward Connor]

General P. Edward Connor was born in County Kerry, Ireland, and migrated
to the United States, with his parents, at a very early period of life.

Having reached the age of manhood, he enlisted in the regular army of
the United States, and served an honorable term, as private, for five
years, on the frontier.

At the breaking out of the Mexican War, he raised a company of Texas
Volunteers, and as captain, led them with distinguished success and
heroism at the battle of Buena Vista. He was mentioned in official
dispatches, with high encomiums for bravery. At this battle he was
severely wounded, and received a pension from the Government. At the
close of the war he settled upon the Pacific coast.

Captain Connor resided in Stockton, California, for ten years, prior to
the rebellion, engaged in private business, wherein he attained a
handsome competence.

He was married at Stockton, and now has two children living. During his
residence in Stockton, Captain Connor took an active interest in
military affairs, and commanded a uniform company.

At the breaking out of the present rebellion, he was tendered the
appointment of Colonel of the Third Regiment of Infantry, California
Volunteers. With the expectation that his regiment was to be sent East,
he promptly raised and organized it.

The exigencies of the service, however, required his presence in Utah,
and in the summer of 1862 he led the 3d Infantry, and part of the 2d
Cavalry, Cal. Vol., across the Plains, in a most successful, though
arduous march, and established his camp where it would command the City
of the Saints.

Amid the snows and storms of the winter of 1862-63, he planned and
prosecuted a successful campaign against hostile Indians, and on the
29th of January, 1863, fought the hard battle of Bear River, defeating
and almost annihilating the savages, under the leadership of Bear Hunter
and Lehigh.

For the brilliancy of this action, Col. Connor was promoted by the
President to be Brigadier-General of United States Volunteers, which
rank he now retains.

He is a man of strong common sense, excellent and quick judgment,
invincible energy and determination, firmness amounting to obstinacy,
and the strictest integrity.

His administration in Utah has been eminently successful. By Brigham
Young he is at once hated and feared. He is but little past forty years
of age.


FOOTNOTES:

[97:A] The above embraces all the commissioned officers then stationed
at Camp Douglas.




CHAPTER VII.

BRIGHAM AS PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH.

     Organization of the Mormon Church.--Functions of the various
     Officers. The Two Priesthoods.--Mode of Treating Dissenters or
     "Apostates."--Divisions in the Church.--The Gladdenites.--
     History of the Morrisites.--The Josephites.--Return to the
     true Mormon Church.


In his capacity as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints, Brigham Young possesses and wields despotic power over "this
people," and rules them by his single will, in all their affairs, both
spiritual and temporal.

This is owing, not to any peculiarity in the church organization. Any
organization which should recognize him as the absolute head of the
church, and dispense with every system of checks and balances, would
answer the same purpose. Once admit the necessity of a spiritual head,
and fail to require from him any responsibility, and all that remains
is, to establish a grade of agents and mediums for the transmission of
his will and wishes to the masses, and the system is complete.

Such a grade is fully established under the Mormon system.

First,--_The First Presidency_. This consists of three, chosen from
those who hold the high-priesthood and apostleship, and its office is to
preside over and direct the affairs of the whole church. It consists of
a President and two Counsellors. The President is also Seer, Revelator,
Translator, and Prophet. He rules in all spiritual and temporal
affairs.

Secondly,--_The Apostles_. These are to build up, organize, and preside
over churches, administer the ordinances, etc.

Thirdly,--_The Seventies_. The Quorums of the Seventies are to travel in
all the world, preach the gospel, and administer its ordinances and
blessings. There is, also, the Patriarch, whose duty is to bless the
fatherless, to prophesy what shall befall them, etc.

Fourthly,--_High-Priests and Elders_. The High-Priest is to administer
the ordinances, and preside over the _Stakes_ of the church; that is,
over the churches established abroad.

The Elders are to preach and to baptize; to ordain other Elders, also
Priests, Teachers, and Deacons. All the foregoing officers are of the
Melchisedec Priesthood.

Fifthly,--_The Aaronic Priesthood_, which includes the offices of
Bishop, Priest, Teacher, and Deacon.

The _Bishop_ presides over all the lesser offices of the Aaronic
Priesthood, ministers in outward ordinances, conducts the temporal
business of the church, and sits in judgment on transgressors.

The _Priest_ is to preach, baptize, administer the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, and visit and exhort the saints.

The _Teacher_ is to watch over and strengthen the church, etc.

The _Deacon_ is to assist the Teacher.

There is also a High Council, consisting of Twelve High-Priests, with a
President. The office of the Council is to settle all important
difficulties.

The Priesthood comes direct from Heaven, and was lost to man, until the
keys of both orders of the Priesthood were given to Joseph Smith, by an
angel from Heaven, in 1829. After the death of Smith, they came into the
hands of Brigham Young.

From this _resumé_ of the church organization, it will be seen that it
is sufficient for the purpose. All these officers are but mediums for
the transmission of the will of the President. Nor is it confined to
spiritual affairs. Under the form of a church organization, this system
absorbs not only the religious, but all the civil and political liberty
of the individual member. The High Council forms an apparent check on
the power of the President; but when it is considered that this body is
composed of persons nearest the President, and under his immediate
influence and control, in other relations in the same organization,--as
High-Priests, etc.,--it will be seen that the check is only nominal, and
forms no real protection to the rights of the people.

The orders of the Priesthood, to which these officers are respectively
attached, are thus distinguished:--

The Melchisedec Priesthood hold the right of Presidency, receive
revelations from Heaven, for the guidance of the church, and hold the
keys of all its spiritual blessings.

The Aaronic Priesthood hold the keys of the ministering of angels, and
have the right to administer in outward ordinances. This Priesthood must
be filled by lineal descendants of Aaron.

It will be seen that the mission of all the officers of the Melchisedec
Priesthood--the Apostles, High-Priests, Seventies, and Elders--is to
propagate the gospel, and make converts; while the government of the
church and of the people is committed to the Aaronic Priesthood.

Of these the chief is the Bishop, who is accordingly the civil and
religious magistrate of the ward in which he resides.

There are other civil magistrates, whose duties are but little more than
nominal, except in Salt Lake City, where the occasional large influx of
"gentiles" who will not submit to this spiritual government, renders
necessary an approximation to the forms of civil proceedings to which
they have been accustomed.

The "saints" themselves are not expected to go before other than the
ecclesiastical magistrates. When brought unwillingly before a civil
magistrate, the same being a Mormon, the case receives a favorable
consideration.

Rare exceptions may be cited where, from motives of policy, this rule is
relaxed or departed from. For instance, in the winter of 1863-64, Jason
Luce, a Mormon, was tried, convicted, and shot, for the murder of a
gentile in Salt Lake City. But the murder was of the most cruel and
unprovoked character, the crime was perpetrated on the street, and the
evidence was open and abundant. Much indignation existed among the
miners, many of whom were congregated in Salt Lake City at the time.

If this had not been the first instance in the history of Utah of the
execution of a Mormon, under judgment of a Mormon court, for the murder
of a gentile, it might be taken as evidence of an intention to do
justice to all. As it is, it should be marked to their credit; and it is
only to be hoped that subsequent events may not prove it to have been an
act of policy merely.

The machinery of the Mormon Church, through which the people are
governed in all their affairs, civil as well as religious, is well
described in the following extract from the Salt Lake Correspondence of
the "Chicago Tribune" of May, 1863:--

     "The machinery of the church consists of Brigham, who is
     greatly pleased and flattered by the blasphemous title of the
     'Lord's Anointed,' the Second and Third Presidents, College of
     Twelve Apostles, Patriarchs, Quorums of Seventies,
     Counsellors, Presidents of 'Stakes,' Bishops, Elders, and
     Teachers; and last but not least, the Danites, or 'Destroying
     Angels,' who are scattered throughout the Territory, and who
     superintend the temporal and spiritual affairs of the people
     in every city, village, 'stake,' and hamlet in the same.

     "These various organizations and persons, from the Second
     President to the red-haired Danite, who is simply the employed
     assassin of the Great Head, are the shafts, driving-wheel, cog
     and spur-wheels, belts and pulleys of the great machine called
     the Church, and as such are made to perform their various
     functions with a precision and fitness of things, that is
     wonderful indeed.

     . . . "Brigham, like a skilful engineer, stands on the platform
     of his locomotive, with hand placed upon the lever, sheltered
     in the caboose, with peep-holes in front, on the right and on
     the left, and the crook of whose finger causes the whole train
     to move forward or back, or to switch off on the track of some
     new dogma, to which he lures on the unsuspecting passengers
     and precious freight, with the catchpenny whistle of
     'Revelation!' which is most persistently sounded when he hears
     the restive murmurings of those who may catch but a
     premonitory glimpse of the awful precipice to which he is
     hurrying them on, as to a terrible and eternal destruction."

The motive-power is religious delusion, which is constantly applied by
Brigham, who thus drives along the whole combination with fearful power.

     "And in that train may be found all that makes up the hopes
     and fears, the joys and sorrows, the love and hatred, of that
     'moral and physical phenomenon,' the Mormon Church,--not only
     here, but scattered throughout all Europe, and the 'Isles of
     the Seas,' who have ventured their all--their lives and
     fortunes, their bodies and souls--on the solution of that
     dearest of all problems to their minds, the ultimate triumph
     of the 'Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints' (as it is
     blasphemously called) over all governments, powers, and
     principalities of earth!"

In reference to the organization of the church, and the functions of the
respective priesthoods, the following is Brigham's own explanation of
the whole matter. In this exhibit will be seen how little importance he
attaches to the High Council.

Speaking of laying the corner-stones of the Temple, he says:--

     "I am not a visionary man, neither am I given much to
     prophesying. When I want any of that done I call on Brother
     Heber,--he is my prophet; he loves to prophesy, and I love to
     hear him.

     "Now, who do we set, in the first place, to lay the chief, the
     South-East corner-stone? We begin with the First Presidency,
     and the Apostleship. Who comes next in the church? The Bishop
     is the next standing authority in the Kingdom of God;
     therefore we set the Bishop at the second corner-stone of the
     building. The Melchisedec Priesthood, with the altar,
     fixtures, and furniture, belonging thereto, is situated on the
     East, and the Aaronic Priesthood belongs on the West;
     consequently the Presiding Bishop laid the second
     corner-stone.

     "The High-Priests' Quorum, do they come next in order? No, not
     any more than the Elders, nor the Elders any more than the
     High Council, nor the High Council any more than the Teachers,
     Deacons, or Priests. The High-Priests' Quorum is a standing
     quorum, abiding at home. So is the Elders' Quorum. But the
     place of the Bishop is in the temporal affairs of the church.
     So, then, what shall we say? Why, out of due respect to the
     High-Priesthood, which is nothing more than right and
     reasonable, we say to the High-Priests, 'Lay the third
     corner-stone.'

     "We started at the South-East corner, with the Apostleship;
     then the lesser, Aaronic Priesthood, laid the second stone; we
     bring them in our ranks to the third stone, which the
     High-Priests and Elders laid; we take them under our wing to
     the North-East corner, which the Twelve and Seventies laid,
     and then again join the Apostleship. It circumscribes every
     other priesthood, for it is the Priesthood of Melchisedec,
     which is after the order of the Son of God."[119:A]

But all this arrangement and subordination does not suffice to prevent
disaffection in the church. This will arise, and results in differences,
schisms, and divisions.

Not to notice smaller matters of difference, three systematic and
organized attempts have been made by large bodies of Mormons, since
their arrival in Utah, to throw off their allegiance to Brigham Young.
They have all been met and treated by him with a fierce bitterness,
indicating how thoroughly he is alarmed by such movements.

The third of these is now in progress, and promises to be successful.

The first of the "apostasies," as they are called by the Mormons, was
headed by Gladden Bishop, in 1852-53, and his followers were called
"Gladdenites."

Some idea of the manner in which they were met by Brigham, and of his
mode of dealing with apostates generally, may be gathered from the
following extracts from a sermon preached by him in March, 1853:--

     "I will ask, What has produced your persecutions and sorrow?
     What has been the starting-point of all your afflictions? They
     began with apostates in your midst; those disaffected spirits
     caused others to come in, worse than they, who would run out
     and bring in all the devils they possibly could. That has been
     the starting-point and grand cause of all our difficulties,
     every time we were driven. I am coming to this place,--I am
     coming nearer home. . . . Do we see apostates among us now? We
     do.

     "When a man comes right out like an independent devil, and
     says, 'Damn Mormonism and all the Mormons,' and is off with
     himself to California, I say he is a gentleman by the side of
     a nasty, sneaking apostate, who is opposed to nothing but
     Christianity. I say to the former, 'Go in peace, sir, and
     prosper if you can.' But we have a set of spirits here, worse
     than such a character. When I went from meeting last Sabbath,
     my ears were saluted with an apostate, crying in the streets
     here. I want to know if any one of you who has got the spirit
     of Mormonism in you, the spirit that Joseph and Hyrum had, or
     that we have here, would say, 'Let us hear both sides of the
     question. Let us listen and prove all things.' What do you
     want to prove? Do you want to prove that an old apostate, who
     has been cut off from the church thirteen times for lying, is
     anything worthy of notice? I heard that a certain
     picture-maker in this city, when the boys would have moved
     away the wagon in which this apostate was standing, became
     violent with them, saying, 'Let this man alone; these are
     saints that you are persecuting.' [Sneeringly.]

     "We want such men to go to California, or anywhere they
     choose. I say to those persons, 'You must not court
     persecution here, lest you get so much of it you will not know
     what to do with it. Do not court persecution.' We have known
     Gladden Bishop for more than twenty years, and know him to be
     a poor, dirty curse. Here is sister Vilate Kimball, brother
     Heber's wife, has borne more from that man than any other
     woman on earth could bear; but she won't bear it again. I say
     again, you Gladdenites, do not court persecution, or you will
     get more than you want, and it will come quicker than you want
     it.

     "I say to you, Bishops, do not allow them to preach in your
     wards. Who broke the roads to these valleys? Did this little
     nasty Smith, and his wife? No. They stayed in St. Louis while
     we did it, peddling ribbons, and kissing the gentiles. I know
     what they have done here,--they have asked exorbitant prices
     for their nasty, stinking ribbons. [Voices, 'That's true.'] We
     broke the roads to this country.

     "Now, you Gladdenites, keep your tongues still, lest sudden
     destruction come upon you. I say, rather than that apostates
     should flourish here, I will unsheathe my bowie-knife, and
     conquer or die. [Great commotion in the congregation, and a
     simultaneous burst of feeling, assenting to the declaration.]
     Now, you nasty apostates, clear out, or 'judgment will be laid
     to the line, and righteousness to the plummet.' [Voices
     generally, 'Go it, go it.'] If you say it is all right, raise
     your hands. [All hands up.] Let us call upon the Lord to
     assist us in this and every other good work."[121:A]

In the same discourse he commanded the Bishops to "kick these men out of
their wards," and warned the apostates themselves that "they were not
playing with shadows," but "it was the voice and the hand of the
Almighty they were trying to play with, and they would find themselves
mistaken if they thought to the contrary."

In accordance with this bloody teaching, many unfortunate apostates who
were unwilling or unable to leave the country, "bit the dust." They felt
the literal edge of the bowie-knife thus from the pulpit unsheathed for
their destruction. Many of the murders committed during the succeeding
six or seven years were fully authorized by these instructions; and yet
Brigham, unable to deny that they had been committed, has openly boasted
that his enemies have been unable to trace any of them to him, and
fasten them upon him.

He unsheathes the bowie-knife, and issues a general mandate; but when
the murder of some individual dissenter is brought to his door, he turns
away and says, "Thou canst not say, I did it."

The second organized opposition to Young was made by Joseph Morris and
his followers.

The rise and progress and subsequent history of the people called
"Morrisites," is as follows:--

On the 19th of November, 1860, a man dressed in ordinary working-clothes
wended his way on foot from Slatersville, a settlement in Weber County,
north of Salt Lake, to the Holy City. This was Joseph Morris, and the
object of his visit was to deliver to Brigham Young two letters which he
had written, under the supposed influence of the Spirit.

It seems that for some reason the life of Morris had been threatened,
and having been driven from the place where he had been living, he was
now going to appeal to the President in person for protection. Morris
had received, previous to this time, many revelations, some of which
looked to a purification of the church,--all of which he had
communicated to Brigham and the Apostles.

On his way to Salt Lake he met John Cook, brother of Richard Cook, at
that time a Mormon Bishop, presiding at South Weber. To him Morris
communicated his views and projects, and made so favorable an impression
that both the Cooks soon afterward espoused his cause, and became his
zealous supporters.

Morris delivered his letters to the President at his residence, but
received no reply.

He then proceeded to the house of Mr. Cook, on the Weber River, about
thirty miles northward from the city.

Not only the Cooks, but a number of their neighbors, now began to
entertain favorable opinions of the claim of their new acquaintance to
inspiration.

Others who conceived that the divine right of Brigham was being
endangered or infringed upon, determined to put Morris to death, or
drive him from their midst. But Bishop Cook stood in the way.

In this emergency President Young was appealed to, who sent two high
ecclesiastics, Messrs. John Taylor and Willford Woodruff, both
Apostles, to investigate the matter. They appointed a general meeting at
South Weber, and invited the Bishops of the surrounding settlements,
with as many of their people as possibly could, to attend.

The meeting convened on the 11th of February, 1861, and the delegates
commenced their court of inquiry by demanding whether there was a man in
the ward who professed to be a prophet? And whether there were any
individuals who entertained him, or professed faith in his claims?

To the astonishment and consternation of the Mormons, seventeen of the
believers, with Bishop Cook at their head, arose and declared that they
would enjoy and defend the right of conscience, by adhering to their new
faith, though it should bring upon them the most bitter persecution, and
the loss of their lives. An old man named Watts arose, and in an
inflammatory speech, recommended that the adherents of the new Prophet
should be "cut off under the chin," and laid away in the brush; at the
same time accompanying his words with a motion of the hand, drawing it
across his throat. This, he said, was what ought to be done, according
to his understanding of the laws of the church.

After some further discussion, in which Watts was boldly rebuked by Cook
for the utterance of such sentiments, the question was put to the
parties on trial, whether they believed that Brigham Young was a
Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. They all answered in the negative. Mr.
Taylor testified that he knew Brigham to be such, and said those who
believed to the contrary must be excommunicated from the church. They
were then subjected to the process of excommunication.

It will be noticed that the right of Brigham to preside over the church
as its temporal head, was not questioned by Morris or his followers.

From this time the followers of Morris increased in numbers with
wonderful rapidity.

On the 6th of April, 1861, five persons were baptized into the new
church in the Weber River. On the same day of the same month, thirty-one
years previous, the Mormon Church had been instituted by the baptism of
six persons. Encouraged by this augury, a church was organized, and the
work commenced in earnest. Converts flocked to them from all parts of
the Territory.

In three months the new church numbered about three hundred persons. Its
highest number did not exceed five hundred.

In the mean time difficulties arose between them and the surrounding
Mormons. The Morrisites refused to train as militia. Heavy fines were
imposed in consequence, and much property sold on execution for their
payment.

These fines and exactions were increased until the Morrisites refused
longer to submit to them. A number of fines of $60 each had been
imposed. When the sheriff appeared and proposed to arrest those who
would not or could not pay, he was resisted. Further proceedings were
then suspended for the present.

In the spring of 1862 a team, consisting of two yoke of cattle, which
had been sent to mill from the Morrisite settlement, was, together with
a load of flour, seized and retained by one William Jones, who
threatened in like manner to retain all that should be sent until some
difficulties between him and them should be settled to his satisfaction.
The Morrisites, standing in immediate need of the flour, sent a _posse_
of men, and took not only the flour, but Jones and two associates
prisoners.

Application was now made to Chief Justice Kinney, who immediately issued
writs for the arrest of the leading Morrisites, and writs of _habeas
corpus_ for the Mormons held in custody.

These writs being disregarded, a _posse_ of several hundred men, headed
by Robert T. Burton, sheriff of Salt Lake County, well armed and
equipped, and having several pieces of cannon, were sent to execute the
writs, and enforce obedience. This force was augmented on the way by
volunteers, and additional arms, until they approached the settlement of
the Morrisites, with a force of about a thousand well-armed men, and
five pieces of artillery.

Early on the morning of the 13th of June, some of the _posse_ appeared
on the heights above South Weber settlement, and took possession of the
Morrisites' cow-herd, killing such as they desired for beef. During the
morning, Sheriff Burton sent a proclamation to the leaders within the
Morrisite "fort,"--for such they had constructed,--calling upon them to
come out and deliver themselves up, according to the requirements of the
writs in his hands, and warning them of the consequences, if they
refused.

This not being responded to, about an hour later the _posse_, most of
whom had been hitherto out of sight, commenced to defile over the
bluffs, and to occupy a prominent position commanding the camp.

Morris now called a meeting of those within the fort. Scarcely had they
assembled, when a cannon-ball came into the congregation, killed two
women, and wounded a girl. From this time cannonading and musketry fire
was continued with but little intermission.

The camp consisted of a few houses built of willows, like basket-work,
and plastered, and of tents, and covered wagons. Still the fight was
kept up by these deluded people for three days, during all which time,
fighting with the energy of desperation, they held this immense force at
bay. On the evening of the third day, a white flag was raised, and the
whole camp surrendered. The Morrisites stacked their arms, under guard
of a detail from the _posse_, who had by this time entered the fort.

Amidst much confusion, the men and women were separated, and large
numbers of the men were placed under arrest. Morris, and a leader by the
name of Banks were shot in cold blood; also two of the women. All these
were killed after the Morrisites were unarmed, and their arms in the
possession of the sheriff. The _posse_ had two men killed. The
Morrisites ten in all.

After the Morrisites had been taken prisoners, their houses were
searched and plundered, and property, consisting of watches, jewelry,
clothing, &c., taken, to the amount of many hundreds of dollars.

The prisoners were taken to Salt Lake City, and placed under bonds by
Judge Kinney for their appearance at his court. They were afterwards
tried, and large numbers of them were fined and imprisoned. All of those
imprisoned were afterward pardoned and released by Governor Harding.

Thus ended "the Morrisite War." The Morrisites were now "scattered and
peeled," and so remained until May, 1863. At that time Gen. Connor
established a military post at Soda Springs, a beautiful place at the
northern bend of Bear River, about 175 miles north of Salt Lake City.
Before starting with his expedition, Gen. Connor gave notice that all
persons wishing to go up and form a settlement at that point, would be
furnished by him with transportation. The result was, that about eighty
families, consisting of over two hundred persons, nearly all Morrisites,
availed themselves of this offer,--removed, with their goods and
household gods, and established themselves at Soda Springs.

This settlement continues to exist and flourish, and may now be looked
upon, it is to be hoped, as a permanent point where the weary emigrant
may pause and rest on his long journey over the Plains, and be free from
the whims, exactions, and dangers of Mormonism. The place is now in
Idaho Territory, and returned eighty-one votes at the territorial
election of 1864.

Although the court and juries were fast to bring to punishment those who
had resisted the writs, yet Burton, the leader of the _posse_, who shot
four persons after they had surrendered, was not even indicted by a
Mormon grand jury. The evidence was laid before them, but without
avail.

The following affidavit of a man of much respectability, now residing at
Soda Springs, shows what was the conduct of Burton on the occasion
alluded to:--

     "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,   } _ss._
       TERRITORY OF UTAH.         }

     "Alexander Dow, of said Territory, being duly sworn, says:

     "In the spring of 1861, I joined the Morrisites, and was
     present when Joseph Morris was killed. The Morrisites had
     surrendered, a white flag was flying, and the arms were all
     grounded and guarded by a large number of the _posse_.

     "Robert T. Burton and Judson L. Stoddard rode in amongst the
     Morrisites. Burton was much excited. He said, 'Where is the
     man? I don't know him.' Stoddard replied, 'That's him,'
     pointing to Morris. Burton rode his horse upon Morris, and
     commanded him to give himself up in the name of the Lord.
     Morris replied, 'No, never, never.' Morris said he wanted to
     speak to the people. Burton said, 'Be d--d quick about it.'
     Morris said, 'Brethren, I've taught you true principles,'--he
     had scarcely got the words out of his mouth before Burton
     fired his revolver. The ball passed in his neck or shoulder.
     Burton exclaimed, 'There's your Prophet.' He fired again,
     saying, 'What do you think of your Prophet now?'

     "Burton then turned suddenly and shot Banks, who was standing
     five or six paces distant. Banks fell. Mrs. Bowman, wife of
     James Bowman, came running up, crying, 'Oh! you blood-thirsty
     wretch.' Burton said, 'No one shall tell me that and live,'
     and shot her dead. A Danish woman then came running up to
     Morris, crying, and Burton shot her dead also. Burton could
     easily have taken Morris and Banks prisoners, if he had tried.
     I was standing but a few feet from Burton all this time. And
     further saith not.

     "ALEXANDER DOW.

     "Subscribed and sworn to before me, this 18th day of April, A.
     D. 1863.

     "CHARLES B. WAITE,

     "_Associate Just., U. T._"

This Burton is the same man who is now the Collector of Internal Revenue
for Utah Territory!

The next movement, and one which promises seriously to interfere with
the schemes of Brigham Young, is under the auspices of the Mormon Church
East, or the "Josephites," as they are called, in contradistinction to
the "Brighamites."

Joseph Smith, the son of the Prophet, resides at Nauvoo, in Illinois,
near where his father was put to death. He claims to be the head of the
true Mormon Church, and of course repudiates Young for the same
position. He is opposed to polygamy, is loyal to the Government and laws
of the United States, and is said to be a good and worthy citizen.

For several years there have been indications of a "breaking up" among
the followers of the Pretender, Brigham, and a rallying around the
standard of the legitimate House of Joseph. In the States, those who
have gone back to their first love are to be numbered by thousands.

[Illustration: Joseph Smith]

In Utah the progress of disintegration, and of secession from the church
as there organized, is slower, and accompanied by more danger.

But in July, 1863, the "fulness of time" having come, the movement was
commenced in earnest, and a system of proselyting inaugurated, which has
already drawn hundreds of deluded people back to their duty to
themselves and their country, and which even now threatens the power of
Brigham so strongly that it seems almost tottering to its fall.

During the latter part of the month mentioned, E. C. Briggs and
Alexander McCord, two missionaries, sent by the Church East, for that
purpose, arrived in Salt Lake, and announced themselves as harbingers of
a better gospel,--as messengers of the true Church of Christ on earth.
Taking their lives in their hands, they had crossed the Plains alone,
and the Lord had protected and sustained them.

It may be supposed that their arrival caused considerable excitement at
Salt Lake City.

Briggs called on Young and acquainted him with the nature of his
"mission." The Prophet became very angry; refused him the use of the
Tabernacle, or any other building in the city; forbade him preaching
to the people, and said if he remained in the city, he (Young) would not
be responsible for his personal safety. Briggs declined to avail himself
of this polite hint to leave; and notwithstanding these thunders from
the Vatican, he went boldly to work, and "daily ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ."

He talked with the people, visited them at their houses, prayed with
them, and sang with them.

The effect was electrical. Singly, by dozens, and by scores, the people
began to fall off from the great apostasy, and to return to the
mother-church. Persecution commenced from the first day of his labors.
He and McCord were forbidden all the houses of the city, by an order of
Brigham which none dared to disobey. One house, that of a gentile, was
still open to them, and there they held their meetings, which were well
attended.

Before spring their numbers had increased to over three hundred. About
half of that number returned across the Plains in the spring of 1864,
and so strong was the excitement, and so bitter the persecution and
enmity of the "saints" toward this comparatively handful of seceders
from Brigham's authority and dominions, that Gen. Connor deemed it
necessary and advisable to send a strong escort with them as far as
Green River, about 145 miles.

Besides this number who departed for the region of the rising sun, large
numbers of the westward-bound emigration were stopped, and having their
eyes opened by missionaries of the same stamp, were induced to withhold
their steps, at least until another season.

The Josephites in Salt Lake, although the subjects of bitter and
unrelenting persecution from the Mormons, found favor and protection
from Gen. Connor and the military under his command.

They will doubtless continue to flourish and increase, and it is
possible that in this way Utah may be brought to loyalty and good
citizenship, without bloodshed or commotion. It is but a possibility,
however, as Brigham will not see himself thus undermined without
desperate efforts to prevent it.

In Europe whole churches have already changed, or "gone over," from the
apostasy of Brigham to the old church, with Joseph at its head.

Briggs is President of the Twelve Apostles, and is admirably fitted for
the work before him. He is a man of great energy and heroism, and takes
hold of his mighty task as though it were but the work of a summer day.
Nowhere can be found a better exemplification of the self-sacrifice and
sublime heroism of the Christians of the Middle Ages.

The following are the Articles of Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints, under the presidency of Joseph Smith, son of Joseph
the Martyr:--

     "We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and his Son Jesus
     Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

     "We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and
     not for Adam's transgressions.

     "We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind
     may be saved by obedience to the Laws and ordinances of the
     gospel.

     "We believe that these ordinances are: 1st. Faith in the Lord
     Jesus Christ; 2d. Repentance; 3d. Baptism by immersion for the
     remission of sins; 4th. Laying on of hands for the gift of the
     Holy Spirit; 5th. The Lord's Supper.

     "We believe that men must be called of God, by inspiration,
     and by laying on of hands by those who are duly commissioned
     to preach the gospel, and administer in the ordinances
     thereof.

     "We believe in the same organization that existed in the
     primitive church, viz.: Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers,
     Evangelists, &c.

     "We believe in the powers and gifts of the everlasting gospel,
     viz., the gift of faith, discoursing of spirits, prophecy,
     revelation, visions, healing, tongues and the interpretation
     of tongues, wisdom, charity, brotherly love, &c.

     "We believe the word of God recorded in the Bible; we also
     believe the word of God recorded in the Book of Mormon, and in
     all other good books.

     "We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now
     reveal, and we believe that he will yet reveal many more great
     and important things, pertaining to the kingdom of God and
     Messiah's second coming.

     "We believe in the literal gathering of Israel, and in the
     restoration of the ten tribes; that Zion will be established
     upon the Western Continent; that Christ will reign personally
     upon the earth a thousand years; and that the earth will be
     renewed, and receive its paradisaical glory.

     "We believe in the literal resurrection of the body; that the
     dead in Christ will rise first, and that the rest of the dead
     do not live again until the thousand years are expired.

     "We believe in being subject to kings, queens, presidents,
     rulers, and magistrates; _in obeying, honoring, and sustaining
     the law_.

     "We believe in being virtuous, chaste, temperate, benevolent,
     and in doing good to all men.

     "_We believe that the church in Utah, under the presidency of
     Brigham Young, have apostatized from the true order of the
     gospel._

     "_We believe that the doctrines of polygamy, human sacrifice,
     or killing men to save them, Adam being God, Utah being Zion,
     or the gathering place for the saints, are doctrines of
     devils_, instituted by wicked men, for the accomplishment of
     their own lustful desires, and with a view to their personal
     aggrandizement.

     "_We believe in being true and loyal to the Government of the
     United States_, and have no sympathy or fellowship for the
     treasonable practices or wicked abominations indorsed by
     Brigham Young and his followers."


FOOTNOTES:

[119:A] April 6, 1863. _Journ. of Dis._, Vol. I. p. 135.

[121:A] March 27, 1853. _Jour. of Dis._, Vol. I. p. 82.




CHAPTER VIII.

BRIGHAM AS TRUSTEE IN TRUST FOR THE CHURCH.

     Nature of the Trusteeship.--The Tithing System.--Brigham's
     Private Speculations.--The Emigration Fund.--The Hand-Cart
     Company.

                                  --"He was a man
          Who stole the livery of the Court of Heaven
          To serve the Devil in; in virtue's guise
          Devoured the widow's house and orphan's bread;
          In holy phrase, transacted villanies
          That common sinners durst not meddle with."


As Trustee in Trust for the Church, Brigham Young is in his element.
Here his genius shines preëminent, giving him the character, at home and
abroad, of a good, as he certainly is a successful, financier.

But here, upon the outset, let no one be misled by the words employed to
designate the capacity in which he handles and manages the funds of the
church. It is called a "_trust_," because he is supposed to use the
money for the benefit of the church.

But this _Trust_ is very general and indefinite in its character. It has
no prescribed duties or conditions. It has no guards or limits. _It has
no prescribed nor acknowledged mode of accountability._

Many years ago, attempts were made at the General Conferences, to
exhibit a balance-sheet of receipts and disbursements. These were
confused and unsatisfactory; and lest they should be too closely
examined, they have of late years been entirely abandoned,--the
increasing faith of the saints in their leader rendering it entirely
unnecessary that any explanation should be made of the disposal of their
funds.

Again: a corps of clerks are employed in the tithing-office, and are
paid out of the public tithing-fund salaries ranging from $1000 upwards.
They are supposed to keep a complete system of accounts, showing all the
receipts from this net-work of fiscal veins, and all the disbursements
through the various arteries of the religious body. But beyond the
receipt and deposit of moneys, and the keeping of the tithing account
with individual members of the church, the duties of these clerks are
merely nominal. Each has another part to perform. The reader will smile
to be informed that these clerks are really the principal stock actors
in the Salt Lake Theatre. Having but little office business, their time
is thus turned to a good account, reading novelettes and newspapers, a
plentiful supply of which may be found in their several offices. The
theatre is the private property of Brigham, and the proceeds go into his
own pocket, disconnected with any real or imaginary embarrassment
arising from the relation of Trustee. Hence it will be seen to be good
"financiering" for the tithing-clerks, under pay of "the church," to
perform for the benefit of "Brother Brigham." Should they fail to comply
with his wishes, he has only, as "Trustee in Trust," to dispense with
their services. This may be mentioned as a notable instance of the
"shrewd financiering" of Brigham Young.

These clerks simply keep the accounts with individuals, and receive and
deposit the money and property paid in to the tithing-fund. They also
keep the accounts of laborers on the temple and other public works.

It is needless to say they are entirely under the control of Brigham.
According to the Mormon creed, the temporal affairs of the kingdom
should be entirely directed and controlled by the Aaronic Priesthood.
The presiding Bishops of this priesthood are agents to perform the will
of the head of the order, who is the President himself.

To keep the public mind quiet and satisfied, it is stated from the
pulpit that the accounts of Brigham Young, as an individual, and those
which he keeps as trustee for the church, are entirely separate and
distinct, and that not a dollar of church money goes to the private use
of the President or his family, without being duly charged and accounted
for. But these public declarations are all the assurance the people have
that such is the fact. The system of book-keeping by double entry is
entirely ignored as an invention of the gentiles; and if an
investigation of the accounts should be instituted, it would be
conducted under great disadvantages, and could have no certainty in its
results.

Notwithstanding these protestations so frequently made from the pulpit,
there is a growing conviction among the masses that the increasing
evidences of the individual wealth of Brigham, notwithstanding his
immense outlays, can only be accounted for in one way,--by the gradual
absorption and assimilation of the funds of the church with his own
private moneys. Indeed he does not hesitate to affirm, boldly, that if
he wishes to build a grist or a saw-mill, or to engage in any other
enterprise, he borrows from the tithing or other public funds the
necessary means, paying it back by instalments when convenient, or
turning in some other property that he has no immediate use for. In
these private arrangements and trades, between himself _in propria
persona_ and himself in his fiduciary capacity, it is not to be supposed
that he would make them to his own disadvantage, or that he would
voluntarily assume losses which he could just as well throw upon the
church at large. With this scape-goat upon which to throw his
unfortunate speculations, and with a large revenue derived from
legislative gifts, in the shape of timber canyons, herding-grounds,
ferries, and other franchises, it is not strange that his worldly store
should be constantly and largely augmented. He boasts that he takes no
thought how to make money or get rich, and yet riches constantly flow to
him. He has said, he can "drop dollar for dollar with any monarch in
Europe." He looks after the Lord's interests, and the Lord looks after
his interests!

The following are some of the principal Legislative Acts in favor of
Brigham Young, passed by the Legislative Assembly of Utah:--

_An Act in relation to City Creek Canyon, approved December 9, 1850._
This gave Young the sole control of City Creek and Canyon, for which he
was required to pay into the treasury the sum of $500. Under this grant
Brigham exacts from those getting wood in the canyon, every third load;
and as this is the only wood within fifteen miles of the city, this
alone is the source of an immense revenue. Besides, he has built upon
City Creek two or three mills,--he having the exclusive use of the
water. It is estimated that Young's income from this canyon alone is
$10,000 per annum.

_An Act passed February 5th, 1852, granting to Brigham Young the waters
from the channel of Mill Creek._

_January 20, 1854._ An Act providing that all property left by any
deceased or absconding person, to which there is no claimant, shall pass
into the Perpetual Emigration Fund. Brigham is President of this
Society, and custodian of the fund. This Act adds largely to the income
of the Trustee President.

_January 19, 1855._ An Act appropriating to Brigham Young $2500 for
building an Academy in Salt Lake City. The Academy was never built.

_December 18, 1855._ An Act granting to Brigham Young exclusive right of
herd-ground known as Kansas Prairie.

_Same date._ _An Act granting to Brigham Young the whole of Cache Valley
for a herd-ground._ This valley is fifty miles long, and more than ten
miles in width, and the richest and most productive valley in the
Territory.

_December 27, 1855._ An Act granting to Brigham Young all of Rush
Valley, except the United States Reserve, for a herd-ground. Another
extensive tract of country.

_January 4, 1856._ An Act granting to Brigham Young exclusive right to
establish a ferry over Bear River.

_January 5, 1856._ An Act granting to Brigham Young a ranch and
herd-ground in Lone Rock Valley.

_January 12, 1856._ An Act granting to Brigham Young exclusive right to
control the road and coal-beds in Coal Canyon, San Pete County.

_Same date._ _An Act making an appropriation to Brigham Young of $1000
from the Territorial Treasury, to enable him to pay for a share in the
Deseret Iron Company._

_January 22, 1864._ An Act authorizing Brigham Young to establish a toll
on the Tooele Road.

After reading all these donations and munificent franchises, one can
appreciate the point of the joke perpetrated by Brigham, when he says
"he takes no thought how to get rich, and yet riches constantly flow to
him."


THE TITHING SYSTEM.

The object of tithing, as stated in the "Book of Doctrines and
Covenants," is to exalt the poor, and humble the rich,--taking from
where it is not wanted the surplus property of the church, and placing
it where it is needed. The law of tithing, as originally instituted,
calls for one tenth of the annual increase and gains, after providing
for the wants of the family. When the poor were amply supplied, the
residue was to be used for purchasing inheritances for the saints,
building houses for public worship, etc.

Of late years, however, tithing assumes an entirely different form, and
is much more comprehensive in its scope and exacting in its demands. The
"saints" in Utah, Europe, and throughout the world, are required to pay
one tenth of their income, without any reference to their ability to
meet the demand. Thus the laboring man in Utah, who receives but one
dollar and fifty cents per day,--not enough to support his family
comfortably,--is assessed tithing to the amount of about forty-five
dollars per annum.

But this is not all. Every emigrant and new-comer is expected to pay one
tenth of his entire possessions. Upon this point much strictness
prevails. On the arrival of the faithful in Zion, they are visited by a
bishop and clerk, and inventories of all their property taken. One tenth
of everything must then be sent to the tithing-office, not even
excepting household furniture, cooking utensils, or clothing. Should the
party be in possession of a little money, he is urged to pay the tithing
all in cash.

A very good idea of the extent to which this tithing system is carried
may be formed from the following tithing-song, sung at a meeting of one
of the quorums, and published in the "Deseret News," No. 6, Vol. V.:--


     "TITHING-SONG.

     _Air._ The King of the Cannibal Islands.]

     "Come, Mormons all, attention pay,
      Whilst I attempt to sing my say;
      I've chosen for my text to-day,
      'Come forward, and pay up your tithing.'
      These may not be the very words,
      Which ancient Holy Writ records;
      But Malachi, I think, affords
      A verse which with the sense accords.
      It seems that he had cause to scold
      The saints, or Israelites of old;
      In fact, they needed to be told,
      'Come forward, and pay up your tithing.'

         _Chorus._

         "Then if to prosper you desire,
          And wish to keep out of the fire,
          Nay, if you to be saints aspire,
          Come forward, and pay up your tithing.

     "Just as it was in the olden times,
      With ancient saints in other climes,
      The call is _now_, 'Bring out your dimes,'--
      'Come forward, and pay up your tithing.'
      Our Prophet says, 'When Elders preach,
      The law of tithing they should teach;
      Pay up themselves, and then beseech
      All those who come within their reach.'
      This makes me now entreat of you
      To follow counsel; right pursue;
      And whilst all evil you eschew,
      'Come forward, and pay up your tithing.'

         _Chorus._

         "Then if to prosper, etc.

     "Now, male and female, rich and poor,
      Who wish to keep your standing sure,
      That you salvation may secure,
      'Come forward, and pay up your tithing.'
      A tenth, that is, and nothing less,
      Of all you do or may possess,
      In flocks and herds, and their increase,
      With pigs and poultry, ducks and geese:
      A tenth, indeed, of all your toil,
      Likewise the produce of the soil;
      And if you've any wine or oil,
      'Come forward, and pay up your tithing.'

         _Chorus._

         "Then if to prosper, etc.

     "HENRY MAIBEN.

     "GREAT S. L. CITY, 1855."

Not only the extent of this exaction, but the penalty for non-payment,
is fully set forth in this song, to wit, exclusion from the church, and
deprivation of all spiritual blessings. What greater penalty can be
placed before a true Mormon?

The administration of the law of tithing has been excessively cruel in
Europe. Many of the saints in England, who, from infirmity, age, or
incapacity to labor, have been supported by the parish, receiving one,
two, or three shillings per week, have been anathematized and cut off
from the church, because they could not pay their tithing out of their
parish allowance, and support life from the remainder!

From the European Mission alone, over $500,000 of British gold has found
its way into the pockets of Brigham Young. No account has ever been made
of this vast amount, nor is there any public work or project requiring
expenditure of church-money, which has not been more than provided for
by the home tithing-fund.

The poor in Utah suffer severely from this exaction. You may see
families barefooted, women and children nearly naked, destitute of even
the necessaries of life, the husband making every effort to meet the day
of tithing, fearful of losing his soul's salvation should he fail. Cases
of extreme destitution have not been, in former years, comparatively
numerous; but as the rich become richer and the poor poorer, by the
operation of this system, these cases become more marked and frequent,
and already a rumbling of discontent is heard among the masses, which
occasionally reaches the throne, and which will soon break forth in loud
peals of thunder, demanding justice for a long oppressed and outraged
people.

Again, there is a standing tithing-price which must be paid for flour
and other necessaries, by those who are engaged upon the public works,
or who are obliged to work for their richer brethren. These always pay
their laborers in produce at tithing-prices. But these prices are
usually far beyond the cash value of the same article in the market. In
1862-63, the tithing-office price of flour was $6 per hundred. The wages
of workmen were nominally $2 per day. But if a poor saint worked for his
more affluent brother, as in most cases he was obliged to do, he
uniformly received his pay in flour at $6. It was not uncommon to see a
laboring man going home at night, with his sack of flour, the result of
his day's work, or of the labor of two or three days. At the same time
the market-price of flour did not exceed $3 per hundred. If the poor
man, who was obliged to take all his pay in flour, wished to purchase
some sugar or groceries for his family, he must exchange for the same
his flour, at half the price paid for it. Thus did the dignitaries of
the church "grind the face of the poor."

The masses were induced to submit to this state of things, by the
assurance that flour would rise to a price much greater than $6, and
when it should do so, the balance would be upon the other side, and the
poor would be the gainers, as they should never pay more than that sum.

In the winter of 1863-64, flour rose rapidly, owing to the new markets
opened up in Idaho and other mining regions. Now the time had come when
the predictions and prophecies concerning the rise of flour had been
fulfilled. But the church authorities, notwithstanding the solemn
promises which had been made to the people, raised the tithing-price of
flour to $12 per hundred. This was "the last straw that broke the
camel's back," and came near producing a revolution. One day a workman
in the "church" (_alias_ Brigham's) blacksmith shop, called at the
"tithing-store" for his flour, as was customary, the same being his
wages for work for a stated period. At the store the flour was weighed
out, and he was given a ticket at $12 per hundred. This was the first
time he had been charged over $6. The blacksmith left his bag of flour
at the store, and proceeded, fired with indignation, to the President's
office. Inquiring for him, he was told the President was out, and he
could not see him. He replied he must see him, and should remain until
he did. After some time the President appeared. "Brother Brigham," said
the excited workman, "you are a liar and a hypocrite." This caused a
great excitement at once. The clerks sprang instantly from their places,
some surrounding Brigham, others the blacksmith. The latter proceeded:
"Have you not repeatedly given the people your solemn promise that they
should never be charged by the church over $6 per hundred for flour? You
with your wives and families are rolling in wealth, surrounded with
everything the heart can wish. But go with me, and I will show you cases
of destitution and suffering which will cause your soul, if you have
one, to shudder with horror."

The clerks were here ordered to put him out of the office, which was
done immediately, but the enraged man, now that his lips were unsealed,
continued to talk, in a loud tone of voice, until a number of people,
attracted by curiosity, gathered around him. To them he explained the
cause of the difficulty, and inveighed in unmeasured terms against those
who were living in luxury and extravagance upon the industry and
hard-earned savings of the poor.

The crowd was finally dispersed, and one of the clerks sent to the
outraged blacksmith to inform him that he could have the flour at $6. He
replied that he would die of hunger ere he would ever taste of it or
touch it. The next day Brigham drove down to the poor man's house,
taking the flour in his carriage, and induced him to accept it, and the
same day the tithing-price of flour was reduced to $6 per hundred.

The best articles of everything paid in for tithing--the choice hams and
beef, the best butter, cheese, etc.--are laid away until the families of
the first Presidency, the clerks, and a few of the elect are supplied.
The balance is served out to the mechanics and laborers. Thus the church
dignitaries literally live off of "the fat of the land." Often when
butter, or some other article not quite so abundant as usual, is called
for by the workman, he is told "there is none in the store," while at
the same time large quantities are stowed away; and scarcely is he out
of sight, before some member of higher standing in the church visits the
same store, and his wants are amply supplied.

As Brigham is not scrupulous on the subject of appropriating the means
of the "church," that is, of the people, minor officers, as Bishops of
settlements, do not hesitate to speculate upon their own account. This
is more or less tolerated, according to the faithfulness of the party to
the interests of the heads of the church, and his diligence in
"attending to counsel," or, in other words, in obeying orders. It is
notorious that the Bishops all become quickly wealthy. Appoint a man
Bishop of a settlement, and in two or three years his fortune is made;
and he who previously lived in a log-cabin, with barely the necessaries
of life, is soon in possession of a fine house, with carriages, horses,
&c., at his command. Every Bishop is expected to "build up the kingdom"
by having numerous wives. If he has less than half a dozen, he is
scarcely considered as "doing his duty to the church," and at once
exposes himself to remark, if not to censure.

Many incidents might be mentioned illustrative of the manner in which
property is accumulated by the Bishops. When the army under Col. Johnson
was located at Camp Floyd, a Bishop of one of the southern settlements
sold to the officers at the camp, at fifty cents per pound, all the
butter which had been paid in for tithing, and accounted for it at the
general tithing-office, at the tithing price,--twenty-five cents per
pound.

Frequently the people would in this way be deprived of luxuries which
had been sold, and the proceeds of which had gone into the pockets of
the Bishops and other officers of the church. On one occasion Kimball
alluded in his sermon to the complaints of the people, that they could
not get butter or anything else to eat on their bread. In response he
told them, if their bread was hard and dry, "dip it in City Creek."

On the departure from the Territory of the army under Col. Johnson,
Brigham bought a large quantity of bacon at one cent per pound, selling
it again to the laborers on the public works at twenty-five cents. The
large contracts of purchase are usually awarded to him, partly because
he has more money with which to fulfil them, and partly because men of
lesser means do not wish to cross his path, by interfering with his
financial operations. A large quantity of condemned crackers were
purchased at the same time, at a nominal sum, many of which were
afterward dealt out to the laborers on the public works, at fifteen
cents per pound.

Soon after the arrival of the saints in Utah, their attention was
especially directed to the building of a temple. Promises were made to
them, that upon its completion, the Saviour, together with angels, would
enter therein, and minister unto those who remained faithful. There they
were to receive blessings that could be obtained in no other place. This
has been held out as a strong inducement for the payment of money. Over
$100,000 has been paid for the accomplishment of this object by the
British saints alone. Not a dollar of this money has been used for that
purpose, as all that has been done upon the temple has been more than
paid for by the people of Utah.[143:A]

The work upon the temple has proceeded very slowly, and the foundation
is but little above the surface. Many of the saints are dissatisfied
with its progress, and ask each other why more has not been accomplished
during the fifteen years that have rolled away since its commencement;
and especially while such ample means have been constantly on hand,--the
tithing system furnishing an immense revenue, and no other public work
on which to expend it? And why it is that $200,000 should be expended by
Brigham Young upon a theatre for his own benefit, and nearly as much
more upon a hotel now being built, and house added to house and building
to building in his own enclosure, while the temple is neglected? These
questions have much significance, and doubtless the day is not far
distant when the people will insist upon an answer more satisfactory
than they have yet received.

The immense fund realized from the tithing system, and which is
constantly at Brigham's disposal, enables him to improve many
opportunities that are offered for private speculations. These he is not
slow to perceive, nor does he permit any advantage of that kind to
escape him. A very common speculation is to send a brother who is doing
well, and accumulating a handsome property, upon a foreign mission. The
call to go upon a mission is considered a trial of the brother's faith,
and he is not expected to decline. Should he desire to sell his house or
other possessions, rather than to leave them in the hands of agents,
brother Brigham stands ready to purchase them at a reduced price. In
this way a large amount of property falls into his hands. If the
missionary returns at all, he comes nearly impoverished, and commences
anew to acquire property.

In 1862 there were two distilleries in Salt Lake City, the owners of
which, Moon & Bradley, were rapidly increasing in wealth. Brigham
professed much indignation, telling them "they should welter in hell for
manufacturing the intoxicating draught to destroy their brethren." As a
sort of expiatory act for their offence he sent them upon a mission to
raise cotton in Southern Utah. As soon as they were gone, he opened a
distillery himself, in the name and under the sanction of the city
council, under pretence of regulating the traffic by law. Thus he
managed to monopolize the large profits from the manufacture of ardent
spirits, an immense quantity of which is used in Salt Lake City and
throughout the Territory.

Among the various inducements held out to the poor saints in Europe, has
been the promise to each of a city lot in Salt Lake, of one acre and a
quarter, upon the payment of the cost of survey, $1.25. On their
arrival, they find to their astonishment, although there are plenty of
vacant and unfenced lots, that they have to pay to Young or Kimball $100
or $150 for a lot. On one occasion a poor Dane having purchased a lot
upon credit, built a small house upon it, but his wife falling sick he
was unable to pay for the lot at the time agreed upon. Kimball compelled
him to pull down the house and remove the material; and the Dane was
obliged, in consequence, to pass the winter, with his family, in his
covered wagon. Fortunately the winter was a mild one, or they might have
perished.

The saints are fond of dancing, and in the winter season social parties
for that purpose are numerous. Each ward has a commodious house, built
by taxation, which is used for schools and public meetings. But for
dancing their use is forbidden, and the people are obliged to pay
Brigham $100 per night for a building called the "Social Hall." Yet this
hall was built from the proceeds of tithing paid in by the very people
who are thus obliged to pay for the rent of it!

Mr. Taussig, a simple and unpretending man, had succeeded in
establishing a substantial tannery well stocked with leather. By some
designing persons he was induced to refuse the payment of his taxes, on
the ground that they were exorbitant, and the Territorial Collector sold
the property, which was bought by one of Brigham's agents, and the poor
man reduced to poverty.

In the fall of 1857, Brigham called a mass meeting in the Tabernacle,
and after dilating upon the disadvantages the people were laboring under
in being without a currency, established a bank, calling upon the
faithful to bring in all their gold and silver, and receive the new
paper currency in exchange. This was done. In a few months the bank was
suspended, and depositors were paid in labor tithing, for the currency
held by them, in exchange for their gold and silver.

One Mr. Tennant, a gentleman residing in Lancashire, England, embraced
Mormonism. His property was estimated at over $70,000. He was soon
marked as a victim. By appliances and representations brought to bear
with much assiduity, he was induced to purchase of Brigham Young a house
in Salt Lake, which he had never seen, and pay for the same the sum of
$20,000; about four times its value. In addition to this, large sums of
money were obtained from him by the Elders, under pretence of his
becoming a share-holder and partner with Young in grist-mills, sugar
machinery, iron-works, &c., solemnly assuring him in relation to its
safe investment and future profits. Mr. Tennant died while crossing the
Plains, leaving a wife, with a young child. On arriving in Salt Lake,
Mrs. Tennant, instead of being comfortably installed in the house
purchased by her husband, found herself placed in lodgings, the
carriage, horses, and other property seized upon, and herself placed
under the control of a guardian. This, together with the loss of her
husband, so worked upon her mind, that she became insane. Afterward
Brigham gave her in marriage to Daniel Spencer, as his fourth or fifth
wife, and thus completed the wrongs for which the poor woman will call
him to account in the day of judgment. She now lives upon a miserable
pittance doled out from the tithing-office.

A Mr. Williams, well known to the writer, became a Mormon in England. He
was a man of considerable property, and while on his way crossing the
Plains, was induced to invest $15,000 in an iron company formed for
working the iron mines in Southern Utah. The money was paid over, and
invested by the Elders, in goods, in St. Louis. The goods were duly
transported across the Plains, and unloaded within the enclosure of
Young, in Salt Lake City. Mr. Williams received, in St. Louis, a receipt
for his money, stating that the same would entitle him, upon his arrival
in Utah, to certificates of stock in the company. But he never was able
to get any stock or other equivalent for his money, nor any statement of
the affairs of the company. Indeed, the dignitaries of the church, after
one or two conversations upon the subject, refused to converse with him
further in relation to it. Soon after, the Legislature of Utah, composed
in good part of the same men, repealed the Act incorporating the
company, and thus the whole thing "vanished into thin air." In 1862,
which was several years after the money had been paid, Mr. Williams took
legal advice, and was told he could file a bill in chancery, against all
persons implicated in the transaction, requiring them to answer under
oath. He hesitated to do so, giving as a reason that he thought "the
time had not yet come," and that such a course would imperil his life.

This mode of getting money by the Elders from the wealthy saints, and
the retaining the same, is not only excused, but openly justified and
encouraged by Brigham. The following extract from one of his published
sermons will show his views upon these questions, and the character of
his morality and financial integrity:--

     "I wish to impress another thing on your minds. An Elder who
     is willing to preach the gospel, borrows a hundred or a
     thousand from you, and you never breathe a word of complaint
     against him, until you come home to this valley; but after you
     have been here for a few days, you follow me round and fill my
     ears with complaints against this brother, and ask me what he
     has done with your money? I say 'I do not know.' Thus you are
     distressed, and in misery all the day long, to get it back
     again. If an Elder has borrowed from you, and you find he is
     going to apostatize, then you may tighten the screws upon him;
     but if he is willing to preach the gospel without purse or
     scrip, _it is none of your business what he does with the
     money he has borrowed from you. If you murmur against that
     Elder, it will prove your damnation._ . . .

     "No man need judge me. You know nothing about it, whether I am
     sent or not; furthermore, it is none of your business, only to
     listen with open ears to what is taught you, and serve God
     with an undivided heart."[147:A]

Stephen Goddard owned a store on Main Street, Salt Lake City, which he
desired to sell. He was offered its value by a gentile, but before
selling, consulted "Brother Brigham." The President said he wanted the
store, and would give him $8,000 for it. To this Goddard demurred, as
the sum was less than half what he had been offered. Young said when the
Lord wanted his property, that should be the end of it, and the price
was none of his business. Goddard and Bishop Woolley, who was present,
retired outside and talked the matter over. The Bishop remarked, "He
thought when a man had worked hard to accumulate property for the
benefit of his family, he should be permitted to sell it for a fair
price." This was overheard by a spy, and reported to headquarters. The
Bishop was sent for and sharply reprimanded. He was told that he was in
a spirit of apostasy. Goddard, afraid to do otherwise, sold the store to
Young for $8,000.

Besides the property acquired through the machinery of the tithing
system, a large amount is obtained under the "law of consecration."
Under this law, those saints who can be induced to do so, place their
whole property in the hands of the President, as trustee in trust for
the church, to be used when the necessities of the church require it.
The object is to guard against apostasy. Brigham Young says:--

     "The rulers of Great Britain have tried to make every
     capitalist identify his interest with the Government that has
     sustained the kingdom. Brethren, do you wish this heavenly
     kingdom to stand?. . . Imitate the policy of that earthly
     kingdom; identify our interest with the kingdom of God, so
     that if our hearts should ever be weaned from loyalty to the
     sovereign, all our _earthly_ interest is bound up there, and
     cannot be taken away. . . .

     "If a man has the purse in his pocket, and he apostatizes, he
     takes it with him; but if his worldly interest is firmly
     united to the kingdom of God, when he arises to go away, he
     finds the calf is bound, and, like the cow, he is unwilling to
     forsake it. If his calf is bound up here, he will be inclined
     to stay."[148:A]


THE EMIGRATION FUND.

The published object and design of this fund is to emigrate the poor
saints from Europe and other foreign countries to Utah, the Zion of the
church. In those foreign countries there is a continual weekly
subscription paid in for that purpose.

Every emigration season, each Conference is permitted to send persons at
the rate of one for every £10 sterling so subscribed. Each one so
emigrating, is required to enter into obligations, before leaving
Liverpool, for the repayment of the same, as soon as possible after his
arrival in Salt Lake City. Parties in Utah, also, wishing their
relations brought over, must pay the required amount, before they are
sent for, unless in some special cases, where notes are accepted in
payment. The sum of £4 10_s._ is required to pay the transportation of
each person to the first American port, and the remaining £5 10_s._
thence to Salt Lake City. The emigrants are stowed away like cattle, on
the freight cars and on the decks of the boats and vessels, and thus by
having them conveyed in the cheapest manner possible, considerable of
the amount paid for transportation is saved, making a large sum in the
aggregate, all of which goes into that "treasury of the church,"--the
pocket of Brigham Young.

Again: as _all_ are obliged to pay their passage-money, either in
advance or after their arrival in Utah, and as a large portion of the
sum is previously raised by contribution, of course the amount, in
thousands of cases, is duplicated, and paid twice into the same
treasury.

The transportation across the Plains costs the church nothing at all,
except a slight diminution of the tithing-fund _prospective_. The teams
are furnished, so many from each ward and settlement, and the owners are
given credit for the use of the same in tithing account. Large
quantities of provisions are furnished and sent out to meet the incoming
saints, but these, although donated and sent by their friends, are all
charged to them by the careful priests and elders.

Before starting across the Plains, meetings are held, and the saints are
counselled to give up all their money and valuables, so that they may be
preserved on their journey. One man, in obedience to this "counsel,"
gave up his money, together with a valuable gold watch and chain.
Afterwards, remembering that he had not provided any tobacco for the
journey, he asked for a dollar back, to purchase some, which was refused
him.

Much cruelty is exercised on the Plains for the slightest disobedience.
A young man, brother of Walter Sanders, of Salt Lake, was whipped
nearly to death for being unable to travel as required.

Several years since, Brigham, with the view of saving still more from
the emigration fund, projected the plan of bringing the saints across
the Plains in hand-cart companies. Under this arrangement, every person,
male and female, was expected to assist in drawing a hand-cart; each
cart being drawn by three persons, and containing a certain quantity of
provisions, clothing, &c.

One of the companies, under the lead of Franklin D. Richards, was
detained on the frontiers until common prudence should have dictated
their remaining until another year. In consequence of the lateness of
the season, before the journey was half performed, winter was upon them,
and their sufferings beggar all description.

Mrs. Chapman, a very intelligent English lady, who crossed the Plains in
this company, related to me many incidents of this dreadful journey.

They started from the frontier very late, sometime in October, I think;
and to allay the fears and forebodings of the saints, Richards
prophesied, in the name of Israel's God, that the elements should be
controlled; and that the winds and snows of winter should be stayed
until the faithful arrived in Zion. Entirely unacquainted with the
country and the route before them, they were reassured, and went boldly
forward, trusting in their leader.

In order to lighten their loads and facilitate their progress, every
article of clothing that they could possibly spare, was left behind;
barely sufficient being taken to prevent them from freezing.

It may be supposed that only the very poor were subjected to this
terrible ordeal. Not so. Many families of means made the journey in this
way, being assured that this sacrifice would add to their exaltation in
the eternal world. They had not proceeded far when the snow began to
fall, and many became sick from want and exposure. When a river was to
be crossed, they were driven into the water,--men, women, and
children,--and were told, if they had sufficient faith, they should,
like the Israelites of old, go over dry shod. Many of the men carried
their wives and children over the streams, as long as they were able. If
any were unable longer to drag their carts, they were obliged to lighten
them by throwing away clothing, cooking utensils, and even
provisions,--thus necessitating a reduction from their daily allowance
of food. Fuel was scarce, and it was often necessary to go into the
snow, waist-deep, to procure it. Mrs. Chapman's husband, a strong,
athletic man, formerly a member of the Queen's Guards, from constant
exertion and exposure, at length fell sick, and though there were a few
wagons for the sick and feeble to ride in, they were not admitted into
them so long as they were able to walk.

The poor man continued to grow worse, and it soon became evident that he
must die. One morning, when the train was ready to start, the Captain
came to the tent of the sick man, and finding him dying, said to Mrs.
Chapman, "Your husband must die; leave him in the hands of God, and
proceed on your journey." "What!" said the heart-stricken woman, "leave
my husband on this barren waste, a prey to wolves? No; while there is
breath in his body, I shall remain by his side, and share his fate.
Leave us if you will, for the wild beasts of the desert cannot be more
cruel than you have been." In five minutes more, he breathed his last;
and throwing him into a hole dug in the sand, they dragged the weeping
wife and children from all they held dear on earth. In a few days the
same woman left her baby, too, on the sands of the desert, a prey to
wolves. She says, "I never see Franklin D. Richards, but I feel
hand-carts from the crown of my head to the sole of my feet."

One day, as they approached their Mecca, an old white-haired saint said
to the Captain, in a weak voice,--"Captain, I feel as if I should die,
drawing in this hand-cart; can't I ride a little while?"--"Draw till you
die then," replied the hard-hearted wretch, "for I'll be d----d if you
can ride." "Oh, well," said the old man, "I suppose I shall draw till I
die." He took out his watch. "A quarter of four. It will soon be over.
Ten minutes. Oh dear; oh, my God! Five minutes to four,--four;"--and the
old man fell down in his place,--he was dead.

Every day witnessed the death of large numbers by cold and starvation.
Those who survived were more like walking skeletons than human beings.
They were covered with vermin, and loathsome to behold. Some were so
badly frozen that their flesh fell from their bones. Many remained
disabled for life.

"Oh Religion! what crimes are perpetrated in thy name!" When Mormons
speak of the hand-cart company, they shudder and grow pale. All this
suffering was the result of an attempt, on the part of the leaders of
the church, to save a still larger sum from the emigration fund. It was
a speculative experiment, which was never repeated. These people bought
their carts with their own money; but on their arrival in Salt Lake, the
carts were claimed by Brigham, in behalf of the church, and were
afterwards sold from the tithing-office at five dollars each.


FOOTNOTES:

[143:A] Persons who are known to possess property, are called upon to
pay for seats in the temple. A lady residing in one of the northern
settlements, was cajoled into paying £50 for that purpose. The good
lady, upon arriving in Utah, found that the famous temple, in which
she had purchased a seat, was scarcely above its foundations.

[147:A] _Jour. of Dis._, Vol. I. p. 340.

[148:A] _Jour. of Dis._ Vol. I. p. 202.




CHAPTER IX.

BRIGHAM AS PROPHET, SEER, AND REVELATOR.

     Brigham's Position as Head of the Church.--Mormon Theology.--
     Brigham's Theology, or Utah Mormonism.--Adam as God.--Brigham
     Young as God.--Human Sacrifice.--Introduction of Polygamy.--
     Polygamy no part of the original Mormon Religion.--The
     Revelation, or Celestial Marriage.--The Ceremony of Sealing.--
     Consequences and Incidents of the Doctrine.--Incest.--Summary
     of the Mormon Religion.


Not only is Brigham Young the temporal head of the church, its chief
business agent, and the sole custodian of its funds, but he is the
spiritual head, the established fountain, in whom is gathered from on
high all spiritual blessings, and from whom they are expected to flow
through the various officers of the priesthood, and thus be distributed
to the faithful among the masses. Standing in this capacity between the
people and the Supreme Being, he is at once Prophet, Seer, and
Revelator. As Prophet and Seer, he sees and foretells to the people what
is to befall them, as the result of certain courses of action. As
Revelator, he reveals and translates, to the comprehension of the
people, the hidden will of God concerning them.

An acknowledgment of this relationship of Brigham with the Divine Being
is made a test of fellowship; as in the case of the Morrisites, who,
although they admitted his right to preside over the church as its
temporal head, denied him the attributes of prophet and revelator. Hence
they were cut off from the church.

Acting in this capacity, he not only prescribes a course of conduct for
his followers, but promulgates, from time to time, doctrines, to be
received, believed, and advocated. Thus the theology or creed of the
church changes, from time to time, to suit the changing opinions, the
whims and caprices, or the passions and lusts, of its head and leader.
What is here said, therefore, of the Mormon religion, must be understood
in reference to the received doctrines and tenets of the church in
former years,--many of which still remain, but incorporated with new
dogmas, and any part or all of which are liable at any time to be
changed, modified, or entirely overthrown.


MORMON THEOLOGY.

There are many Gods, and they are of both sexes. But to us there is but
one God,--the Father of mankind, and the Creator of the earth.

Men and women are literally the sons and daughters of God,--our spirits
having been literally begotten by God, in the heavenly world, and having
been afterwards sent to the earth, and invested with these tabernacles.

God is in the form of man. He has a body, composed of spiritual matter.
There is no difference between matter and spirit, except in quality.
Spirit is matter refined.

God is omnipotent, but not personally omnipresent. He is everywhere
present by his Holy Spirit. His personality is generally expressed by
the phrase, "He has body, parts, and passions." He resides in the centre
of the universe, near the planet Kolob. This planet revolves on its axis
once in a thousand of our years, and one revolution of Kolob is a day to
the Almighty.

Jesus Christ was the Son of God, literally begotten by the Father, and
had the Spirit of God in the body of a man. After his resurrection, he
had a body of flesh and bones only, typical of man's resurrected body.
He differs in nothing from the Father, except in age and authority,--the
Father having the seniority, and consequently the right to preside.

The Holy Spirit is a subtle fluid, like electricity. It is the subtlest
form of matter, and pervades all space. By its agency all miracles, so
called, are performed. Miracles are simply the effects of the operation
of natural laws. But they are laws of a higher character than those with
which we are acquainted. This Holy Spirit is communicated by the
laying-on of hands by one of the properly authorized priesthood, and the
recipient is then enabled to perform wonderful things, according to his
gift,--some having the gift of prophecy, some of healing, some of
speaking in unknown tongues, etc.

There are three heavens,--the telestial, the terrestrial, and the
celestial.

The _telestial_ and _terrestrial_ heavens are to be occupied by the
various classes of persons who have neither obeyed nor rejected the
gospel. The telestial is typified by the stars,--the terrestrial, by the
moon.

The _celestial_, or highest heaven, has for its type the sun, and is
reserved for those who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on
His name, and were baptized by one having authority from Him, and who
afterwards lived a holy life.

The earth, as purified and refined, after the second coming of Christ,
is to be the final habitation of those entitled to the glories of the
celestial kingdom. Jerusalem is to be rebuilt, and Zion, or the New
Jerusalem, is to be built in Jackson County, Missouri, whence the saints
were expelled in 1833.

There is a fourth class of persons, not entitled to either of these
heavens. They are those who sin against the Holy Ghost; that is, those
who apostatize after receiving the Holy Spirit. These go into
everlasting punishment, to remain with the devil and his angels.

The gospel, which people are called upon to obey, in order to gain a
place in the celestial kingdom, is,--_First_, They must believe in Jesus
Christ as the Son of God, and in His authorized priesthood. _Secondly_,
They must repent of their sins; _Thirdly_, They must be baptized by
immersion for the remission of their sins; and, _Fourthly_, They must
receive the laying-on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

God, having become nearly lost to man, revived His work, by revealing
himself to Joseph Smith, and conferring upon him the keys of the
everlasting Priesthood,--thus making him the mediator of a New
Dispensation, which is immediately to precede the second coming of
Christ. All those who recognize the divine authority of Smith, and are
baptized by one having authority, are the chosen people of God, who are
to introduce the Millennium, and to reign with Christ, on earth, a
thousand years.

Previous to the year 1852, it was also an orthodox principle of the
Mormon religion, that a man should have but one wife, to whom he should
be true and faithful.

Those who have any curiosity to pursue the subject further, will find
these views and doctrines fully explained and illustrated in the
religious writings of the Mormons,--of which the following are some of
the principal: Book of Mormon; Book of Doctrine and Covenants; Works of
Orson Pratt; Key to Theology, by P. P. Pratt; The Only Way to be Saved,
etc., by L. Snow; Pearl of Great Price; Voice of Warning, by P. P.
Pratt; Catechism for Children, by John Jaques; Deseret News, 14 vols.;
Journal of Discourses, 6 vols.; Latter-Day Saints' Millennial Star,
London, 26 volumes.


_Brigham's Theology; or Utah Mormonism._

The doctrines taught and practised by the present head of the Mormon
Church differ so much from the previously established tenets of the
church, that they require a separate consideration.

One of the most important innovations upon the established doctrines of
the church, is in relation to the Godhead. In April, 1852, Brigham put
forth the startling doctrine that Adam is God, and to be recognized and
honored as such! This announcement created some consternation among the
Mormon theologians, and some of them had the courage to oppose it. The
following is the "Revelator's" own exposition of this doctrine:--

     "When the Virgin Mary conceived the child Jesus, the Father
     had begotten him in his own likeness. He was not begotten by
     the Holy Ghost. And who is the Father? _He is the first of the
     human family_; and when he took a tabernacle, it was begotten
     by his Father in heaven, after the same manner as the
     tabernacle of Cain, Abel, and the rest of the sons and
     daughters of Adam and Eve. . . . It is true that the earth was
     organized by three distinct characters, namely: Elohim,
     Yahovah, and Michael, [Adam;] these three forming a quorum, as
     in all heavenly bodies, and in organized element perfectly
     represented in the Deity, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

     "When our Father Adam came into the garden of Eden, he came
     with a celestial body, and brought _Eve, one of his wives_,
     with him. He helped to make and organize this world. He is
     Michael, the Archangel, the Ancient of Days. _He is our Father
     and our God, and the only God with whom we have to do._ . . .
     Jesus, our elder brother, was begotten in the flesh by the
     same character that was in the garden of Eden, and who is our
     Father in heaven."[157:A]

It is manifest that Young is not so much at home in theology as when
engaged in financial schemes and money speculations. So disgusting and
blasphemous are these ideas, and so unacceptable were they, even to
Mormons, who were not prepared to see the basis of their religion thus
rudely overthrown, that Brigham finally felt compelled to caution the
Elders not to preach the new doctrine concerning Deity, until the people
should be better prepared to receive them.

Mahomet is the great exemplar and prototype whom Brigham Young aims to
imitate, and doubtless he took from the Koran his ideas about the deity
of Adam. Thus in chapter two of the Koran, we have the following:--

     "And when we said unto the angels, 'worship Adam,' they all
     worshipped him, except Eblis, [Lucifer,] who refused."

From the following affidavit of John Stiles, father of Judge Stiles,
formerly one of the United States Judges in Utah, a man of much probity
of character, and well known in Salt Lake City as "Father Stiles," it
appears that the blasphemous pretensions of Brigham Young do not stop
with Adam, but that, among the brethren, he has encouraged a doctrine,
which he dare not put in print;--no less than _to arrogate to himself
the attributes of Deity_.

     "TERRITORY OF UTAH,     } _ss._
       GREAT SALT LAKE CITY. }

     "In the spring of 1856," John Stiles says, "I resided in the
     11th Ward of Great Salt Lake City, in the Territory of Utah. I
     was appointed by the quorum to which I then belonged, as a
     Missionary High-Priest for the said Ward. My duty was to look
     after the morals of the people of the Ward, and especially to
     see that there was no false doctrine taught there. I
     subsequently found that there were not only immoralities, but
     also false doctrines among some of the people, as I supposed
     at the time. Many people believed and taught the doctrine,
     that Brigham Young was all the _God_ that we were amenable to.
     I found by opposing that doctrine, that I gave offence to the
     authorities of the Ward, and was consequently called to answer
     for my opposition before the Bishop of the Ward, although he
     had no jurisdiction over me. As a High-Priest I was amenable
     to a higher authority, but not to him.

     "In a public assembly he wished me to state my views on the
     question, whether _if Brigham Young was not God, who was?_ I
     told him I would do so. I rose and stated that my idea of the
     being of God was expressed in a passage of Scripture, and I
     need only repeat the passage to explain the idea. The passage
     was: 'To us there is but one God, _the Father_, of whom are
     all things, and we in Him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
     are all things, and we by Him.' I subsequently, in
     explanation, cited this passage of Scripture: 'This is life
     eternal, that we might know thee, the only living and true
     God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.' I then sat down,
     and the Bishop rose and said: 'Brethren, we perceive that
     Father Stiles runs round Brigham.' I replied, 'Yes; I do not
     mention Brigham Young on the same day with God, as of the same
     Godhead.' His (the Bishop's) First Counsellor, then moved that
     Father Stiles be cut off from the church. This was seconded
     by the Second Counsellor. This was proposed to the assembly as
     a question by the Bishop, and I was cut off accordingly. I
     subsequently discovered that by my opposition and explanation,
     I gave offence to the authorities of the Mormon Church, and
     was cut off from the church and dismissed from the place of
     Missionary High-Priest of that Ward. I have never been
     restored as Missionary High-Priest.

          (Signed,) JOHN STILES.

     "Sworn to and subscribed before me at Great Salt Lake City,
     this April 26th, 1864.

     "JOHN TITUS,

     "_Ch. Justice of Utah_."

Another doctrine of a startling character, promulgated by one of Young's
counsellors and endorsed by him, is that of _human sacrifice for the
remission of sins_.

It was first announced by Jedediah M. Grant, Second Counsellor to the
President, in the following language:--

     "Brethren and sisters, we want you to repent and forsake your
     sins. And you who have committed sins that cannot be forgiven
     through baptism, _let your blood be shed, and let the smoke
     ascend_, that the incense thereof may come up before God as an
     atonement for your sins, and that the sinners in Zion may be
     afraid."[159:A]

Again:--

     "We have been trying long enough with this people, and I go in
     for letting the sword of the Almighty be unsheathed, _not only
     in word, but in deed_."[159:B]

In accordance with such bloody teaching, it is said that an altar of
sacrifice was actually built by Grant, in the temple block, upon which
these human sacrifices were to be made. On the 21st of September, 1856,
Grant said:--

     "I say there are men and women here that I would advise to go
     to the President immediately, and ask him to appoint a
     committee to attend to their case; and then let a place be
     selected, and let that committee shed their blood."[159:C]

This horrible proposal to immolate upon the altar of sacrifice the
erring saints, was fully endorsed by Brigham Young as follows:--

     "There are sins that men commit for which they cannot receive
     forgiveness in this world, or in that which is to come; and if
     they had their eyes open to see their condition, _they would
     be perfectly willing to have their blood spilt upon the
     ground_, that the smoke thereof might ascend to Heaven as an
     offering for their sins, and the smoking incense would atone
     for their sins; whereas, if such is not the case, they will
     stick to them, and remain upon them in the spirit-world.

     "I know, when you hear my brethren telling about cutting
     people off from the earth, that you consider it is strong
     doctrine. It is to save them, not to destroy them. I will say
     further, I have had men come to me, and offer their lives to
     atone for their sins. It is true that the blood of the Son of
     God was shed for sins, through the fall, and those committed
     by man, yet men can commit sins which it can never remit. As
     it was in ancient days, so it is in our day; and though the
     principles are taught publicly from this stand, still the
     people do not understand them; yet the Law is precisely the
     same. There are sins that can be atoned for by an offering
     upon the altar, as in ancient days, and there are sins that
     the blood of a lamb, of a calf, or of turtle-doves cannot
     remit, _but they must be atoned for by the blood of the man_.
     That is the reason why men talk to you as they do from this
     stand. They understand the doctrine, and throw out a few words
     about it."[160:A]

But the greatest change of all in the Mormon religion, made by Brigham
Young, was the introduction and establishment of polygamy.

This was no part of the Mormon system of religion as originally
established. On the contrary, it was expressly repudiated by all the
Mormon writers and speakers, previous to 1852, and in Europe for some
years afterward.

The Mormon religion was founded by Joseph Smith and his coadjutors, and
the principles and doctrines of the religion were, in the first
instance, such as they established. The Book of Mormon is the historical
foundation, corresponding with the Old Testament of the Christian Bible.
Afterward, a volume of revelations to Smith and others was collected and
published, called the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. This corresponds
to the Christian's New Testament. It may be safely asserted, therefore,
that previous to the innovations of Young, the Mormon religion was
embodied in these two volumes. Their authority in the church is
universal and unquestioned.

Let us examine these volumes, and see whether they teach or countenance
polygamy.

The Book of Mormon nowhere contains a word in favor of it. On the
contrary all of its principal characters were monogamists. Such was
Lehi, the patriarch of Mormon history. Such also were Ishmael and
Nephi.[161:A] That the people of Zarahemla were monogamists, is evident
from what is said concerning them on page 146.

But we are not left to inference as to the testimony of this volume
concerning this practice. On page 119 we have the following:--

     "Behold the Lamanites, your brethren, whom ye hate because of
     their filthiness and the cursings which hath come upon their
     skins, are more righteous than you; for they have not
     forgotten the commandment of the Lord, which was given unto
     our fathers, that they should have, save it were one wife; and
     concubines they should have none; and there should not be
     whoredoms committed among them. And now, this commandment they
     observe to keep; wherefore, because of this observance, in
     keeping this commandment, the Lord God will not destroy them,
     but will be merciful unto them; and one day they shall become
     a blessed people."[161:B]

Again:--

     "And it came to pass that Riplakish did not do that which was
     right in the sight of the Lord, for he did have many wives and
     concubines, and did lay that upon men's shoulders which was
     grievous to be borne; yea, he did tax them with heavy taxes;
     and with the taxes he did build many spacious
     buildings."[162:A]

And again:--

     "And he [Noah] did not walk in the ways of his father.
     [Zeniff.] For behold, he did not keep the commandments of God,
     but he did walk after the desires of his own heart. And he had
     many wives and concubines. And he did cause his people to
     commit sin, and to do that which was abominable in the sight
     of the Lord. Yea, and they did commit whoredoms and all manner
     of wickedness. And he laid a tax of one fifth part of all they
     possessed." . . . "All this did he take to support himself, and
     his wives and his concubines; and also his priests, and their
     wives and their concubines; thus he had changed the affairs of
     the kingdom."[162:B]

     "And it came to pass that he placed his heart upon his riches,
     and he spent his time in riotous living, with his wives and
     his concubines; and so did also his priests spend their time
     with harlots."[162:C]

As if to place this matter beyond any question, we have the following
still more explicit testimony, on pages 115 and 118:--

     "And now it came to pass that the people of Nephi, under the
     reign of the second king, began to grow hard in their hearts
     and indulge themselves somewhat in wicked practices, such as
     like unto David of old, desiring many wives and concubines,
     and also Solomon his son." . . .

     "The word of God burdens me because of your grosser crimes.
     For behold, thus saith the Lord, this people begin to wax in
     iniquity; they understand not the Scriptures; for they seek to
     excuse themselves in committing whoredoms, because of the
     things which were written concerning David, and Solomon his
     son. Behold David and Solomon truly had many wives and
     concubines, which thing was abominable before me, saith the
     Lord: wherefore, thus saith the Lord, I have led this people
     forth out of the land of Jerusalem, by the power of mine arm,
     that I might raise up unto me a righteous branch from the
     fruit of the loins of Joseph. Wherefore, I the Lord God, will
     not suffer that this people shall do like unto them of old.
     Wherefore, my brethren, hear me, and hearken to the word of
     the Lord; for there shall not any man among you have, save it
     be one wife; and concubines he shall have none; for I, the
     Lord God, delighteth in the chastity of women. And whoredoms
     are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of
     Hosts."[163:A]

Here it is stated as coming from God himself, that the polygamy and
concubinage of David and Solomon were abominable before the Lord. And
yet we every day hear David and Solomon, as well as Abraham, Jacob, and
others, cited by those practising polygamy, as their illustrious
prototypes, whose example is worthy of all imitation.

Orson Pratt, the ablest writer on Mormon theology, is compelled to admit
that the Book of Mormon is opposed to polygamy. He says:--

     "Do you believe that the Book of Mormon is a divine
     revelation? We do. Does that book teach the doctrine of
     plurality of wives? It does not. Does the Lord in that book
     forbid the plurality doctrine? He forbid the ancient Nephites
     to have any more than one wife."[163:B]

Elder Pratt then endeavors to blunt the force of this testimony in the
following manner:--

     "Why were the ancient Nephites restricted to the one-wife
     system? Because, first, the number of males and females among
     them, at the time the command was given, was about equal.
     Secondly, there was no probability that judgments, wars, or
     any other calamities which were to befall their nation, would
     produce a disproportionate number of males and females.
     Thirdly, this small remnant of the tribe of Joseph, were, at
     that time, about equally righteous; and one was about as
     capable of raising up a family in righteousness as another.
     And, lastly, the Lord himself informs them, in the same
     connection with the quotation which I have just made, that if
     He would have them practise differently from what He had
     previously taught them, it must be by His command."[164:A]

Thus, in the attempt to weaken the force of the evidence furnished by
the Book of Mormon against polygamy, Pratt acknowledges, in the most
explicit manner, the validity of the argument against it, founded upon
the equality in the numbers of each sex. Two of the four reasons why the
Nephites were to retain monogamy, relate to the equality in the numbers
of the sexes. But there is a substantial equality in the numbers of the
sexes, not only in the United States, but in Utah Territory. (See U. S.
Census.)

Let us now turn to the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and see if we can
find in that volume any authority for polygamy. The following passages
will determine the question:--

     "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave
     unto her, and none else; and he that looketh upon a woman to
     lust after her, shall deny the faith, and shall not have the
     spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out."[164:B]

Again. In 1845, the year after Smith's death, an Appendix was
authoritatively added to the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, containing
the following, which is extracted from the section entitled
"Marriage":--

     "2. Marriage should be celebrated with prayer and
     thanksgiving; and at the solemnization, the persons to be
     married standing together," etc., "he [the person officiating]
     shall say, calling each by their names, 'you both mutually
     agree to be each other's companion, husband and wife,
     observing the legal rights belonging to this condition; that
     is, keeping yourselves wholly for each other, and from all
     others, during your lives.' And when they have answered
     'yes,' he shall pronounce them 'husband and wife,' in the name
     of the Lord Jesus Christ and by virtue of the laws of the
     country, and authority vested in him. . . .

     "4. . . . Inasmuch as this church of Christ has been reproached
     with the crime of fornication and polygamy; we declare that we
     believe that one man should have one wife; and one woman but
     one husband, except in case of death, when either is at
     liberty to marry again."[165:A]

Can anything be more explicit than this? Polygamy is not only expressly
repudiated by the church, but is classed by the side of fornication as a
crime.

Thus we find that polygamy is contrary to both books of the Mormon
Bible. That it is, in fact, strongly condemned in those volumes.

It is, therefore, no part of the Mormon religion, as given to the world
by Joseph Smith.

But polygamy is practised in Utah. Whence did it arise, and upon what
foundation does it rest?

Like slavery, and all other great social evils, it had its origin,
doubtless, in an abuse of the passions of man.

It was first publicly announced and recommended in Utah Territory on the
29th of August, 1852, by Orson Pratt and Brigham Young, at a
politico-religious meeting, held in Great Salt Lake City.

On that occasion, President Young said:--

     "You heard Brother Pratt state, this morning, that a
     Revelation would be read this afternoon, which was given
     previous to Joseph's death. It contains a doctrine a small
     portion of the world is opposed to; but I can deliver a
     prophecy upon it. Though that doctrine has not been preached
     by the Elders, this people have believed in it for years.

     "The original copy of this Revelation was burnt up. William
     Clayton was the man who wrote it from the mouth of the
     Prophet. In the mean time it was in Bishop Whitney's
     possession. He wished the privilege to copy it, which Brother
     Joseph granted. Sister Emma (wife of Joseph Smith) burnt the
     original. The reason I mention this is, because that the
     people who did know of the Revelation, suppose it was not now
     in existence.

     "The Revelation will be read to you. The principle spoken upon
     by Brother Pratt this morning, we believe in.

     . . . "Many others are of the same mind. They are not ignorant
     of what we are doing in our social capacity. They have cried
     out proclaim it; but it would not do a few years ago;
     everything must come in its time, as there is a time to all
     things. I am now ready to proclaim it.

     "This Revelation has been in my possession many years; and who
     has known it? None but those who should know it. I keep a
     patent lock on my desk, and there does not anything leak out
     that should not."[166:A]

The Revelation, so called, which was read at the close of this sermon,
purports to have been given to Joseph Smith, July 12, 1843. It is very
lengthy, consisting of twenty-five sections or paragraphs. It is
published in full, in Burton's "City of the Saints," and in various
other publications. The following synopsis exhibits all that is
essential of this extraordinary Revelation.


THE REVELATION.

SECTION 1. "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph,
that inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand
wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as
also Moses, David, and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principle
and doctrine of their having many wives and concubines: Behold, and lo,
I am the Lord thy God, and will answer thee as touching this matter."
[The balance of this section is prefatory, declaring that a new law and
everlasting covenant is about to be revealed, and that he who abides not
that covenant shall be damned.]

SEC. 2. All covenants, contracts, vows, etc., not made and sealed by
the Holy Spirit of promise, of him who is anointed (Joseph Smith) both
as well for time and for all eternity, are of no efficacy or force after
the resurrection.

SEC. 3 represents the necessity of having everything sanctioned by the
Almighty.

SECS. 4 and 5. Persons married for life only, or for time and eternity,
but not by the proper authority, not bound to each other after this
life.

SEC. 6 provides that if a man marry a wife by the law of God, and by the
new and everlasting covenant, and if they abide in the covenant, and do
not shed innocent blood, then the covenant shall be binding throughout
time and eternity, "and they shall pass by the angels, and the gods
which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things."

SEC. 7 declares that such shall be gods in the eternal world.

SEC. 8 states that none can receive such exaltation except those who
receive and abide the law of God.

SEC. 9. "Verily, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according
to my word, and they are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise according
to mine appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin or transgression
of the new and everlasting covenant whatever, and all manner of
blasphemies, and if they commit no murder wherein they shed innocent
blood, yet they shall come forth in the first resurrection, and enter
into their exaltation, but they shall be destroyed in the flesh, and
shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of
redemption, saith the Lord God."

SEC. 10 explains that shedding innocent blood, and assenting unto the
death of Christ, is the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which shall
not be forgiven in the world nor out of the world.

SECS. 11 and 12 refer to Abraham as the father of the faithful, and him
to whom the promises were made. "This promise is yours also, because ye
are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham." "Go ye,
therefore, and do the works of Abraham; and enter ye into my law, and
ye shall be saved."

SEC. 13 intimates that Sarah acted in accordance with the command of God
in giving Hagar to Abraham.

SEC. 14 refers to the concubines which Abraham received, and says, "they
bare him children, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness." The
latter part of the section is as follows: "David also received many
wives and concubines, as also Solomon, and Moses my servant; and also
many others of my servants, from the beginning of creation until this
time; and in nothing did they sin save in those things which they
received not of me."

SEC. 15. "David's wives and concubines were given unto him, of me, by
the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the
keys of this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me,
save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and therefore he hath fallen
from his exaltation, and received his portion; and he shall not inherit
them out of the world; for I gave them unto another, saith the Lord."

SEC. 16 prescribes certain regulations concerning those who commit
adultery, and provides that in case the husband commits adultery, and
the wife is innocent, and the fact is revealed by God to Joseph, the
wife shall be given by Smith to one who has not committed adultery, "but
hath been faithful, for he shall be made ruler over many."

SEC. 17. "And verily, verily I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on
earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever you bind on earth in my
name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the
heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted
eternally in the heavens; and whosesoever sins ye retain on earth shall
be retained in heaven."

SEC. 18. "And again, verily I say, whomsoever you bless I will bless,
and whomsoever you curse I will curse, saith the Lord; for I, the Lord,
am thy God."

SEC. 19. "And again, verily I say unto you, my servant Joseph, that
whatsoever you give on earth, and to whomsoever you give any one on
earth, by my word, and according to my law, it shall be visited with
blessings, and not cursings, and with my power, saith the Lord, and
shall be without condemnation, on earth and in heaven." Then follows a
declaration to the effect that Smith has found favor with God, and that
he will forgive his sins, etc.

SEC. 20 commands Emma Smith "that she stay herself, and partake not of
that which I commanded you to offer unto her; for I did it, saith the
Lord, to prove you all," etc., and continues as follows: "And let mine
handmaid, Emma Smith, receive all those that have been given unto my
servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me; and those who
are not pure, and have said they are pure, shall be destroyed, saith the
Lord God; for I am the Lord thy God," etc.

SEC. 21 commands Emma Smith, wife of Joseph, to abide and cleave unto
Joseph and none else, under penalty of destruction. She is also exhorted
to forgive Joseph his trespasses.

SEC. 22 forbids Joseph putting his property out of his hands.

SEC. 23 touches upon the law of the priesthood, and says of any one who
is called of God, as was Aaron, "if he do anything in my name, and
according to my law, and by my word, he will not commit sin, and I will
justify him." Joseph is to be justified, etc.

The last two sections are as follows:--

SEC. 24. "And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood: if any
man espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first gives
her consent; and if he espouse the second, and they are virgins, and
have vowed to no other man, then he is justified; he cannot commit
adultery, for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit adultery
with that that belongeth unto them, and to none else; and if he have
ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot commit adultery, for
they belong to him, and they are given unto him; therefore is he
justified. But if one, or either of the ten virgins, after she is
espoused, shall be with another man, she has committed adultery, and
shall be destroyed; for they are given unto him to multiply and
replenish the earth, according to my commandment, and to fulfil the
promise which was given by my Father before the foundation of the world,
and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they may bear the
souls of men; for herein is the work of my Father continued, that he may
be glorified."

SEC. 25. "And again, verily, verily I say unto you, if any man have a
wife who holds the keys of this power, and he teaches unto her the law
of my priesthood as pertaining to these things, then shall she believe,
and administer unto him, or she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord your
God; for I will destroy her; for I will magnify my name upon all those
who receive and abide in my law. Therefore it shall be lawful in me, if
she receive not this law, for him to receive all things whatsoever I,
the Lord his God, will give unto him, because she did not believe and
administer unto him, according to my word; and she then becomes the
transgressor, and he is exempt from the law of Sarah, who administered
unto Abraham according to the law, when I commanded Abraham to take
Hagar to wife. And now, as pertaining to this law: Verily, verily I say
unto you, I will reveal more unto you hereafter; therefore let this
suffice, for the present. Behold, I am Alpha and Omega. Amen."

       *       *       *       *       *

Such is the foundation upon which is built the superstructure of Utah
polygamy. And the system itself, what is it in its theory and practical
application? The mode of its institution has been shown. Its
ceremonials, and many facts illustrative of its tendency and effects,
will be given; and it is for our readers to determine how much it is
better than promiscuous intercourse, and to discover, if they can, its
redeeming features, as distinguished from such a state of society.

No man who has a wife already, has any right to make propositions of
marriage to a lady, until he has consulted the President of the whole
church, and through him obtained a revelation from God upon the subject.
If the revelation be favorable, he must next obtain the approbation of
the parents, and _thirdly_, he is to consult the lady herself.

It is also necessary that the first wife be consulted. If she refuses
her consent, however, the lover husband may take an appeal to the
President; and unless the wife can give to the President satisfactory
reasons why her consent is withheld, the husband may proceed to
introduce another wife into the family, against her will. The plan is,
either to divorce the first wife, and damn her eternally, or to torment
her daily, until, with a broken heart and a crushed spirit, she goes to
the altar, and there gives another to her husband. Thus the semblance of
her approbation is obtained.

The exquisite cruelty of this abominable practice will appear most
vividly from the marriage ceremony.

     "When the day set apart for the solemnization of the marriage
     ceremony has arrived, the _bridegroom_ and the _wife_, and
     also the _bride_, together with their relations, and such
     other guests as may be invited, assemble at the place which
     they have appointed. The scribe then proceeds to take the
     names, ages, native towns, counties, States, and countries of
     the parties to be married, which he carefully enters on
     record. The President, who is the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator
     over the whole church, throughout the whole world, and who
     alone holds the keys of authority in this solemn ordinance,
     calls upon the _bridegroom_ and his _wife_, and the _bride_,
     to arise, which they do, fronting the President. The wife
     stands on the left hand of her husband, while the bride stands
     on her left. The President then puts this question to the
     wife: 'Are you willing to give this woman to your husband, to
     be his lawful and wedded wife, for time and all eternity? If
     you are, you will manifest it by placing her right hand within
     the right hand of your husband.' The right hands of the
     bridegroom and the bride being thus joined, the wife takes
     her husband by the left arm, as if in the attitude of walking.
     The President then proceeds to ask the following questions of
     the man: 'Do you, brother, (calling him by name) take sister
     (calling the bride by name) by the right hand, to receive her
     unto yourself, to be your lawful and wedded wife, and you to
     be her lawful and wedded husband, for time and for all
     eternity, with a covenant and promise on your part, that you
     fulfil all the laws, rites, and ordinances pertaining to this
     holy matrimony, in the new and everlasting covenant,--doing
     this in the presence of God, angels, and these witnesses, of
     your own free will and choice?' The bridegroom answers, 'Yes.'
     The President then puts the question to the bride: 'Do you,
     sister, (calling her by name) take brother (calling him by
     name) by the right hand, and give yourself to him to be his
     lawful and wedded wife, for time and for all eternity, with a
     covenant and promise, on your part, that you will fulfil all
     the laws, rites, and ordinances pertaining to this holy
     matrimony, in the new and everlasting covenant,--doing this in
     the presence of God, angels, and these witnesses, of your own
     free will and choice?' The bride answers, 'Yes.' The President
     then says: 'In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
     authority of the Holy Priesthood, I pronounce you legally and
     lawfully husband and wife, for time and all eternity; and I
     seal upon you the blessings of the holy resurrection, with
     power to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection,
     clothed with glory, immortality, and eternal lives; and I seal
     upon you the blessings of thrones, and dominions, and
     principalities, and powers, and exaltations; together with the
     blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and say unto you, be
     fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, that you may
     have joy and rejoicing in your posterity, in the day of the
     Lord Jesus. All these blessings, together with all other
     blessings, pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, I
     seal upon your heads, and enjoin your faithfulness unto the
     end, by the authority of the Holy Priesthood, in the name of
     the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.'"

The scribe then enters the _marriage_ on the records, and the parties
retire. The wedding is then celebrated with a feast at the husband's
house, and a "Mormon dance." The new wife is assigned a room,--if indeed
the happy husband's domicil contains two rooms,--and her experience in
"plurality" begins.

In well-regulated Mormon families, the first wife stands at the head of
domestic concerns. She carries the keys of the storehouse, makes the
purchases for the family, and deals them out to the plural wives, in
much the same manner as other housekeepers do to their cooks. The
husband's will is law, and from it there is no appeal, except in extreme
cases, when the Bishop may be consulted.

If a husband has lost his wife by death, before he had the opportunity
of attending to this holy ordinance, and securing her as his lawful wife
for eternity, then it is the duty of the second wife, first, to be
sealed or married to the husband, for and in the name of the deceased
wife, for all eternity; and, secondly, to be married for time and
eternity herself, to the same man. Thus, by this holy ordinance, both
the dead and the living wife will be his in the eternal worlds. But if,
previous to marriage for eternity, a woman lose her husband by death,
and marry a second, and if her first husband was a good man, then it is
the duty of the second husband to be married to her for eternity, not
for himself, but in the name of her deceased husband, while he himself
can only be married to her for time; and he is obliged to enter into a
covenant to deliver her up, and all her children, to her deceased
husband, in the morning of the first resurrection.

Thus, by these refinements, a religious veil, captivating to the fancy,
is thrown over the institution to hide its deformity. The same
distinctions are carried through all the various relations of life;
hence in case a widow is married to a widower, three ceremonies are
necessary, in order fully to establish the eternal relations of all the
parties.

Incest is the practical result of some of the branches of this
new-fangled system of sealing and marriage. It has already been shown,
by the report of the Committee on Territories in the United States
Senate, and the Message of Gov. Harding, that a mother and her daughters
(by a former husband) all live together, as wives of the same
husband.[173:A]

A still more revolting relation is sometimes maintained. It is called
"heirship," and is plainly enough sanctioned by Young, as follows:--

     "The text is, the right of heirship. I will, however, make an
     addition to the scripture, before I proceed further with my
     remarks, and say, 'the right of heirship in the Priesthood.'"

After asserting that the right of heirship belongs to the first-born
son, he says:--

     "There are sisters in the church that have been bereaved of
     their husbands, who died full of faith in the Holy Gospel, and
     full of hope for a glorious resurrection to eternal life. One
     of them is visited by a High Priest, of whom she seeks
     information touching her situation, and that of her husband.
     At the same time the woman has a son, twenty-five years of
     age, who is an Elder in one of the Quorums of the Seventies,
     and faithful in all the duties connected with his calling. She
     has also other sons and daughters. She asks this High-Priest
     what she shall do for her husband, and he very religiously
     says to her, 'You must be sealed to me, and I will bring up
     your husband, stand as proxy for him, receive his endowments,
     and all the sealing, keys, and blessings, and Eternal
     Priesthood for him, and be the father of your children.' Hear
     it, ye mothers! The mother that does that, barters away the
     sacred right of her son. Does she know it? No. But you that
     will hear, and be made to understand the true principles that
     govern this matter, go from this place, and do hereafter as
     has been done in by-gone days; instead of the children being
     robbed of their just rights, the woman shall lose her
     children, and they shall yet stand in their place, and be put
     in possession of their rights. Let mothers honor their
     children. If a woman has a son, let her honor that
     son."[174:A]

But we will not pursue these disgusting details further.

Capt. Robert Burton, the famous English traveller, thus epitomizes the
Mormon faith:--

     "In the Tessarakai Decalogue above quoted, we find syncretized
     the Shemitic Monotheism, the Persian Dualism, and the Triads
     and Trinities of the Egyptians and the Hindoos. The Hebrews
     also have a personal Theos; the Buddhists, avataras and
     incarnations; the Brahmins, self-apotheosis of man by prayer
     and penance; and the East generally holds to quietism,--a
     belief that repose is the only happiness, and to a vast
     complication of states, in the world to be.

     "The Mormons are like the Pythagoreans, in their procreation,
     transmigration, and exaltation of souls; like the followers of
     Leucippus and Democritus in their atomic materialism; like the
     Epicureans in their pure atomic theories, their _summum
     bonum_, and their sensuous speculations; and like the
     Platonists and Gnostics in their belief of the Æon, of ideas,
     and of moving principles in element. They are Fetichists in
     their ghostly fancies, their _evestra_, which became souls and
     spirits. They are Jews in their theocracy, their ideas of
     angels, their hatred of gentiles, and their utter segregation
     from the great brotherhood of mankind. They are Christians,
     inasmuch as they base their faith upon the Bible, and hold to
     the divinity of Christ, the fall of man, the atonement, and
     the regeneration. They are Arians, inasmuch as they hold
     Christ to be 'the first of God's creatures,' a 'perfect
     creature, but still a creature.'

     "They are Moslems in their views of the inferior status of
     womankind, in their polygamy, and in their resurrection of the
     material body. Like the followers of the Arabian Prophet, they
     hardly fear death, because they have elaborated
     'continuation.' They take no leap in the dark; they spring
     from this sublunary stage into a known, not into an unknown
     world; hence also their worship is eminently secular, their
     sermons are political or commercial, and--religion being with
     them not a thing apart, but a portion and parcel of every-day
     life--the intervention of the Lord in their material affairs
     becomes natural, and only to be expected.

     "Their visions, prophecies, and miracles are those of the
     Illuminati; their mysticism that of the Druses, and their
     belief in the Millennium is a completion of the dreams of the
     Apocalyptic sects. Masonry has evidently entered into their
     scheme; the Demiurgus whom they worship is 'as good at
     mechanical inventions as at any other business.'

     "With their later theories, Methodism,
     Swedenborgianism,--especially in its view of the future
     state,--and Transcendentalism are curiously intermingled. And,
     finally, we can easily discern, in their doctrine of affinity
     of minds and sympathy of souls, the leaven of that faith
     which, beginning with the Mesmer, and progressing through the
     Rochester Rappers, and the Poughkeepsie Seer, threatens to
     extend wherever the susceptible nervous temperament becomes
     the characteristic of the race."[176:A]

According to this learned author, Mormonism is a conglomeration of all
the _isms_ from Adam to the present time.

The predominant characteristics of Mormonism are, the concentration of
power in one individual,--the entire unity of church and state,--and the
united efforts of the people and their leaders to establish and maintain
a kingdom, spiritual and temporal, which shall spread over the whole
earth, and result in the complete subjugation and subordination of all
other kingdoms, principalities, and powers.

The establishment of polygamy among such a people, was no difficult
matter. It was but an easy step from materialism to sensualism. Here the
passions and lusts harmonize with the love of power and dominion.

The following toasts were given at a celebration on the 24th of
July,[176:B] 1856. Therein the Mormons speak for themselves.

     "_Mormonism._ A plurality of worlds, a plurality of gods, and
     a plurality of wives, with all truth in all eternity."

     "_President Brigham Young._ With the keys of heaven and earth
     to open and shut, and all Israel to sanction."


FOOTNOTES:

[157:A] _Jour. of Dis._ Vol. I. p. 50.

[159:A] _Deseret News_, October 1, 1856.

[159:B] _Ibid._

[159:C] _Ibid._ Vol. VI. p. 235.

[160:A] Sermon by Brigham Young, published in the _Deseret News_,
October 1st, 1856.

[161:A] _Book of Mormon_, pp. 3, 12, 33, 43.

[161:B] _Ibid._ p. 119.

[162:A] _Book of Mormon_, p. 535. 5th sec. of 4th chap. of Book of
Ether.

[162:B] _Book of Mormon_, p. 167.

[162:C] _Ibid._ p. 168.

[163:A] _Book of Mormon_, pp. 115, 118. 1st and 2d chapters of the
Book of Jacob.

[163:B] Article on Celestial Marriage, in _The Seer_, Vol. I. p. 30.

[164:A] _The Seer_, Vol. I. p. 30.

[164:B] _Doctrine and Covenants_, p. 125.

[165:A] _Book of Doctrine and Covenants_, pp. 330, 331.

[166:A] Sermon of Brigham Young, published in the _Deseret News_,
Extra, of September 14, 1852.

[173:A] The marriage of brothers and sisters was at one time openly
encouraged by President Brigham Young. George D. Watt, reporter for
the _Deseret News_, married his half-sister, and lived with her as a
wife, for about twelve years. She passed as the wife of Young, for
several years, owing to the presence of gentiles and the prejudices of
the saints. She has since been convinced of her error, and joined the
"new organization," and with her three children returned to the
States.

[174:A] April 8, 1858, _Deseret News_, Vol. III. No. 12.

[176:A] _City of the Saints_, pp. 397, 398.

[176:B] The 24th of July, 1847, was the day when the first Mormons
arrived in Salt Lake Valley. The 24th of July is therefore celebrated
by them as the 4th is by gentiles.




CHAPTER X.

BRIGHAM AS LORD OF THE HAREM.

     Brigham's Block.--The Lion House.--The Tithing-House.--The
     Bee-hive House, Office, etc.--Description of the Harem.--Plan,
     Rooms, etc., of each Floor, and who occupies the same.--Life
     at the Harem.--Brigham at Home.


[Illustration: The Prophet's Block.]

Brigham's Block consists of about twenty acres, situated in the northern
part of the city, and on the "first bench." These "benches" are level
plateaus, or ridges running along at the base, and parallel with the
mountain sides, and rising one above another, in regular succession.
They are supposed to have been formed by the action of water, which
doubtless at one time, covered the whole country, half way to the
mountain tops. These benches overlook the city, which is mostly built on
the flats, or bottom lands of the Jordan River. From Brigham's Bench the
view is particularly beautiful, including the lake spread out in all its
grandeur to the westward, with mountains rising in and beyond it, and
mountains bounding the horizon in every other direction.

The grounds are surrounded by a wall from eight to ten feet in height,
built of pebble-stones, cemented with mortar, and strengthened and
supported by semicircular buttresses, at equal distances. The main
entrance faces south, and the gateway is surmounted by a huge eagle
carved in stone, which sits in a very uncomfortable position, and looks
as though desirous of soaring to his native hills, or of making a
descent upon some of the denizens of earth. His business is to watch and
see who enters this sacred precinct, and to see that every third load of
wood brought from City Creek (or Brigham's) Canyon, which leads into
this enclosure from the north, is deposited at the Prophet's door. The
only entrance into this canyon is _through_ this gate, and the canyon
itself contains the only wood within fifteen miles of the city. The gold
also, which it is well understood lies embedded in City Creek Canyon, is
thus pretty well guarded.

The grounds are regularly laid out by William C. Staines, one of
Brigham's adopted sons. The Prophet himself is very fond of fruit, and
has carried its culture to a considerable degree of perfection. Large
numbers of apple, pear, peach, and apricot trees, have been set out, and
are producing every year. Grape culture also has not been neglected. It
is a custom here to present the President with a specimen of every new
variety of fruit and vegetable raised, and he receives very graciously
anything presented, from a barrel of brandy to an umbrella, and is sure
to think more of the donor, ever afterward.

Everything bears the mark of utility, and nothing is expended for show,
or merely to gratify taste. No expensive flower-garden or green-house is
to be seen, and this is perfectly characteristic of the Prophet, who is
thoroughly utilitarian in all his views and tendencies.

On the southwest corner, and fronting the temple block, stands the
tithing-store and office, and the Deseret printing-office. A description
of the tithing-office and store, with its concomitant system, is given
elsewhere. Back of the tithing-office, is a cattle-yard and barn, and
numerous other buildings connected with tithing operations. Also a long
row of buildings for various mechanical purposes: a carpenter's shop,
shoe-shop, etc., with a blacksmith's shop in the rear. A number of small
tenements are scattered over the premises, in which some of the
employees reside.

The next large building, east of the Deseret store and printing-office,
is the "Lion House," or Harem.

Further to the east, and connected with the Harem by a covered
passage-way, is Brigham's general business office. This is a large
room, with three desks on either side; those to the left on entering,
being appropriated to the clerks of "Brigham Young, Trustee in Trust for
the Church," and those to the right, used by the clerks of "B. Young &
Co." At the end opposite the door is a large platform railed off, and a
gallery runs round the upper wall. The bookcases are of the yellow box
elder-wood, highly polished. A business-like air pervades the room, and
all is neat and clean.

Still further east and connected by another passage-way, is the private
office of the "President." This is a plain, neat room, about twenty-five
feet square. A large writing-desk and money-safe, tables, sofas, and
chairs, and a "store" carpet, make up the furniture of the room. Back
of, and adjoining this, is the _sanctum sanctorum_; the Prophet's own
private bedroom. Few, even of the family, are permitted to enter this
room without special invitation. Here is the "veil," behind which the
Prophet receives his "revelations." Here he consults on his most private
and important matters. He usually occupies this room alone, and when he
desires the company of one of his wives, sends a message to that effect.
When he is sick, he designates one of them to attend upon him.

The next building to the eastward is the Bee-Hive House, so named from
models of bee-hives, on the top and in front of it. The honey-bee is the
Mormon symbol, as according to "Reformed Egyptian," _Deseret_ means "the
honey-bee." As yet, however, the term applies only by faith, to Utah, as
that industrious insect is almost an utter stranger to her borders.

The Bee-Hive House is a large, handsome adobe building, excellently
plastered on the outside, and dazzlingly white. It is a two-storied
tenement, and balconied from ground to roof. On the top is an
observatory, surmounted by a bee-hive. Its cost was about $65,000, and
it is the best edifice in the Territory.

Eastward still, and farther back from the road, stands the school-house,
a white building, with green blinds, and a cupola. Here the children of
the Prophet, about fifty in number, are educated. Though not an educated
man himself, nor a patron of learning, among the people he employs good
teachers, and takes considerable pains in the education of his children.

Farther to the right, upon an eminence, stands the "White House,"
occupied by Mrs. Young, the first wife, and her children. This is a very
lonesome-looking old house, just such a one as you might fancy to be
haunted. It was the first one built by Young, and glass being then very
expensive, the windows are few and small.

These, with other smaller buildings, make up the improvements on the
Prophet's Block, and constitute a small town of themselves.


THE HAREM.

The "Lion House" is a three-storied building. First, a basement, built
of stone; then the main building, of wood, with peaked gable, and
narrow-pointed Gothic windows, and steep roof. This house cost over
$30,000, and would have cost more, but for the economy of the owner. It
was completed, ready for the shingles, and the shingles were waiting. At
a meeting in the Tabernacle on Sunday, he announced that he had a
mission for all the carpenters, and asked if they would accept it. They
raised their hands, and were then coolly told to "shingle the Lion House
in the name of the Lord, and by the authority of the Holy Priesthood." A
large lion, carved in stone, is placed upon a pillared portico, in front
of this edifice, "resting, but watchful."

[Illustration: Plans of the Lion House.


                             BASEMENT STORY.

                                  East.

      +----+--+------+------+----+--------+--+----+-+---------------+
      |No. |  |      |Pantry|No. |Weaving |--|No. | |    General    |
      |19  |  |      |No. 18|17  | Room   |--|15  | |    Cellar     |
      |    |  |      |      |    |No. 16  |28|    | |    No. 14     |
      +----+--+------+------+----+--------+--+----+-+---------------+
      |                    Main Hall. No. 25.                       |
   N. |      +---------+            +-----------+                   | S.
      |   27 ||||||||||| Basement.  ||||||||||||| 26                |
      +------+---------+-------+----+-+-----+---+-+-----------------+
      |                        | No.  | No. | No. |     Dining      |
      |     School Room        | 21   | 22  | 23  |      Room       |
      |       No. 20           |      |     |     |     No. 24      |
      +------------------------+------+-----+-----+-----------------+

                                  West.

     No. 14. General Cellar.
     No. 15. Ash House.
     No. 16. Weaving Room.
     No. 17. Coachman's Room.
     No. 18. Pantry.
     No. 19. Back Hall.
     No. 20. School Room.
     No. 21. Wash Room.
     No. 22. Kitchen.
     No. 23. Dish Room.
     No. 24. Dining Room.
     No. 25. Main Hall.
     No. 26. Stairs.
     No. 27. Stairs.
     No. 28. Hall.


                             PRINCIPAL STORY.

                                  East.

      +--+----+----+----+-+----+---------+-+----+-------+
      |  | A  |No. |No. | |No. |  No. 6  | |No. | 5     |  Steps.
      |  +----+10  | 9  |C| 7  |    +----+E+----+       |    --
      |  | B  |    |    | |    |    | D  | |    |       |   ----
      +--+----+----+----+-+----+----+----+-+----+-------+---------+
      |                  Main Hall.                     |Portico. |
   N. |  11. +---------+  No. 13.   +-----------+ 12.   |         | S.
      +------+-----+------+----+----+----+------+-------+---------+
      |            |  F   |No. |         |              |
      |   No. 4    +---+--+ 3  |  No. 2  |     No. 1    |
      |            | G |       |         |              |
      +------------+---+-------+---------+--------------+

                                  West.

     No.  1. Parlor.
     No.  2. Emeline's Room.
     No.  3. Mrs. Cobb.
     No.  4. Clara Chase.
     No.  5. Lucy Decker's Rooms.
     No.  6. Clara Decker.
     No.  7. Lucy Bigelow.
     No.  8. Doesn't appear on the plan.
     No.  9. Emily Partridge.
     No. 10. Aunt Fanny's Room.
     No. 11. Stairs.
     No. 12. Stairs.
     No. 13. Main Hall.
          A. Aunt Fanny's Bed Room.
          B. Emily's Servant's Room.
          C. Hall.
          D. Clara Decker's Children.
          E. Hall.
          F. Emmeline's Children.
          G. Clara Chase.


                               UPPER STORY.

                                  East.

      +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
      |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |
      |38  |37  |36  |35  |34  |33  |32  |31  |30  |29  |
      +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---------+
      |                  Main Hall.                      | Upper  | Lion.
   N. |      +---------+  No. 49.   +-----------+        |Portico.|   S.
      +----+-+--+----+-+--+----+----+----+----+-+--+----+---------+
      |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |No. |
      |48  |47  |46  |45  |44  |43  |42  |41  |40  |39  |
      +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

                                  West.

     No. 29. Twiss.
     No. 30. Unassigned.
     No. 31. Hall leading to Portico.
     No. 32. Mrs. Hampton.
     No. 33. Harriet Cook.
     No. 34. Mrs. Weston.
     No. 35. Eliza Snow.
     No. 36. Spare Room.
     No. 37. Margaret Pierce.
     No. 38. Hired Help.
     No. 39. Harriet Barney.
     No. 40. Eliza Burgess.
     No. 41. Harriet Seeley.
     No. 42. Charlotte Cobb.
     No. 43. Zina D. Huntington.
     No. 44. Martha Bowker.
     No. 45. Spare Room.
     No. 46. Unassigned.
     No. 47. Ellen Rockwood.
     No. 48. Susan Snively.
     No. 49. Main Hall.]

The following is the inside plan of the Lion House:--

_Principal Story._--No. 1. Parlor. You enter the parlor from the left,
and find a long, narrow room, with a large window in front, and four on
the side, all heavily curtained. A beautiful Brussels carpet--design, a
large bouquet of flowers, a rose, surrounded with other flowers and
leaves, with a light ground--covers the floor. Two centre-tables, of
solid mahogany, are placed at equal distances from the ends of the
room. An elegant rose-wood piano sits at the lower end of the room.
Between the windows hangs a large mirror, under which is a melodeon. A
large sofa, upholstered with dark crimson velvet, occupies the opposite
side, and near this is a bureau, with silver candlesticks and other
ornaments. The chairs are painted to represent mahogany, and gilded. The
room is painted and gilded in the same manner. A large stove in the
corner, near the door, completes the furniture of the drawing-room of
the Harem.

The family meet in this room, every morning and evening, at the ringing
of the bell, to attend family prayers. The favorite wives, Emeline,
Lucy, and Clara Decker, receive their company in the parlor, while the
less favored ones entertain theirs in their rooms.

There are said to be underground passages from Brigham's houses to
Kimball's on the north, and Wells's on the south. Also apartments under
the Lion House, where he secretes his wealth and punishes his refractory
wives. I cannot vouch for the truth of this assertion, but give it as a
rumor. I am credibly informed, however, that all the carpenters and
masons who worked on the lower story of this building have disappeared.

The three favorite wives before named, receive and entertain the friends
of the Prophet, who visit at the Lion House. He very seldom introduces
here any outside the church. Gentile visitors are usually entertained at
the Bee-Hive.

No. 2 is Emeline's room, just back of the drawing-room. She formerly
occupied No. 4, but was removed to No. 2, because Brigham, in going to
her room, was obliged to pass several other rooms, thus creating remark
and jealousy among the other women. He therefore had a hall, No. 8,
prepared, leading from his office to No. 2, to which room he removed his
favorite wife. Here he formerly spent much of his time. She dressed his
artificial curls, petted and caressed him, and worshipped him
alternately as her God. The furniture in Emeline's room consists of a
three-ply carpet, mostly red, a high post bedstead, with white and red
curtains, sofa, table, chairs painted to resemble oak, a large square
mirror, oil-shades, wardrobe, and fireplace.

No. 3. Mrs. Cobb formerly occupied this room, but now resides in a neat
cottage outside the walls. A three-ply carpet, red and yellow, common
bedstead, standing in a recess, fall-leaf table, chairs painted oak,
oil-shades with white curtains, a small mirror, also a small closet and
a fireplace, constitute the furniture of this room. This was the home of
a woman who had lived in a comfortable and commodious house in Boston,
as its mistress and head, with a large and interesting family around
her. All this she left for the ridiculous delusion called Mormonism. To
what extremes will not religious fanaticism and mistaken zeal lead its
devotees!

No. 4 is a large, pleasant room, with bedroom attached. This was
occupied by Clara Chase and her children, before her death. She was once
a favorite with Brigham, which will account for her superior
accommodations. This room is furnished as follows: a carpet similar to
Emeline's, common bedstead placed in a recess, common table, nice large
gilt mirror, red and white curtains, wardrobe, and fireplace.

No. 5. This room, opposite the parlor, belongs to Lucy Decker, the first
wife in plurality, and is rather plainly furnished. Rag-carpet, common
bedstead, stand, mirror, oak chairs, wardrobe, small cupboard and a
fireplace, curtains of the prevailing colors red and white. A
sitting-room and two bedrooms are allowed Mrs. Lucy Decker, as she has a
number of children.

No. 6. In Clara Decker's room stands a beautifully carved bedstead,
arched overhead with heavy damask curtains, chairs like parlor, stand,
settee, Venetian blinds, and oil-shades. Brigham's portrait in oil, half
size, hangs on the wall, also a large mirror. A rag-carpet covers the
floor. A bedroom and recess are attached to this room, and from its
superior furniture it is easy to infer that its occupant is a woman fond
of show, as well as a favorite with the Prophet.

No. 7. Lucy Bigelow's room contains a common bedstead, three chairs, a
stand, wardrobe, carpet, mirror, and white curtains.

No. 8. Hall leading to Emeline's room.

No. 9. Emily Partridge, one of the "proxies," occupies this room. A
common carpet, calico curtains, a fall-leaf table, bedstead, and the
usual quota of chairs, make up the furniture of this woman's home.

Formerly a tin pail and tin wash-dish constituted the toilet set of most
of the wives, but since the Prophet has had so many fat government
contracts, and his purse has become plethoric with public money, and
from the continued inflow of tithing, he has indulged his "women folks"
with crockery ware. As Uncle Sam is rich, and a good easy-going soul,
why should he not furnish "Harems" for his "loyal and law-abiding
citizens?"

No. 10 is Aunt Fanny Murray's room. Her furniture consists of a red and
yellow carpet, home-made bedsteads, oak chairs, a fall-leaf table, and
oil-shades. A sitting-room and a small bedroom belong to Aunt Fanny. But
you ask, Who is Aunt Fanny? She was in her young days, Fanny Young, and
had a great awkward brother, called Brigham. She married a Mr. Murray,
to whom she was devotedly attached. She was a gentle, kind creature; and
when her husband died, she became dependent on her brother. She had long
been a believer in Mormonism, and was with the Mormons at Nauvoo. After
the death of her husband, she was, by the earnest persuasion of her
brother Brigham, induced to be sealed to another. She protested at the
time, and said it would break her heart. And in relating the story to a
young friend, years afterward,--"Bessie," said she, "my poor, poor heart
is breaking now;" and laying her hand on her heart, she wept aloud. Aunt
Fanny has gone to her rest. She has suffered want and privation, mental
anguish and bodily pain, for her religion. Who shall say that her dear
heavenly Father, whom she so blindly worshipped, will not reward her
with a crown of glory in His kingdom above, when she shall rejoin the
partner of her youth, free from the shackles of tyranny and
superstition?

Nos. 11 and 12 are staircases.

No. 13. Main Hall, extending the whole length of the building; it is
lighted from a large window at the further end.

This completes the principal story of the Lion House.

_The Basement Story._--No. 14. General cellar, where all kinds of
vegetables and provisions are stored.

No. 15. Ash-house.

No. 16. Weaving-room. The wives spin, color, and prepare the yarn, and a
man is kept employed in weaving. A large quantity of cloth is made at
the Harem every year. Brigham's motto is, "No drones in the hive."

No. 17 is the coachman's room.

No. 18. Pantry. Milk, pies, cake, bread, and cooked provisions, are kept
in this place.

No. 19. Back Hall.

No. 20 was formerly occupied as a school-room and dancing academy for
the Youngs.

No. 21. Wash-room.

No. 22. Kitchen.

No. 23. Dish-room.

No. 24. The Dining-room is about fifteen by forty feet. Two tables
extend its whole length, allowing only a passage-way at each end. A
third table extends two thirds of the length of the room. Also a
side-table, and chairs of different sizes, to accommodate the various
ages of the family group.

Each wife has her seat at the table, and her children sit with her. The
wives who have children are seated at the heads of the tables in the
order in which they came into the family,--they taking the preference
over those who have no children. This is the case in every
well-regulated Mormon family. Among Mormons, the title of mother
includes that of queen, and is consequently the highest distinction a
woman can attain. If a woman has no children, she is miserable, and her
position in society a very unpleasant one. She can only redeem herself
by urging her husband to take more wives. Many women do this, and
afterward labor incessantly for the new mistresses and their children.

Lucy Decker, the first "plurality" woman, presides at one of the long
tables. At the head of the short table, Brigham always presides, when he
takes his meals at the Harem. On his right sits Clara Decker, with her
children, and on the left, Emeline, with hers. This order is strictly
observed. This preference causes much unhappiness on the part of other
wives less favored.

No. 25. Main Hall.

Nos. 26 and 27 are staircases.

No. 28. Small side Hall.

_Third Story._--This floor is divided in the centre by a wide hall, and
ranged on either side are ten small rooms, of nearly uniform size, with
one door and window each. These rooms are about twelve by fifteen feet,
and are occupied principally by those of "the women" who have no
children. The windows are of the Gothic style.

No. 29 is occupied by "Twiss," and has a carpet, common bedstead, three
oak chairs, a little toilet-stand, small mirror, and plain white
curtains.

All these rooms are similarly furnished. All are neat and clean. Harriet
Cook, Ellen Rockwood, and Twiss, display more taste than the others in
the arrangement of their little cages.

In addition to these articles, Harriet Cook has mahogany chairs, instead
of oak, and a large cupboard, painted to represent mahogany. All the
rooms are furnished with stoves, except three, which have fireplaces.

No books, except the Book of Mormon, Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and
Mormon Hymn-Book, will be seen in any room except Eliza Snow's; she
being a woman of considerable literary taste, and withal a
writer,--having made a number of contributions to Mormon
literature,--her room is indicative of the same, being well supplied
with books and papers.


_What the Women do._

The internal arrangement of affairs at the Harem is very similar to that
of a young ladies' boarding-school. Each woman having her own room, her
affairs are all centred there. The culinary department is under the
control of such of the wives as Brigham from time to time appoints. She
is the stewardess, and carries the keys. A cook is employed,--generally
a man,--and several servants besides, who are all under the control of
the stewardess.

When the meals are prepared and ready, the bell rings, and each woman,
with her children, if she have any, files down to the dinner-table, and
is seated as before stated.

Each, on rising, has her children to attend to, and get ready for
breakfast; this over, she commences the business of the day, arranges
her rooms, and sits down to her sewing or other work, as the case may
be.

A sewing-machine is brought into requisition, and one of the number
appointed to use it. For the benefit of those who want a sewing-machine,
it may be well to state how this one was procured. One day a man from
St. Louis came to offer one for sale, stating that his price was ninety
dollars. Brigham bought it, promising to pay the man whenever he should
call. The man being poor, called in a few days. He did not get his pay.
He called again, a number of times, with the same result. One of the
wives became quite indignant, and said,--"If I was in his place, I never
would ask it from one so high in the priesthood. He had better give it
to him than to ask pay of him." The poor man never received his money,
and as soon as he could get the means, left the Territory. This is the
manner in which the Prophet becomes possessed of much of his property.

Most of the women spin and make their every-day clothing, doing their
own coloring. They are quite proud of the quantity of cloth manufactured
in their establishment every year. All work hard, and take but very
little out-of-door exercise. Parties and the theatre are the favorite
amusements. At the theatre, Brigham and one or two of the favored wives
sit together in "the King's box," but the remainder of the women and the
children sit in what is called "Brigham's corral." This is in the
parquette, about the centre of the area. The Prophet goes down once or
twice during the evening to the corral, and chats for a few moments with
one and another, but in a short time he can be seen beside his "dear
Amelia" again.

At the Mormon parties, much gayety prevails. Appearances are maintained,
somewhat, by paying more respectful deference to the first wives, on
such occasions. Gentiles, with whom the saints are on good terms, are
well received and kindly entertained at these parties, and all join in
giving themselves up to the influences of mirth and festivity. Dancing
is not only a favorite amusement, it is more; it is cultivated to such
an extent that it becomes a passion.

Brigham's women, though better clothed than formerly, still work very
hard. They are infatuated with their religion, and devoted to their
husband. If they cannot obtain his love, they content themselves with
his kindness, and endeavor to think themselves happy. As religion is
their only solace, they try to make it their only object. If it does not
elevate their minds, it deadens their susceptibilities, and as they are
not permitted to be _women_, they try to convince themselves that it is
God's will they should be _slaves_.

A music-master, a dancing-master, and a teacher of the ordinary branches
of an English education, are employed in the family school. Also a
teacher of French. His children have much better advantages than any
other in the Territory. Dancing and music are the leading
accomplishments, and everything else is made subordinate to these.


_Brigham at Home._

Much interest naturally attaches to the inner life of such a man as
Brigham Young. His time is much occupied. He rises early, calls the
whole family together; they sing a hymn; he prays fervently, and they
separate for the duties of the day. In past times, he ate at the Harem.
His fare is very simple, usually consisting of a bowl of milk, covered
with cream, and dry toast or bread.

His next duty used to be, to "see the women folks," to whom he was
friendly and kind, but no more. He is not Brigham the husband, but
Brigham the Prophet and Seer. The women fear and reverence him as their
God, watch his countenance as he gives them counsel, and look upon every
word he utters as the "key" to some great mystery. He pays much less
attention to them now than formerly, but is kind and considerate in his
conduct toward them.

This duty done, he next proceeds to his office, to receive his visitors,
and to transact any business that may be there awaiting his attention.
His counsel is sought upon all subjects, even in the minutest domestic
affairs of the people. So numerous are these applications for advice and
assistance, that many are turned away with a very brief answer, while
some are denied access entirely.

Theoretically, no one but he can "seal" or give plural wives in
marriage, and such at first was the practice. But in later years, this
power has been delegated to Kimball and others, and to the Bishops of
distant wards. The divorces of such can only come from him; and from
this source alone he derives a handsome revenue. He once said from the
pulpit to the people, that "the divorce money which he received through
their d--d foolery, furnished him with plenty of spending money."

No speculations are entered upon, no enterprises begun, without
consulting "Brother Brigham." This he encourages and commands. "If you
do not know what to do, in order to do right, come to me at any time,
and I will give you the word of the Lord on the subject."

This mode of directing the people, though laborious and perplexing, has
its advantages. Their secret thoughts and plans are thus laid open to
his view, and facts are sometimes brought to his knowledge very
important and essential to be known, having a direct bearing upon the
permanent maintenance of his rule and authority. The people, too, by
such frequent consultations, are led to believe that their prosperity,
happiness, and safety, are all dependent upon the favor and assistance
of their leader. If any one becomes contumacious and troublesome, he has
the earliest information of the fact, and soon devises means to be rid
of the annoyance.

It is a common expression among the people at Salt Lake, "When I obey
counsel, I am prospered in everything; when I neglect it, I prosper in
nothing."

Years ago, Brigham was kind and fatherly toward his followers. If he met
one of them in the street, he gave him a cordial greeting and a hearty
shake of the hand, with an inquiry concerning his family and prospects.
But of late, the Prophet, having become rich, has grown haughty and
proud, and as he rides along in his fine carriage, surrounded by his
courtiers and sycophants, the toiling, hard-handed brethren, who receive
no friendly recognition, sometimes shake their heads and mutter
sentiments strangely discordant with those generally expressed in
conversation.

The feeling of dissatisfaction at the distance placed by the Prophet
between himself and his followers, has grown, as that distance became
more perceptible, until it has become quite universal among the poorer
classes. The poverty-stricken saint, as he takes home upon his back or
his wheelbarrow a sack of flour, or piece of meat, obtained with
difficulty by his daily toil, beholds his Prophet, his spiritual guide,
clothed in fine raiment, seated in a splendid carriage, by his side a
courtesan, a so-called wife. He sees the smile and kind word, which
should be given to his suffering and down-trodden people, lavished upon
a harlot. He turns in disgust, and with a weary and troubled spirit,
seeks temporary rest in his own humble home. Here kind poverty has
protected him from the vices of his leaders, and he thanks God inwardly,
after all, that he has not yet abandoned the wife of his youth. To such,
the new preachers sent by the "Josephites," to bring the people back to
virtue, to loyalty, and to the original Mormon religion, appear as
angels from heaven, and hence the ready assent given to their teachings,
and the rapid defection from the established church.




CHAPTER XI.

THE WIVES OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.

     Mary Ann Angell Young, the first wife.--Her Family.--Lucy
     Decker Seely, the first wife in Plurality.--More of "My
     Women": Clara Decker, Harriet Cook, Lucy Bigelow, Twiss,
     Martha Bowker, Harriet Barney, Eliza Burgess, Ellen Rockwood,
     Susan Snively, Jemima Angell, Margaret Alley, Margaret Pierce,
     Mrs. Hampton, Mary Bigelow, Emeline Free, or the Light of the
     Harem.--Proxy Women: Miss Eliza Roxy Snow, Zina D. Huntington,
     Amelia Partridge, Mrs. Cobb, Mrs. Smith, Clara Chase, the
     Maniac.--Amelia, the last love.--The Prophet in Love the
     Thirtieth Time.


_Mrs. Mary Ann Angell Young._

This lady is the first living and legal wife of the Prophet. She is a
native of New York, and is a fine-looking, intelligent woman. She is
large, portly, and dignified. Her hair is well sprinkled with the frosts
of age; her clear, hazel eyes and melancholy countenance indicate a soul
where sorrow reigns supreme. She has been very much attached to her
husband, and his infidelity has made deep inroads upon her mind. Her
deep-seated melancholy often produces flights of insanity, which
increase with her declining years.

Bereft of her husband's society, she naturally clings to her children,
of whom she has five: Joseph, Brigham A., John, Alice, and Luna. They
all reside with her. She formerly occupied "the Bee-Hive House," but as
the number of her husband's wives increased, it became necessary that
additional accommodations should be furnished the "plural" portion of
the family. The first wife was obliged to vacate her residence for the
benefit of new comers. She was removed to a great barn-like house on the
hill. This building looks more like a penitentiary than anything else.
It was the first house built upon the premises, and, as before stated,
is very deficient in the number and size of its windows.

Mrs. Young seldom receives guests, and her husband himself scarcely ever
pays her a visit.

When I looked upon this poor, suffering woman, as she sat at church,
surrounded by her husband's mistresses, I seemed for the first time
fully to realize the true character of that "institution" which has
crushed the hearts of many noble women.

She is very kind to her children and dependents, and is much beloved by
them. She has not succeeded so well in gaining the affection of "the
wives." With them she is very unpopular, and by some of them she is
often mocked and upbraided. It is said, "one hates whom he has injured."
This may account for much of this feeling among the "plurals."

Joseph, or "Joe Young," as he is familiarly known in Utah, is a fast
young man. He has been on a "mission," travelled in Europe, smokes,
chews, gets drunk, swears, preaches the gospel, has three wives whom he
whips and otherwise shamefully abuses, and is a good Mormon, in full
fellowship in the church. While at a fashionable watering-place, at
Great Salt Lake, in the summer of 1863, he insulted a gentile lady. The
gentleman who accompanied her, being an officer, promptly knocked him
down, and this not seeming to be satisfactory, afterwards challenged
him. Joseph's friends interfered, and obtained a settlement of the
difficulty.

Brigham A. is more respectable. He has also been on a "mission." This is
equivalent to saying that he has been wild and reckless, as it is the
Mormon custom to send all who are unruly and hard to manage, or who have
committed crimes, on a mission. It is thought that by "bearing the pure
vessels of the Lord" to such poor wicked wretches as the gentiles, they
will perchance themselves become purified.

John, being the youngest, has not developed his tastes so fully. He
seems inclined to seek after the loaves and fishes of office. He was
Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council in the winter of 1863-64, and will
doubtless be one of its members when he is old enough, should his father
then reign in Utah.

Mrs. Alice Clawson is the oldest daughter. Rather amiable, with fair
hair, blue eyes, and of _petite_ stature. She is one of the performers
in her father's theatre. As an _artiste_ she is "flat, stale, and
unprofitable." But being Brigham's daughter, and good looking, she is
applauded to the echo. She is one of three wives of Hiram B. Clawson,
who is the Prophet's chief business agent and manager. Quick, shrewd,
and unscrupulous, he is a fit instrument with which to accomplish the
purposes of such a man.

In the year 1851, a Mr. Tobin came to Salt Lake with Capt. Stansbury.
While there, he met Miss Alice, fell in love with her, and they were
engaged to be married. Mr. T. had occasion to leave Salt Lake on
business, and did not return until 1856. He then renewed his engagement
with Alice, but afterward, for reasons satisfactory to himself, broke
it. This subjected him to the vengeance of her father, which never
slumbers. Tobin and his party were followed, attacked in the night, on
Santa Clara River, 370 miles south of Salt Lake City. Several of the
party were severely wounded. They lost six horses, and were compelled to
abandon their baggage, which was completely riddled by bullets. During
Tobin's absence, Alice had been engaged to another, who had been sent
off to the Sandwich Islands, by her watchful father. Hiram B. Clawson,
the confidential clerk of the President, next appeared as a candidate
for the young lady's hand. He had already one wife, but was anxious to
secure a second.

A little incident in their courtship, will illustrate the manner of
obtaining No. 2.

"Good-morning, sister _Clawson_," said a young friend whom she met in
walking.

"What do you wish me to understand?" said Alice.

"Nothing more than that your father gave his consent this morning, in
my presence, to your marriage with Hiram Clawson."

"There, Alice," said brother Clawson, who at this moment made his
appearance, "did I not tell you? You would not believe me."

"This matter begins to be serious," said Alice, "now that my father has
given me away to a man that has one wife already, and is courting
another beside me, both of them much handsomer than I am."

Hiram was nettled, for it was true that he was courting a third wife,
and of the three Alice was the least beautiful. She then proposed,
playfully, to elope with an old gentleman, a friend of the family. "I
would do so," she said, "before I would be given away like an old mule,
to a man who already has one wife, and is seeking for others."

Yet Alice, though doubtless giving expression at this time to the
sentiments of her heart, was afterward prevailed upon, and consented to
become No. 2 in the harem of Hiram B. Clawson. Hiram, having commenced
at a much earlier age than his father-in-law, may, if unchecked in his
career, yet rival him in the number of his wives and the extent and
magnificence of his "plural" establishment.

Luna Young is a _character_. She is very wilful and headstrong. She
always governed her sister Alice, and even her father could not control
this wayward child.

She is the fourth daughter, by the first wife, two having died. She has
light hair, blue eyes, and a fair complexion. She is very haughty and
beautiful. Slender as the gazelle, and free and joyous as a bird,
brooking no control, she was the light, and often the annoyance of her
father's house in her girlish days. She is now married, and very likely
will become amiable and docile, under Mormon discipline.


_Lucy Decker Seely._

This is the first wife in "plurality,"--or the second "woman."

Lucy Decker was married to Isaac Seely, and had two children. She
afterward became a Mormon, and went to Nauvoo to reside. Her husband,
Seely, was somewhat dissipated, but treated her well. She, however, saw
Brother Brigham, and loved him. He visited her, told her that Seely
could never give her an "exaltation" in the eternal world; that he,
being "high in the priesthood," could make her a queen, in the first
resurrection.

She yielded to these inducements and the promptings of her inclination,
left her husband, and was "sealed" to Brigham Young.

Lucy Decker has brown hair, dark eyes, small features, a fair skin, and
of short stature; but quite _en bon point_. She would strongly remind
you of a New-England housewife, "fat, fair, and forty." In common with
nearly all the inmates of the Harem, she is of very ordinary intellect,
and limited education.

Her first child, after marrying Young, was named Brigham Heber, and was
the first-born in Mormon polygamy. He is now a lad of about eighteen
years of age.

Lucy Decker is still one of the favorite wives. She lives in the
"Bee-Hive," and keeps a sort of boarding-house for the work-hands. She
has had eight children by Brigham, all of whom are living. A story is
told which illustrates well the disposition and character of these
polygamous children. "Brigham Heber" was in the habit of playing while
the family were at breakfast. One morning, after breakfast was over,
this boy, then only ten or twelve years of age, went into the kitchen,
and undertook to help himself to anything he could find. Mr. Smith, the
cook, would not permit it. Brigham Heber seized a fork, and with oaths
that would put a pirate to shame, swore he would stab the cook. Smith
caught him, wrenched the fork from his hand, and pushed him into the
hall. He and Oscar, son of Harriet Cook, swore they would kill Smith the
first time they should catch him out.


_More of "My Women."_

_Clara Decker_, sister of Lucy Decker, is a short, thick-set person,
very much like Lucy in appearance. She is much more intelligent and
agreeable than her sister, and in every way her superior.

She is also quite a favorite with the Prophet; has three or four
children, and is much attached to her "husband."

_Harriet Cook_ was early in plurality; having been sealed to Brigham, at
"Winter Quarters," on the Missouri River, while the Mormons were on
their way to Utah. This was five years before polygamy was publicly
proclaimed in Utah as a divine institution. Harriet is very tall, has
light hair, blue eyes, a fair complexion, and sharp nose. She is rather
slender, but has much power of endurance, and a look of determination.

When all is going on smoothly, she is as calm and serene as a May
morning; but let Brigham or any one else in the establishment cross her
path, and the blue eyes at once light up, and give evidence of a coming
storm. When irritated and aroused, she denounces the whole Mormon
religion, including polygamy, and says, "the whole thing is a humbug,
and may go to the devil for aught she cares." Brigham, though a stern
disciplinarian, makes good his escape, at such times, and the "women"
all keep at a respectful distance.

When she is in a religious mood, which is seldom the case, she says: "I
don't profess to know much, but there is one thing I _do_ understand,
and that is Mormonism. Whenever Brother Brigham (all the wives call him
Brother) goes behind the veil, I make him tell me what he sees and hears
there. I mean to know all about it." She is the "smartest" of all the
women. She has one son in plurality, named Oscar. He is a wild, ugly
boy, and curses his mother _ad libitum_. Brigham cares nothing for this
woman, and avoids her as much as possible.

_Lucy Bigelow_ is of middling stature, has dark brown hair, blue eyes,
aquiline nose, and a pretty mouth, and is very pleasant and affable. She
is very pretty and ladylike in the ball-room, but does not appear to so
good advantage in the nursery and kitchen. She is the one who was the
subject of a well-turned repartee at the anniversary ball in Salt Lake
City, on the 24th of July, 1863. Governor Harding, on that occasion,
having danced with several of the wives of "Governor" Young, became
somewhat enthusiastic and extravagant in his compliments. Among other
fine sayings, he remarked to one of the wives, upon leading her on to
the floor,--"The President has introduced several of his wives to me as
'Mrs. Young,' 'Mrs. Young,' 'Mrs. Young.' As well might the astronomer
point me to the stars of heaven, without giving me their names."
"Governor, I understand your compliment, and appreciate it. The name of
this particular star is Lucy."

She has but little influence over Brigham, and he seldom visits her.

_Twiss_ has sandy hair, inclined to curl, round features, blue eyes, low
forehead, complexion fair, face somewhat freckled. She is short and
stout. This woman makes a good servant, and is always ready to wait on
her lord and master. She prepares his linen, and is content. She has no
children.

_Martha Bowker_ is low in stature, with black hair and eyes. She is very
quiet. Is plain and sensible; neither showy nor interesting. Very neat
in dress, very ordinary in intellect and acquirements. She is of few
words, and rather quick-tempered. Very little influence over the
Prophet.

_Harriet Barney._--This lady is tall, slender, and graceful. She has
hazel eyes, light-brown hair, mild, sweet expression of countenance, and
is indeed a beautiful woman. Her character is as lovely as her face, and
the suffering and sorrowing always find a friend in her. She is patient
and forbearing, and would rather suffer wrong than do wrong. Her kind
and sympathetic nature, and excellent character, place her far above all
the other inmates of the Harem.

Believing in polygamy, she left her husband, and became one of the
plural wires of the President of the church in which she believed. She
loves, with all the intensity of her nature, him for whom she has
sacrificed everything. Of course, she deeply feels his neglect, but,
like a true woman, complains not. Having sacrificed her happiness upon
the altar of her faith, she continues to love, to endure, and to suffer.

She had three children by her first husband; none since.

_Eliza Burgess._--Her parents resided in Manchester England, and came to
Nauvoo in the early days of Mormonism. Soon after, they both died,
leaving Eliza an orphan. She was thrown upon the cold charities of the
world, and Brother Brigham, ever the friend of _youth_ and _beauty_,
_took_ her into his family. She served seven years, and then desired to
marry another. She applied to Young for his consent, but the Prophet had
other projects inconsistent in their nature with the proposed marriage.
"Eliza," he said, "you have been so long in the family, that I need you.
I wish to marry you myself. Will you not be my wife? Brother S. is a
very good man, but I can give you a greater exaltation. I can make you a
queen." This argument was conclusive, and Eliza gave up her lover, and
married Brigham Young.

In person Eliza is small, with large dark eyes, dark hair, and dark
complexion. She is quick-tempered, and is of the class--English
serving-girl. She is the only one of the Prophet's women who is not
American. She has several children.

_Ellen Rockwood_ is of medium size, slender, with light hair,
light-brown eyes, and fair complexion. She is the daughter of the warden
of the penitentiary, who is a "regular down-east Yankee." Ellen is
rather quiet, even-tempered, but quite narrow-minded. Her health is
poor, and she spends most of her time in embroidery and needle-work. She
has no children, and, per consequence, very little influence with her
husband. He calls upon her in her little room, about once in six months.

_Susan Snively._--A middle-aged woman, of medium size, dark hair, light
eyes, dark complexion, and expressionless face; the plainest of all the
women. She is good and kind in her nature, quiet and retiring. She spins
and colors yarn, and is a good housewife, of the type--New-England
farmer's wife. Having no children, she adds nothing to the kingdom and
glory of her husband, and is estimated accordingly.

_Jemima Angell_ is the sister of Mary Ann, the lawful wife. She is an
elderly lady, with dark hair, gray eyes, and pensive countenance. Of low
stature, but quite robust. Her first husband died out of the church, and
she is merely sealed to Young, for her exaltation in another state. She
lives in a little house by herself, and seldom receives a visit from her
spiritual husband.

_Margaret Alley._--Short and small; light hair and eyes, rather
lengthened features, but mild expression of countenance. Being much
neglected by her husband, she became very melancholy. She died in 1853,
leaving two children.

_Margaret Pierce._--Of medium height, light hair, and blue eyes, sharp
nose, and very variable in temper. She has several children, but not
much influence with her husband.

_Mrs. Hampton._--This woman is very tall, and noble in appearance, has
round features, large lustrous eyes, dark hair, and fair complexion. She
was early married to Mr. Hampton, by whom she had six children. They
removed to Nauvoo, where Hampton died. Mrs. Hampton was afterward sealed
to Young.

When the Mormons were driven from Nauvoo, Mrs. Hampton was, for some
reason, left behind. She then married a Mr. Cole, by whom she had one
daughter, named Vilate. When this child was about four years old, Cole
went to California. Young then sent for Mrs. Hampton to come and live
with him. She obeyed, and became, a second time, one of his plural
wives. During this time Cole wrote letters frequently, and sent her his
likeness.

About this time, Feramorz Little, one of Young's nephews, married Julia
Hampton, daughter of Mrs. H., and half sister to Vilate Cole. Mrs.
Hampton lived at the Harem about eight years, and superintended the
culinary department. Some misunderstanding having arisen between her and
the Prophet, he again cast her off. It is said that she was unwilling to
be sealed over the altar for eternity to Young, preferring her first
husband in the eternal world. Her son, Nephi Hampton, provided a house
for her at Ogden, a pleasant town forty miles north of Salt Lake, where
she now resides.

Vilate is now about fourteen years of age, beautiful and accomplished.
She and Brigham Heber, now about twenty years old, were engaged to be
married, but his father disapproved the match, and laid a plan to defeat
it. In the fall of 1863, Feramorz Little sent for Vilate to come down to
the city, and proposed to have her board with him and attend school. His
real object was to secure her for his fourth wife and at the same time
prevent her marrying the son of the President. During all this time the
girl frequently inquired, with much anxiety, about her father.

In 1863 Cole enlisted in the 2d Regiment of Infantry, Nevada Volunteers,
and came to Salt Lake City expressly for the purpose of finding his
daughter. After much inquiry he ascertained where his wife and child
were living, and wrote a letter to Vilate. The mother received the
letter, read it, and put it in the fire. Thus the matter rested, until
Vilate came to the city. One day she said to her sister Julia, (Mrs.
Little,) "Would it not be strange if my father was among the soldiers?"
Said Julia, "He is. Didn't you know it? Nephi told me all about it."
This gave her new courage, and thenceforth she made every effort to see
her father. For some time she was closely watched, and Cole, who had
found where she was, was denied admission to her; but the girl's
resolution remaining firm, Little, fearing she would leave him, finally
permitted an interview. The happy meeting of the father with his only
child, after an absence of eleven years, who shall describe? Cole still
remains in Utah, devoted to his daughter, whom he visits frequently, and
is not without hope of getting her away from her unfortunate
associations. The task is a delicate and difficult one, and in his
efforts to accomplish it, he has the sympathy of every father.

_Mary Bigelow._--I can give no description of this woman. She was sealed
to Young at "Winter Quarters," and came on with him to Utah. After a
time she left the Harem, and what became of her is unknown to me.


_Emeline Free, or the Light of the Harem._

                     ----"O Nourmahal!
     Thou loveliest, dearest of them all;
     The one whose smile shone out alone
     Amidst a world, the only one
     Whose light, among so many lights,
     Was like that star, on starry nights,
     The seaman singles from the sky,
     To steer his bark forever by!"

Emeline is tall and graceful; with mild, violet eyes, fair hair,
inclined to curl. She has long been the favorite of the Prophet,--the
light of his eyes, and the joy of his heart.

Mr. and Mrs. Free, her father and mother, were opposed to polygamy, and
Brigham went one day to convince them of their error. The beautiful
Emeline was the first he sought to win, and he argued and expounded the
new doctrine with wonderful zeal and fervor. At length the parents were
convinced. The Prophet of the Lord stepped up to Emeline, laid his
saintly hand upon her shoulder, and said, in fervid accents, "Emeline,
will you be my wife?" "Yes, sir," was the reply. This was their
courtship. She at once became the favorite, and many a heart grew sad
when she became an inmate of the Harem.

Brigham distinguished her in every way; gave her better rooms than the
rest, and servants to wait upon her. She grew to love him, and obtained
a powerful influence over him. There is no weapon so powerful as a
woman's tears. This Emeline believed, and often acted upon, to bring
back her truant lover, when she thought too much attention was paid to
others. Finally, so great became the jealousy of the other wives, that
the husband of these contending fair ones constructed a private hall
leading from his office to Emeline's room, that he might visit her
without observation or constraint. He devoted himself to her
exclusively, and she reigned supreme over the sisters. She received her
company in the grand saloon; she occupied the seat of honor at the
table, at the right hand of her husband. In short, she was the mistress
of the Harem.

At that time the most of the women did their own work, and stayed in
their own rooms, so that there was but little communication with each
other. She has eight children, but is still a young-looking woman.

But, alas! "the course of true love never did run smooth," and Emeline
was doomed to have a rival. When the Prophet "took" Amelia, his last
love, poor Emeline was heart-broken. She was taken very sick, and her
life was, for a long time, despaired of. From her "sisters" she received
no sympathy. The bitter cup which they had been obliged to drink, was
now commended to her own lips. From the confiding and happy wife, she
has become the rejected and suffering mistress, and must now drag out
the remainder of her days a faded, cast-off woman. And Amelia, the
present queen, what of her? She too, will soon take her place by the
side of Emeline and Mary Ann. Other and younger women will take the
place she now occupies, and in their turn be cast off, to suffer with
her.


"_Proxy Women._"

This is a very common term in Utah, and signifies that a woman is
married to one man for "time," and sealed to another for eternity. All
her children belong to the man to whom she is sealed, no matter which
may be their father, or whether the mother ever married the celestial
husband "in time." This is a refinement upon the Jewish doctrine, which
required a man to "raise up children to his dead brother."

Of this class of women Brigham Young has four, all of whom, while they
live with him for "time," are sealed to Joseph Smith for eternity, and
to Joseph must they be delivered over, with their children, in the first
resurrection.

"Miss" _Eliza Roxy Snow_ is of middling stature, dark hair, well
silvered with gray; dark eyes, noble intelligent countenance, and quiet
and dignified in manner. She is the most intellectual of the women.

Her literary taste and acquirements are good, and she has composed some
very creditable hymns for the church of which she is a conscientious and
devoted member. A volume of her poems has also been published, some of
which evince genius of a high order.

She is quite exclusive in her tastes, and associates but little with the
"women." She occupies a small room on the third floor of the Harem,
about twelve by fifteen feet in size. A neat carpet covers the floor; a
common bedstead occupies one corner. There are some oak chairs grained,
with crochet covers, white window-curtains and bed-spread, her "own
handiwork." Behind the door is a neat little wardrobe. On a shelf over
the window, stands a vase of artificial flowers. A stand, covered with
books, usually occupies the centre of the room, and these articles, with
a neat little stove, make up the furniture.

This is the _home_ of "the sweet singer of Israel." She has cast the
charm of her genius over the rude materials, and there is an air of
neatness, comfort, and refinement about her little sanctum which is not
apparent in any other portion of the house. Here she receives and
entertains her company. She occupies her time chiefly in writing, and in
needle-work. She is highly respected by the family, who call her "one
of the nobles of the earth." When tired of writing and study, she walks
out and visits her friends. If any one is sick in the house she looks
after the invalid, and shows every kindness and attention. She soothes
the afflicted, and cares for the infirm and aged. She and Zina D.
Huntington are the most lady-like and accomplished of the wives.

The following verses, written by Miss Eliza R. Snow, will show her style
as well as the religious fervor and fanaticism for which she is
remarkable.


     [For the _Deseret News_.]

     "_The Ladies of Utah to the Ladies of the United States Camp,
     in a Crusade against the Mormons._

          BY MISS E. R. SNOW.

          Why are you in these mountains,
            Exposed to frosts and snows?
          Far from your sheltering houses,
            From comfort and repose?

          Has cruel persecution,
            With unrelenting hand,
          Thrust you from home and kindred,
            And from your native land?

          Have you been robbed and plundered,
            Till you are penniless,
          And then in destitution
            Driven to the wilderness?

          No, no; you've joined a crusade
            Against the peace of those
          Driven to these distant valleys
            By cruel, murderous foes.

          Amid the dreary desert,
            Where hideous red men roam;
          Where beasts of prey were howling,
            We've made ourselves a home.

          Can woman's heart be callous,
            And made of flint and steel?
          Perhaps you'll learn to pity,
            When you are made to _feel_.

          Should sickness prey upon you,
            And children cry for bread,
          With bitter self-reproaches
            You'll rue the path you tread.

          We love with purest feelings,
            Our husbands, children, friends;
          We've learned to prize the blessings
            Which God in mercy sends.

          We have the ancient order
            To us by prophets given;
          And here we have the pattern
            As things exist in Heaven.

          We'd fain from human suffering
            Each barbéd arrow draw,
          But yet self-preservation
            Is God's and Nature's law.

          The Scriptures are fulfilling,
            The spoiler's being spoiled;
          All Satan's foul devices
            'Gainst Zion will be foiled.

     _Great Salt Late City_, Oct. 13, 1857."

This is given not as a fair specimen of her poetry, for she has written
much better, but to illustrate how completely she was devoted to the
interests of her people at that exciting period of their history.

_Zina D. Huntington Jacobs_ is of large form, well proportioned, high
forehead, with light hair and eyes. She is of a melancholy temperament,
as is plainly indicated by the expression of her countenance. She has
three children, and has charge of the children of Clara Chase.

Zina has some literary ability, and sometimes writes poetry. She has a
special office in the family, which is to act as governess for all the
young ladies, accompanying them in their attendance to singing-schools
and other public places. Zina came to Utah with her husband, Dr. Jacobs.
Young became attached to her, sent the Doctor on a mission, and in his
absence appropriated to himself the wife and children. Dr. Jacobs is
still in California, and is an "apostate." Zina stands in great awe of
Brigham, who treats her with marked coldness and neglect.

_Amelia Partridge_ is rather tall, with a fine form, black hair, dark
eyes, dark complexion, sweet expression of countenance, and very mild
and amiable in disposition. She and her sister Eliza had been servants
in the family of Joseph Smith, in Nauvoo.

Amelia has four children, to whom she is devotedly attached. She is a
kind and gentle mother, patient and forgiving,--one of the excellent
ones of earth. She takes but little interest in family matters, outside
of the circle of her own children.

_Mrs. Augusta Cobb_ is a native of Massachusetts, and formerly resided
in Boston. She is a large, fine-looking person,--dark hair, gray eyes,
and clear complexion. She is very stylish in appearance, and of
dignified demeanor. She was converted to Mormonism at Boston, fifteen
years ago, left her husband and a very interesting family of children,
and with one little girl, Charlotte, came to Utah, and took up her
residence at the Harem, as a plural wife of Brigham Young.

She is high-spirited and imperious. She once returned to her family in
Boston, and remained two years, but was too deeply involved in the
meshes of Mormonism to be satisfied away from Zion, and again returned
to Salt Lake. She now lives in a neat little cottage near the Lion
House, and is supported by Young. Her son, James Cobb, after finishing
his course of study in the East, came to Salt Lake, and after some
years, through the influence of his mother, joined the church. Previous
to becoming a Mormon, he expressed much anxiety about his mother and
sister Charlotte,--now an interesting young lady,--and used many
arguments and entreaties to induce them to leave, but finally himself
yielded to the seductive influences which surrounded him.

Charlotte at one time enjoyed the proud title of "the belle of Salt
Lake." She has steadfastly opposed polygamy, and hence has remained
unmarried.

_Mrs. Smith_ is an elderly woman, who admired Brother Brigham very much,
and desired to be sealed to him, to insure her salvation. Young did not
reciprocate her sentiments toward him, but compromised the matter by
sealing her to Joseph Smith for eternity, and to himself for time. After
this ceremony had been performed, he committed her to the care of the
Bishop of the ward, directing him to support her.

There are many of this class of women in the Territory.


_Clara Chase, the Maniac._

This woman was of medium height, dark hair and eyes, rather sullen
expression of countenance, low forehead, and her features indicative of
deep-seated melancholy. When Young married her, he treated her with
marked consideration. He assigned to her an elegant apartment, in which
hung the only oil-painting of himself. She from the first distrusted the
principle of polygamy, and had many misgivings of conscience in regard
to her course in marrying the Prophet.

For a time she lived in this way, in a strait between two opinions. When
her husband treated her kindly, she tried to be happy, but when he was
cold and unfeeling toward her, she was driven well-nigh to desperation.
In the mean time she had four children, two of whom are now living. They
are bright and intelligent girls, fourteen and sixteen years of age.

As she approached her fourth confinement, her fits of remorse became
more frequent and more terrible. She reproached herself with having
committed the _unpardonable sin_. Her condition was truly pitiable.
During her sickness Brigham treated her with such coldness and neglect,
that she became actually insane, and raved incessantly.--"Oh, I have
committed the unpardonable sin! Oh, warn my poor children not to follow
my bad example. I am going to hell. Brigham has caused it. He has cursed
me, and I shall soon be there. Oh! do not any of you go into polygamy.
It will curse you, and damn your souls eternally." When her husband
appeared, she cursed him as the author of her destruction.

The "President" and his two "counsellors" "laid hands" on her, but all
of no avail. Dr. Sprague, the family physician, was sent for; but her
poor wrecked spirit would no longer abide where it had suffered so much,
and she died a raving maniac.


_Amelia, or the Last Love._

_Amelia Folsom_ is a native of Portsmouth, N. H. She is tall, and well
formed, with light hair and gray eyes, and regular features. She is
quite pale, owing to ill health. Has but little refinement of manner.
When at the theatre, sitting in the King's box, with her husband, the
observed of all observers, she may be seen eating apples, throwing the
skins about, chatting with Brigham, and occasionally levelling her glass
at some one in the assembly.

She plays and sings, but with indifferent skill and taste. She was, for
a long time, unwilling to marry the President, but he continued his suit
with a pertinacity worthy a better cause, and by repeated promises of
advancement made to herself and her parents, finally succeeded. For
several months he had urged his suit, during which time his carriage
might be seen, almost any day, standing at her father's door, for hours
at a time. He told her she was created expressly for himself, and could
marry no one else on pain of everlasting destruction. She plead,
protested, and wept, but he persevered, and at length, when all other
arguments failed, he told her he had received a special revelation from
Heaven on the subject. She had always believed in Mormonism, and had
been taught to have faith in revelation. "Amelia," he said, "you must be
my wife; God has revealed it to me. You cannot be saved by any one else.
If you will marry me, I will save you, and exalt you to be a queen in
the celestial world, but if you refuse, you will be destroyed, both soul
and body."

The poor girl believed this hellish impostor, and yielding to his
wishes, became his wife. For several months after her marriage, Amelia
was sad and dejected, but of late she has rallied, and now appears the
gayest of the gay. This marriage took place on the 29th day of January,
1863,--more than six months after the passage by Congress of the
anti-polygamy law,--and was public and notorious. Here was perpetrated
in one act, the double crime of destroying forever the happiness of a
young lady and setting before his people the example of an open
violation of a law of the land. Yet for both crimes he goes unpunished,
and continues to sit in his chair of state, clothed in authority and
power, not only the wonder, but the admiration, of thousands outside of
the Mormon Church!

Amelia is evidently living under constraint, and acting an assumed
character. She is playing the _rôle_ of a happy wife, with a breaking
heart. At the time of her marriage, her heart had been given to another,
to whom she should have been married. That she compromised her
character, in marrying Young under the circumstances, is a fact too
notorious to be concealed,--and this connection has brought more odium
upon polygamy than any the "President" ever formed.

Nevertheless, Amelia stands the recognized Queen of the Harem. She leads
the _ton_, and is the model woman for the saints. Thousands bow low as
she passes, and think themselves happy to receive her passing
recognition. She is now a queen, and is to be a goddess in the celestial
world. The new wife sometimes becomes restive and impatient, and treats
her liege lord rather shabbily. She is at times notional and imperious,
and somewhat coquettish,--to all of which her husband submits with good
grace for the present, and pets her as a child.

The Bee-Hive House, formerly occupied by Mrs. Young and her family, has
been vacated for Amelia. Servants are at her disposal, and her
establishment is extensive and imposing.

Brigham spends much of his time with his new wife, and often dines with
her. One evening a friend was taking tea with the newly-married couple.
Amelia behaved quite naughtily toward her lord. After tea was finished,
they remained at the table, eating nuts and confectioneries. Amelia
threw her shells through an open window, on the opposite side of the
room. Her husband said, "Amelia, don't do that; put your shells by your
plate." "I sha'n't do it," replied the fair one; "I'll throw them where
I please." Young was silent for a time, but became so annoyed that he
again said: "Amelia, I wish you wouldn't do that any more." "I don't
care," replied the spouse, pettishly, "I'll throw the shells where I
please, and I'll do as I please, and you may help yourself." And pulling
her guest by the dress, she said; "Come, let's go up-stairs, and let him
_grunt_ it out."

The theatre was dedicated by prayer and a grand ball. This was in the
winter of 1862-63. Brigham led off in the dance with Amelia, and all was
smiles and sunshine. On another occasion, he honored another one of "the
women" with his hand for the first cotillon. This so displeased Amelia,
that she refused to dance with him at all. He coaxed, she shrugged her
shoulders, and shook her head. It was only after much condescension and
solicitation on his part that she granted her forgiveness, and consented
to dance with him. This gay Lothario of sixty-three then led forth his
blushing mistress, and "all went merry as a marriage-bell."

Amelia has lovers still, for one of whom she entertains considerable
feeling. He was sent to "Dixie," or the Cotton District, in Southern
Utah, on a mission. He soon returned, however, to Salt Lake, and by his
presence in the city, causes the Prophet considerable anxiety.

Amelia is tyrannical, and rules the women of the Harem with a strong
hand. Poor Emeline is quite broken-hearted. Naturally very sensitive,
this blow prostrated her upon a bed of sickness, from which it was
feared she would never recover. But she lives to drag out a miserable
life,--neither wife nor mistress, but a castaway.

In fact all the women are miserable and unhappy. A common remark, in
reply to the usual salutation, is, "Oh, I've got the blues to-day."


_The Prophet in Love the Thirtieth Time._

Miss Selima Ursenback is a native of Geneva, Switzerland, and with her
parents and brother came to Utah in the fall of 1862. She is an
accomplished musician, and at once became a favorite with the Mormons.
Several concerts were given, at which she figured as _prima donna_, and
although she sang in French, the melody of her voice and the artistic
character of her music gained for her an established reputation.

Brigham heard, and was delighted. Her voice was music to his ravished
ear, and, for the thirtieth time, the little god let slip his arrow, and
launched it into the Prophet's heart.

Says a celebrated writer:--

     "Now there are various ways of getting in love. A man falls in
     love just as he falls down-stairs. It is an accident. But when
     he runs in love, it is as when he runs in debt: it is done
     knowingly, intentionally, and very often rashly and foolishly,
     even if not ridiculously, miserably, and ruinously.

     "The rarest and happiest marriages are between those who have
     grown in love. Take the description of such a love in its rise
     and progress, ye thousands and tens of thousands who have what
     is called a taste for poetry. Take it in the sweet words of
     one of the sweetest and tenderest of English poets, and then
     say whether this is not the way that leads to happiness and
     bliss.

     "'Ah! I remember well (and how can I
       But evermore remember well) when first
       Our flame began; when scarce we knew what was
       The flame we felt. When as we sat and sighed,
       And looked upon each other, and conceived
       Not what we ailed,--yet something we did ail;
       And yet were well, and yet we were not well;
       And what was our disease, we could not tell.
       Then would we kiss, then sigh, then look; and thus,
       In that first garden of our simpleness,
       We spent our childhood. But when years began
       To reap the fruit of knowledge, ah, how then
       Would she with graver looks, with sweet, stern brow,
       Check my presumption, and my forwardness;
       Yet still would give me flowers, still would me show
       What she would have me, yet not have me know.'

     "Falling in love, and running in love, are, as everybody
     knows, common enough, and yet less so than what I shall call
     catching love. Where the love itself is imprudent, that is to
     say, where there is some just, prudential cause or impediment
     why the two parties should not be joined together in holy
     matrimony, there is culpable imprudence in catching it,
     because danger is always to be apprehended, which may have
     been avoided."

It is plain to be seen, our Prophet did not walk into love,--he did not
run into it. He caught it, as a man catches the measles. It broke out,
and showed itself all over, in smiles, bows, and sweet honeyed tones. It
is also plain that he should not have caught it. Had he not the charming
Amelia, dear Emeline, sweet Lucy, pretty Twiss, his darling Lucy No. 2,
poetic Eliza, meek Zina, and his dear, dear Jemima, Martha, Ellen,
Susan, Hattie, etc., etc. How could any man, much less a prophet, wish
for more?

But he said to himself, "I have not a French lady in the family to teach
my daughters that charming language. I have no _prima donna_ to conduct
their musical education. Then my last love--my pretty, naughty,
bewitching Amelia--is so cross and fitful, she leads me such a crazy
life, she frets and scolds, and I cannot drown her voice, even with my
'sacred fiddle.' [He had frequently boasted that with his violin he
could put a stop to the scolding of any of his women.]

"Then my French lady is accomplished. She can receive my foreign guests.
She is so clever, that she can assist me in my business projects and
plans; and if she should prove unkind,--which God grant she may
not,--and if her sweet lips should scold, I should have a great
advantage,--_I could not understand her_. Then her name,--Selima! How
poetical. None of my wives have such a poetical name. With her in my
Harem, I could rival the Sultan himself. Yes, sweet, adored Selima, _you
shall be mine_. You shall be the high priestess of my affections, and
all my common women shall serve you."

The Prophet plead his suit, but Selima was like stone. He had a young
man in his employ who dared to love Selima. The rival lovers met face to
face. The Prophet was furious,--"She is not for you, sir, she is not for
you. Leave my service, and never dare to aspire to that young lady's
hand again."

Alas, that love so devoted, so pure and disinterested as Brigham's,
should fail to be rewarded by the object of its choice. But no sooner
had the poor singing-master, for such he was, left the Territory for
California, than another rival appeared in the field,--a California
volunteer,--a dangerous rival; one who would not fear to follow up any
advantage he might gain over his spiritual competitor.

To destroy the romance of the whole story, Selima, charming but
sensible Selima, becoming disgusted with the whole affair, soon after
left for Switzerland again, leaving her lovers to settle the matter
among themselves.

For once in his life, Brigham Young was foiled, and that by a woman.




CHAPTER XII.

POLYGAMY.

     Condition of Woman among various Heathen Nations.--Influence
     of Christianity.--Mormonism and Woman.--Brigham offers to set
     the Women Free.--Arguments in Favor of Polygamy.--The Argument
     against it.--Abraham and Sarah.--Appeal to Mormon Women.--
     Their Unhappy Condition.--Evil Effects of the System.--
     Illustrations.


Woman is looked upon and treated by all heathen nations as an inferior
being, created for the convenience and comfort of man.

     "According to the ancient Rabbis, the rib which had been taken
     from Adam, was laid down for a moment, and in that moment a
     monkey came and stole it, and ran off with it, full speed. An
     angel pursued, and though not in league with the monkey, he
     could have been no good angel; for, overtaking him, he caught
     him by the tail, brought it maliciously back instead of the
     rib, and out of that tail was woman made. What became of the
     rib with which the monkey got clear off 'was never to mortal
     known.'

     "The Hungarians think it infamous to be governed by a
     woman,--and when the crown fell to a female, they called her
     King Mary instead of Queen.

     "Aristotle calls woman a monster, and Plato makes it a
     question whether she ought not to be ranked among irrational
     creatures.

     "Mahomet, too, was not the only person who has supposed that
     women have no souls. Among the Afghans, twelve young women
     were given as compensation for the slaughter of one man. Six
     for cutting off a hand, an ear, or a nose; three for breaking
     a tooth, and one for a wound of the scalp. By the laws of the
     Venetians, and of certain other Oriental people, the testimony
     of two women was made equivalent to that of one man.

     "According to the Brahmins, the widow who burns herself with
     the body of her husband, will, in her next state, be born a
     male; but the widow who refuses to make the self-sacrifice,
     will never be anything better than a woman, let her be born
     again as often as she may."

The Jew begins his public prayer with a thanksgiving to his Maker for
not having made him a woman. The Moors do not allow women to enter their
mosques or places of worship.

Mussulmen hold that there is a separate paradise for women, considering
them unworthy to occupy the same as the men, except such beautiful women
as are assigned to the male occupants as a reward for a virtuous and
religious life on earth. "Sit not in the midst of women," said the son
of Sirach, in his wisdom; "for from garments cometh a moth, and from
women wickedness."

"It is a bad thing," said Augustine, "to look upon a woman, a worse to
speak to her, and to touch her, worst of all." John Bunyan thanked God
that he had made him shy of the women. "The common salutation of women,
I abhor," said he, "their company alone, I cannot away with." "Look at
the very name woman," says another author, "it evidently means woe to
man, because by woman was woe brought into the world."

The Turk does not exclude woman from his heaven, but she is there only
to minister to his passions and wants. She bears to his lips the golden
goblet, filled with the nectar of the gods.

The Indian hunter believes his squaw, as well as his faithful dog, will
bear him company to those shadowy hunting-grounds beyond the dark river.

Among all these heathen and degraded nations, polygamy has prevailed.
Among them all, woman has been but the slave of the stronger sex. Her
feelings have been outraged, her spirit crushed, and her heart broken;
or, which is still worse, her nature has become imbruted and insensible
to all the finer feelings and nobler impulses of her sex.

But behold the day-star from on high, the lowly Jesus. He came to bring
deliverance to the captive, to let the oppressed go free. No longer is
woman to be degraded and despised. The holy covenant of marriage which
Moses, by reason of the hardness of their hearts, permitted the Jews to
break, was henceforth to be kept inviolate. "It hath been said,
whosoever shall put away _his wife_, let him give her a writing of
divorcement. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away _his
wife_, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit
adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, committeth
adultery." And again,--"For this cause shall a man leave father and
mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and _they twain_ shall be one
flesh."

The position of woman, and her duties in life, are well defined in the
New Testament Scriptures. If married, she is to direct her household
affairs, raise up children, be subject unto her husband, and use all due
benevolence toward him; but his duties are equally well defined. He must
love his wife, even as Christ loved his church and gave himself for it;
and the fourth verse of the seventh chapter of Corinthians distinctly
states that the rights and duties of the marriage relation should be
reciprocal, granting no exclusive privilege to either. Is not this
reciprocity necessarily and entirely destroyed, when the husband brings
other wives into the family?

In the face of the direct and positive teachings of Jesus and his
Apostles, the "Latter-Day Saints" of Utah, or rather their leaders, have
instituted the heathenish and horrible practice of polygamy. And to add
to the blasphemy of the scheme, it is all done in the name of the Lord.
In this nineteenth century, they have reduced women to the heathen and
Jewish standard.

Foremost in the ranks of their oppressors stands Brigham Young.
Following in the footsteps of Mohammed, he declares that women have no
souls,--that they are not responsible beings, that they cannot save
themselves, nor be saved, except through man's intervention. To be
saved, a woman must be "sealed" to a good man,--he can save her; or, if
he does not, her sins will be upon his head. Under this system, woman
was created expressly for the glory of man; hence the more women and
children a man has, the more glory.

This doctrine is openly put forth in the most disgusting form.

Said Brigham, in a public discourse, Sept 20th, 1856,--

     "It is the duty of every righteous man and woman to prepare
     tabernacles for all the spirits they can; hence if my women
     leave, I will go and search up others who will abide the
     celestial law, and let all I now have go where they please."

And in accordance with the same view, he publicly proclaimed that after
a certain day which he named, all of his women who were dissatisfied
should be free to leave him. The following is his language:--

     "Now for my proposition: it is more particularly for my
     sisters, as it is frequently happening that women say that
     they are unhappy. Men will say,--'My wife, though a most
     excellent woman, has not seen a happy day since I took my
     second wife.' 'No, not a happy day for a year,' says one; and
     another has not seen a happy day for five years. It is said
     that women are tied down and abused; that they are misused,
     and have not the liberty that they ought to have; that many of
     them are wading through a perfect flood of tears, because of
     the conduct of some men, together with their own folly.

     "I wish my own women to understand that what I am going to say
     is for them as well as others, and I want those who are here
     to tell their sisters,--yes, all the women of this
     community,--and then write it back to the States, and do as
     you please with it. I am going to give you from this time to
     the 6th day of October next (the day the semi-annual
     Conference was to meet) for reflection, that you may determine
     whether you wish to stay with your husbands or not, and then I
     am going to set every woman at liberty, and say to them,'Now
     go your way,--my women with the rest,--go your way.' And my
     wives have got to do one of two things: either round up their
     shoulders to endure the afflictions of this world, and live
     their religion, or they may leave, for I will not have them
     about me. I will go into heaven alone, rather than have
     scratching and fighting around me. I will set all at liberty.
     'What, first wife too?' Yes, I will liberate you all. I know
     what my women will say. They will say, 'You can have as many
     women as you please, Brigham.' But I want to go somewhere, and
     do something to get rid of the whiners."[219:A]

It does not appear that these unhappy women availed themselves of this
opportunity of getting rid of their misery, by being cast off upon the
world, in an Indian country, nearly a thousand miles from civilization.

It may seem very strange, that so many women are led into the snare of
polygamy. The most specious arguments are advanced, and inducements held
out, by the wicked and designing leaders of the Mormon Church, to blind
and deceive unsuspecting and simple-minded women. They are told that
"the laws of Christendom differ widely from those of the other three
fourths of the whole family of man;" that they are the laws and
practices of "a wicked and perverse generation," and differ also from
the doctrines taught in the Bible. It is a noticeable fact that the
Bible is only quoted on the subject of polygamy. On all other topics,
the books of Mormonism are used. These being, as already shown, adverse
to their favorite institution, resort is had to the Old Testament
Scriptures.

Abraham is constantly cited as the great exemplar and pattern. It is
urged that the family order observed by him is the order established
among celestial beings, in the celestial world. That God sanctioned the
practice, and is himself a polygamist.

That many virtuous and high-minded women should infinitely prefer to
unite their fortunes to _one_ good man, rather than to have each a
wicked husband who could bring her no exaltation in another world.
"Shall such virtuous and innocent females, though they may be poor, and
low in the scale of fortune's partial smiles,--shall they be denied the
right to choose the objects of their love? Must they, through the
operation of hideously contracted laws, be virtually doomed to resort to
infamous prostitution, entailing disease, infamy, and death upon
themselves and their offspring, or to marry an inferior grade of
corrupt, vicious men,--debauchees, gluttons, drunkards, and idlers,--or
remain in perpetual celibacy, and frustrate the designs of their
creation, and violate the first and foremost command of God,--to
multiply and replenish the earth?"

They are pointed to Jacob, also, who had several wives, and who was the
father of the twelve patriarchs, after whom all the tribes of Israel
were named. From one of these wives, Christ himself lineally descended.
Various other instances are cited from the Jewish
Scriptures,--especially the fact that the Lord gave unto David some of
the wives of Saul. "Hereby we learn that God himself gives many wives to
those who are faithful, _and takes them away from transgressors_." The
faith of Abraham was indorsed by Christ and his Apostles, and those who
have the same faith are called heirs of the promise. Hence an effort is
made to bring the New Testament also to the support of polygamy,
notwithstanding it is so plainly condemned in that volume. Indeed, it is
unblushingly asserted that not only the Apostles but Christ himself
practised polygamy! "The grand reason," said J. M. Grant, one of the
First Presidency, in a discourse delivered in the Tabernacle in Great
Salt Lake City, "why the gentiles and philosophers of that school
persecuted Jesus Christ, was because he had so many wives. There were
Elizabeth and Mary, and a host of others, who followed him."

To Abraham and Sarah was the promise made--"In thee and in thy seed,
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." The sisters are called
upon to follow the example of Sarah, and to give plural wives to their
husbands, even as Sarah gave Hagar unto Abraham. "If you suffer with her
(Sarah) you shall reign with her. You shall be heirs of the same
promise, and crowned with glory in the celestial world."

By these specious arguments and falsehoods, are thousands lured on to
their destruction. Oh! could this volume reach the eye of all such,--as
it surely will of many,--to them I appeal to examine carefully the
foundation of the system to which they are committing themselves. To
them I respectfully and earnestly submit some considerations and facts
worthy of their serious attention, before they enter irretrievably upon
their own ruin.

Polygamy, or plurality, so called, is not only contrary to the laws of
our country, which we are all in duty bound to uphold and obey, but it
is adverse to the genius of our free institutions, and is, moreover,
contrary to the laws and instincts of our nature, and to the suggestions
of a sound reason.

In the first place, is polygamy reasonable or natural?

In pursuing this inquiry, the first fact that stares us in the face is
the equality in the numbers of the male and female sexes, in all
countries, and in all ages of the world. If polygamy were the natural
relation between the sexes, the number of females born into the world
would far exceed the number of males. So far from that being the case,
there is a larger number of males, and the excess about equal to the
greater loss of life, among males, by wars and accidents; thus leaving a
substantial equality in the numbers of those living.

The following figures will show the number of males and females in the
United States, at the close of each of the last five decades:--

                                          Excess of     Per cent.
     Year.      Males.        Females.     Males.       of Excess.
     1820     4,898,127      4,740,004     158,123         3.2
     1830     6,529,696      6,336,324     193,372           3
     1840     8,688,532      8,380,921     307,611         3.5
     1850    11,837,661     11,354,215     483,446         4.1
     1860    16,086,059     15,359,021     727,038         4.5

Thus it will be seen, that nature has made no provision for the practice
of polygamy in this country. On the contrary, there has continually been
an excess of the male population. This fact is owing, in part, to the
large excess of males in the immigration from foreign countries.

Let us pursue this subject a little farther. In 1851, the population of
Great Britain and Ireland was,--males, 13,537,052; females, 14,082,814.
Excess of females, 3 per cent. But emigration, and the heavy wars in
which that country had been engaged, had been draining off the male
population for many years previous.

In Prussia, in 1849, there were then living,--males, 8,162,805; females,
8,162,382.

The mortality of males is greater than that of females. To compensate
for this, more males are born.

In England, the excess of male births is 5 per cent.; in France and
Russia, 6 per cent.; in the United States, from 5 to 12 per cent.,
according to the locality.

If, now, we turn our attention to the Territory of Utah, we shall find a
similar state of facts. By reference to the United States Census of
1850, it will appear that there was, at that time, an excess of males in
every county in the Territory, amounting, in the aggregate, to 712; the
total number of males being 6,046, and of females, 5,334. The national
census of 1860 shows the following result: males, 20,255,--females,
20,018.

There has always been, in this Territory, as there is in every new
country, a scarcity of females. No person, therefore, could take more
than one wife, without, as a necessary consequence, compelling some
other person to live without any.

This subject is placed in a still stronger light, by reference to the
report of the Territorial Superintendent of Common Schools, dated
January 14, 1863, and published in the "Deseret News," Vol. XII. No. 31.

By that report it appears that the number of boys between the ages of
six and eighteen, is greater than the number of girls between four and
sixteen, in every county in the Territory but one. The total, so far as
the Superintendent had been able to obtain reports, is as follows:--

     Number of boys between six and eighteen            3950
     Number of girls between four and sixteen           3662
                                                        ----
         Showing an excess of boys, to the number of     288

The thanks of the public are due to Mr. Campbell, for bringing to light
facts having so important a bearing on this subject.

Thus it will be seen that in this Territory, as well as in all other
parts of the country, has nature failed to make any provision for the
practice of polygamy. On the contrary, ever true to herself, even now,
after polygamy has been practised over ten years, during which time it
has been openly encouraged, nature is reëstablishing her own laws, and
maintaining the substantial equality in the numbers of the sexes; thus
placing the seal of condemnation on this practice, and saying, in the
plainest language, "Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman
have her own husband."

In considering whether polygamy is reasonable or natural, other
arguments present themselves.

This practice tends necessarily to the degradation of woman. Instead of
being a companion of man, socially his equal, sympathizing with his
moral and intellectual nature, and sharing in all his pursuits and
enjoyments, she becomes, under this system, merely the minister to his
passions and physical comfort, or the servant to assist in the increase
of his worldly store.

It is impossible that several women should live on terms of such
intimacy with the same man, all at the same time on a social equality
with him and with each other. The idea of plurality necessitates that of
subordination and inferiority. Rules must be established and observed,
to insure even the appearance of harmony. But this necessary assumption
of superiority and power, on the part of the man, at once mars, if it
does not destroy, all the finer and holier of the marriage relations.
The husband loses respect for her who sits at his feet, rather than by
his side. A full and perfect communion of thought and feeling ceases to
exist. A sense of inferiority on the part of the wife blunts her pride
and ambition, and renders her careless of intellectual and moral
progress, and insensible to many of the highest and noblest duties of
her sex. She gradually conforms herself to her position, however hard it
may be at first to do so, and thus her place in the social scale is
lowered.

It need scarcely be asked whether this is an evil. Both reason and
history answer the question plainly in the affirmative. In all ages of
the world, the most enlightened and prosperous nations have been those
who sought to refine and elevate woman by the practice of monogamy, or
the one-wife system. Witness Egypt, Greece, and Rome, among the ancient
nations; and among the moderns, the United States, Great Britain,
France, and other European countries.

A reference to those nations will also illustrate and prove the remark
already made, that the practice of polygamy is adverse to free
institutions. In all countries where the most freedom has prevailed, has
monogamy existed,--a coincidence so remarkable as to authorize the
deduction that the relation of cause and effect exists between these
facts. The love of home is intimately associated with the love of
country and of liberty, and whatever tends to refine and purify the
former will inevitably exalt and strengthen the latter.

Again: polygamy tends to destroy the unity and sanctity of home, by
permitting a man to have families in different places at the same time.
"The supposition," says an eminent jurist, "that a man can have two
domicils, would lead to the absurdest consequences." Hence such an idea
has always been rejected in courts of justice. And yet this very thing
is attempted in Utah, where it is not uncommon to have different
families of wives and children located sometimes many miles apart.
Indeed, one of the Twelve Apostles has families scattered all along
between Salt Lake City and the southern boundary of the Territory,--a
distance of over three hundred miles.

Polygamy requires a law of descent peculiar to itself, and this law,
differing, as it necessarily must, from that in force in all the
surrounding States and Territories, leads to endless difficulty and
confusion in the titles to property.

The evils of polygamy are aggravated by the fact that the consent of the
first wife is not made necessary to the union of the husband with
subsequent ones. The prevailing doctrine on this subject is
authoritatively stated in the following words:--

     "When a man who has a wife, teaches her the law of God, as
     revealed to the ancient patriarchs, and as manifested by new
     revelation, and she refuses to give her consent for him to
     marry another according to that law, then it becomes necessary
     for her to state before the President the reasons why she
     withholds her consent; if her reasons are sufficient and
     justifiable, and the husband is found in the fault, or in
     transgression, then he is not permitted to take any step in
     regard to obtaining another. But if the wife can show no good
     reason why she refuses to comply with the law which was given
     unto Sarah of old, then it is lawful for her husband, if
     permitted by revelation through the Prophet, to be married to
     others without her consent, and he will be justified, and she
     will be condemned, because she did not give them unto him, as
     Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham, and as Rachel and Leah gave
     Bilhah and Zilpah to their husband Jacob."[225:A]

In the case last supposed, in the foregoing extract, if the marriage
ceremony is performed in the usual manner, the first wife is obliged to
stand between her husband and the hated bride, and falsely admit that
she gives her consent, when asked if she "is willing to give this woman
to her husband to be his lawful and wedded wife, for time and for all
eternity."

The result of such a state of things is what might be expected.
Jealousies, strifes, and heart-burnings arise, resulting in most cases
in the breaking-up of the family, or the casting-off of the less
congenial elements.

It is useless to deny these results. The facts are too patent to admit
of any dispute. The alarming frequency, and I may say recklessness, with
which divorces are applied for and granted, is a fact familiar to all,
and can only be traced to the causes just stated, unless, indeed, we
should--as I am unwilling to do--impute it to the promptings of caprice
and passion. Having resided in the Territory nearly two years, it would
be impossible for me, unless I had, in the mean time, shut my eyes to
what was going on around me, to be ignorant of the state of things to
which I have briefly alluded.

It has been urged as an argument in favor of polygamy, that it tends to
lessen the evils of prostitution. Even if this were true, the argument
would have no validity, if at the same time that this evil is abated or
suppressed, others are introduced, more serious, lasting, and
wide-spread in their influence upon society, our country, and the world.
But it never has been clearly shown that polygamy has such an effect.
The argument is made by comparing the most favorable localities where
polygamy prevails with the most unfavorable monogamic districts; for
instance, with the large cities of the United States. But it remains to
be seen what condition any one of those cities would be in, with
polygamy in full blast; and until it be shown that its condition would
be improved, the argument remains of but little force.

Another argument in favor of polygamy, perhaps worthy of notice, is,
that it tends to a more rapid increase of population. Admitting the
object is a desirable one, it has not been shown that it can be attained
in that way. As has been remarked by an able writer, the question is,
not whether ten men would not have more children by forty women than by
ten; but whether the forty women would not have more children, each
woman having "her own husband."

Some other reasons have been given in justification of polygamy, which I
consider too absurd to require even a passing notice.

In a former chapter, the so-called Revelation on Celestial Marriage has
been given, and it was there shown that polygamy was an innovation upon
the Mormon religion.

I desire now to call the attention of the women of Utah to a few
observations on the nature of this pretended revelation, and the
circumstances under which it was given to the world.

1. It was, even if given as assumed, kept secret for nine years.
Polygamy was privately practised by the leaders of the church for
several years, during which time, according to Brigham's admission, it
was not "preached by the Elders," and was therefore studiously concealed
from new converts. Indeed, not only was it "not preached," but it was
strongly denounced during the same period.

On the first of February, 1844, the following notice appeared in the
"Times and Seasons," the church organ, published at Nauvoo.


     "NOTICE.

     "As we have lately been credibly informed, that an Elder of
     the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, by the name
     of Hiram Brown, has been preaching Polygamy, and other false
     and corrupt doctrines, in the County of Lapeer, and State of
     Michigan:

     "This is to notify him and the church in general, that he has
     been cut off from the church for his iniquity; and he is
     further notified to appear at the Special Conference, on the
     6th of April next, to make answer to these charges.

     "JOSEPH SMITH,

     "HYRUM SMITH,

     "_Presidents of the Church_."[227:A]

This was seven months after the time when, according to Brigham Young
and his associates, the Revelation concerning Celestial Marriage had
been given to Smith. But here both Joseph and Hyrum Smith call polygamy
a "false and corrupt doctrine." Can any true follower of Smith, or
believer in his divine mission, believe for a moment, in the face of
this declaration, that Smith had received any revelation on the 12th of
July, 1843, sanctioning polygamy?

Again, six weeks later, Hyrum Smith wrote as follows:--

     "NAUVOO, March 15, 1844.

     "To the Brethren of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
     Saints, living on China Creek, in Hancock County, Greeting:

     "Whereas, Brother Richard Hewett has called on me to-day, to
     know my views concerning some doctrines that are preached in
     your place, and states to me that some of your Elders say,
     that a man _having a certain priesthood_, may have as many
     wives as he pleases, and that doctrine is taught here; I say
     unto you, that that man teaches _false doctrine_, for there is
     no such doctrine taught here, neither is there any such thing
     practised here; and any man that is found teaching privately
     or publicly any such doctrine, is culpable, and will stand a
     chance to be brought before the High Council, and lose his
     license and membership also; therefore he had better beware
     what he is about."[228:A]

Polygamy was condemned at the General Conferences of the European
churches, in England, during the year 1846, and subsequently.

In July, 1845, Parley P. Pratt, in the "Millennial Star," published at
Liverpool, had denounced the "Spiritual-Wife doctrine of J. C.
Bennett,"--which was one of the earliest manifestations of polygamy in
the church,--as a "doctrine of devils" and of "seducing spirits," using
this language: "It is but another name for whoredom, wicked and unlawful
connection, and every kind of confusion, corruption, and
abomination."[228:B]

In May, 1848, Orson Spencer, then editor of the "Star," used the
following language:--

     "In all ages of the church truth has been turned into a
     lie, and the grace of God converted into lasciviousness,
     by men who have sought to make 'a gain' of godliness, and
     feed their lusts on the credulity of the righteous and
     unsuspicious. . . . Next to the long-hackneyed and bugaboo
     whisperings of polygism, is another abomination that sometimes
     shows its serpentine crests, which we shall call sexual
     resurrectionism. . . . The doctrines of corrupt spirits are
     always in close affinity with each other, whether they
     consist in spiritual wife-ism, sexual resurrection, gross
     lasciviousness, or the unavoidable separation of husbands and
     wives, or the communism of property."[229:A]

In July, 1850, at a discussion held at Boulogne, France, John Taylor, a
well-known Mormon Apostle, when charged with the belief and practice of
this doctrine, said:--"We are accused here of polygamy, and actions the
most indelicate, obscene, and disgusting, such that none but a corrupt
and depraved heart could have contrived. These things are too outrageous
to admit of belief. Therefore, leaving the sisters of the 'White Veil,'
the 'Black Veil,' and all the other veils, with those gentlemen to
dispose of, together with their authors, as they think best, I shall
content myself by reading our views of chastity and marriage, from a
work published by us, containing some of the articles of our
faith."[229:B] He then read from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the
article on marriage, already quoted from.

Here we have the following facts:--

In 1830 the Mormon Church organized, and the Book of Mormon was
published, in which polygamy is strongly condemned.

In 1831, the same doctrine condemned, in a revelation to Joseph Smith,
which was afterward published in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

In July, 1843, the revelation in favor of polygamy, _said to have been
given_ to Joseph Smith.

In February, 1844, polygamy publicly denounced by Joseph and Hyrum
Smith.

In March, 1844, the same practice again denounced by Hyrum Smith.

In June, 1844, the death of Smith.

In 1845, the publication of the article on Marriage, in the Appendix to
the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, in which polygamy is called a
"crime," and is again strongly condemned and repudiated. The same year
the Spiritual-Wife doctrine of J. C. Bennett, denounced by P. P. Pratt,
in England.

In 1846, polygamy condemned at the Conferences of the European Mormon
churches in England.

In 1848, "polygism" and "sexual resurrectionism" severely denounced in
the "Millennial Star," published in Liverpool.

In 1850, polygamy denounced and repudiated by Apostle John Taylor, in
France.

And yet, in the face of all these facts, in 1852, we have the same
doctrine publicly given to the church, accompanied by the announcement,
that it had been believed and practised by the church for many years.

Now, it will not be pretended by any one, that polygamy was any part of
the Mormon religion previous to 1843.

Take, then, the period from 1843 to 1852. How was it during those nine
years? Which shall be taken as evidence of what was the teaching of the
Mormon religion, on that subject, during that time? The Book of Doctrine
and Covenants, the Notices published by Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the
declarations of Pratt and Spencer, the action of the churches in
England, and the assertions of Taylor in France, or the announcement
made in Great Salt Lake City in 1852? Are we not, at least, as much
authorized to take the former as the latter?

If the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the writings of Joseph and Hyrum,
the continued and persistent declarations of the Mormon leaders, and the
action of the Mormon churches be taken, then polygamy was no part of
Mormonism up to 1852. And if not previous to that time, it was not
afterward, for Young did not pretend to give it at that time as a new
revelation, but rested the doctrine entirely on the revelation said to
have been given to Joseph in 1843.

2. A singular feature of this revelation is, that in it God is made
expressly to contradict what he is represented as having said in the
Book of Mormon.

According to the Book of Mormon, as already quoted, God said the
polygamy and concubinage of David and Solomon were abominable before
him. The following is the language: "Behold David and Solomon truly had
many wives and concubines, which thing was abominable before me, saith
the Lord."

This was the testimony of the Almighty, as to the manner in which he
viewed the conduct of David and Solomon, up to July, 1843, when he is
represented in this revelation as indorsing those very acts which, in
the Book of Mormon, he had so strongly condemned.

3. Again: This revelation classes Isaac and Moses with Abraham, Jacob,
David, and Solomon, as polygamists; when in fact neither Isaac nor Moses
ever practised polygamy. How could the All-wise Being make such a
mistake?

4. The most remarkable circumstance connected with this revelation
remains to be considered,--It was in direct contradiction to the laws of
the land.

At that time, July 12, 1843, Smith resided at Nauvoo, Illinois, and was,
of course, together with all the other inhabitants of that city,
amenable to the laws of Illinois.

The following statute was then in force in that State, the same having
been passed February 12, 1833:--

     "SEC. 121. Bigamy consists in the having of two wives or two
     husbands at one and the same time, knowing that the former
     husband or wife is still alive. If any person or persons
     within this State, being married, or who shall hereafter
     marry, do at any time marry any person or persons, the former
     husband or wife being alive, the person so offending shall, on
     conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one
     thousand dollars, and imprisonment in the penitentiary not
     exceeding two years." [The remainder of this section relates
     to evidence, and prescribes certain exemptions.]

     "SEC. 122. If any man or woman, being unmarried, shall
     knowingly marry the husband or wife of another, such man or
     woman shall, on conviction, be fined not more than five
     hundred dollars, or imprisoned not more than one year."[232:A]

In the face of this law, which was then in full force, the revelation to
Smith declares: "If any man espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse
another, and the first give her consent; and if he espouse the second
and they are virgins, and have vowed to no other man, then is he
justified."[232:B] Thus justifying the violation of both sections of the
law. People may well hesitate, before believing in the authenticity of
such a revelation.

Here, again, God is made to contradict himself; for not only in the
Christian but in the Mormon Bible, He is represented as enjoining upon
His disciples to obey the laws and civil authorities. The Book of Mormon
abounds in such teachings. The Book of Doctrine and Covenants is to the
same effect:--

     "We believe that every man should be honored in his station;
     rulers and magistrates as such being placed for the protection
     of the innocent and the punishment of the guilty; and that to
     the laws all men owe respect and deference, as without them
     peace and harmony would be supplanted by anarchy and
     terror."[232:C]

Here, again, I may quote from Mr. Orson Pratt, whose writings have been
freely used, as of high authority in "the church."

     "Would it be right for the Latter Day Saints to marry a
     plurality of wives in any of the States or Territories, or
     nations, where such practices are prohibited by the laws of
     man? We answer, No; it would not be right; for we are
     commanded to be subject to the powers that be."[233:A]

Since, then, it was not right to violate the laws of the land, then in
force in Illinois on this subject, how came God to give a revelation
sanctioning such a violation of the State law? And that too, without
making, in the revelation, the least allusion to the law which was to be
so grossly violated?

Again: Who was authorized to keep this revelation secret, no secrecy
being enjoined in the revelation itself?

But enough concerning this extraordinary document. It seems strange,
indeed, that any reasonable man or woman can look upon this so-called
revelation, announced under such suspicious circumstances, and involved
in so many contradictions, as a sufficient authority or excuse for the
establishment of a custom which would overturn our most cherished social
institutions, and throw us at once back thousands of years in
civilization.

The conclusion would not be changed if it were admitted that the
doctrine of celestial marriage is a part of the Mormon religion; for
that has nothing to do with polygamy. On the contrary, this doctrine is
expressly founded upon the relation between Adam and Eve before the
fall. The following is the language:--

     "The first marriage we have on record is that of our first
     parents. . . . Here was a marriage in which the Lord in person
     officiated,--a marriage between two immortal beings. . . . He
     joined them in one, as one flesh, to be indissolubly united,
     while eternal ages should roll on, or God himself endure. . . .
     Did death tear asunder husband and wife, divorce that which
     God had joined together as 'one flesh,' immortal and eternal
     in its nature? The atonement of Christ will repair the breach,
     will restore the immortal Eve to the immortal Adam, will join
     them again as one flesh, never more to be separated, and will
     again let the lawful husband enjoy the society of his lawful
     wife. . . .

     "Therefore, if the children have been married for eternity, as
     well as for time, by the authority of God, the same as their
     first parents were, they will, with them, raise up, after the
     resurrection, an endless posterity of immortal beings. . . .
     But those who do not, in this life, enter into the eternal
     covenant of marriage, after the pattern set by the first
     immortal pair, can never obey the first great command."[234:A]

The foregoing extracts convey a very intelligible idea of this doctrine;
and from them it will be seen it is founded entirely upon the relation
between Adam and Eve. Those who would enjoy the blessings of celestial
marriage, must, "in this life, enter into the eternal covenant of
marriage, after the pattern set by the first immortal pair." What was
that pattern? Adam and Eve were monogamists. Adam lived with the wife of
his youth, and had no other, for nine hundred and thirty years, and
according to Pratt, he is to live with the same woman, in the same
capacity, throughout all the ages of eternity. Surely he must be very
astute who can discover in this "pattern" any sanction for polygamy.

I might enlarge, indefinitely, upon the arguments against polygamy. I
might go into the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, and show that it had
been, in many ways, condemned by the Almighty. That not only had Adam
been limited to one wife at the creation, but when the world was
destroyed by a flood, one wife only to each man was taken into the
ark;--that God blessed Abraham's posterity through the issue of his
first and lawful wife, and in order to do that, worked a miracle upon
Sarah; thus sanctioning monogamy in the strongest manner possible. I
might refer to the warning of Malachi: "Take heed to your spirit, and
let none deal treacherously with the wife of his youth." I might refer
to the fact that Lamech, the first polygamist, was a murderer; and that
the most prominent polygamists of old were men guilty of the most
heinous crimes. And turning from the Old Testament to the New, I might
quote the words of Paul,--"To avoid fornication, let every man have his
own wife, and let every woman have her own husband;" and the words of
Christ,--"From the beginning of creation, God made them male and female.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to
his wife; and they twain shall be one flesh."

But I choose to pass over all these things, and for my present purpose
rest the moral character of this practice upon the assertion, already
quoted from the Book of Mormon, that the polygamy and concubinage of
David and Solomon were abominable before God. No Mormon can gainsay this
testimony.

In conclusion, to review what has been said. I have endeavored to show
that polygamy is unreasonable, and contrary to the plain provisions and
teachings of Nature; that it tends to degrade woman, and to confuse and
break up the family relation, thus weakening the attachment to home and
country. Other evils consequent upon this system have been pointed out.
The arguments by which it is supported have been examined, and have been
shown to be weak or invalid.

A word further as to the case of Abraham and Sarah. Did God sanction the
polygamy of Abraham?

"Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bare him no children; and she had a handmaid,
an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar. And Sarai said unto Abram, 'Behold
now the Lord hath restrained me from bearing; I pray thee go in unto my
maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her.'" From this it
appears that Sarah, and not God, was the author of Abraham's polygamy.
She had lost all hope of having children herself, and was willing to
adopt those of her handmaid. Hagar being her slave, she intended to own
her children. She soon, however, perceived her fatal error. Hagar wished
to assume the rights and privileges of a wife. This Sarah would not
listen to for a moment.

Hagar despised her mistress, and Sarah appealed to Abraham. Abraham
said, "Behold thy maid is in thy hand, do unto her as it pleaseth
thee." "And Sarah dealt hardly with her, and she fled from her face."
Isaac was born. The son of Hagar was seen mocking, and Sarah desired
Abraham to cast him out. "And the thing was grievous in Abraham's sight,
because of his son. And God said unto Abraham, 'Let it not be grievous
in thy sight, because of the lad, and because of thy bond-woman; in all
that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; _for in Isaac
shall thy seed be called_.'"

Again: "God tempted Abraham, saying, 'Take now thy son, thine _only
son_, Isaac,'" &c. And again: "Thou hast not withheld thy son, _thine
only son_." For this reason God blessed Abraham, and said, "In blessing
I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the
stars of the heaven, or the sands on the sea-shore;" but, "in Isaac
shall thy seed be called."

God thus plainly and unequivocally condemned Abrahamic polygamy, refused
to recognize Ishmael as a legitimate son, and disinherited him. He
thence went forth, as a cast-out bastard, whose "hand was against every
man, and every man's hand against him."

Sisters in Israel! You are told that Sarah is the mother and pattern for
all women. She is held up as a bright example of conjugal loyalty and
faith for females--wives and mothers--of all ages. Follow, then, her
example. If through a mistaken faith and false doctrines, you have been
induced to give mistresses to your husbands, turn them from you; purify
your homes, as Sarah did, and the same God who blessed her will bless
you, and multiply your children.

Sisters in Israel! If you have been led astray by wicked and designing
men, and have been caught in their snares, arise, and by the help of the
Lord your God, break the bonds of wickedness, and go forth and purify
yourselves by fasting and prayer; and the God who blessed Hagar in the
wilderness will bless you, and show you a fountain, even the blood of
Christ, which will cleanse you from all sin.

May God guide and direct the afflicted women of Utah, and speedily
deliver them from their thraldom.

The practical working of polygamy is what might be expected from a
system the fundamental principles of which are in direct opposition to
the laws of God and man.

A few instances and illustrations will be given, from among a thousand
which might be adduced to show the unhappiness and misery it entails
upon all parties concerned, and especially upon those females who are so
unfortunate as to be drawn into it.

A Mr. Cushion was engaged to be married to Miss Susan McBride, when he
was taken sick and died. He had been a great favorite of Heber C.
Kimball, Second President of the Church, who desired he should be saved
and glorified in another world. But to that end, he must have a family.
Accordingly Heber visited Miss McBride, and urged her to marry the man
whom she had loved, _by proxy_; explaining to her that it was a
religious duty which she owed to her affianced husband. The poor girl,
puzzled and troubled, and desirous of being in the society of the loved
one, and contributing to his happiness in the next world, consented.

Heber then applied to Robert T. Burton, and induced him to marry the
girl. Burton is the Sheriff of Salt Lake County, and Collector of
Internal Revenue for the United States Government! He is a fit
instrument to carry out any scheme of the heads of the church, and
required but little inducement to undertake this one. The poor girl was
thus disposed of, by being sealed to Cushion for eternity, and to
Burton, as his third wife, for time. She was taken home, and domiciled
with the other two.

These worthy matrons were not pleased with the appearance of a new wife,
and claiming their rights as the only real wives, who had been sealed to
their husband both for time and eternity, resolved at once to make it
exceedingly uncomfortable for the new-comer. This they did effectually,
and Susan's life was a very unhappy one. But time passed on, and she
became the mother of several children.

Susan was not allowed equal privileges with the other two. She had but
one small room, in which she cooked, ate, slept, and spun, while the
other two had splendid chambers and parlors,--for Burton is wealthy.
When she complained to Burton, he said,--"Susan, you know I have only
married you for time, and you must not expect the same privileges which
I grant to my other wives, who are married for eternity, and who will
exalt and glorify me in the celestial kingdom. You ought to be thankful
for what you do receive, and not fret about my other wives."

The first wife takes control of Susan's children, in contradiction to
the entire theory of this complex and unnatural relationship, and the
mother is frequently obliged to see them severely punished, and suffer
in silence. One day the first wife's boys and one of Susan's were in the
barn, doing some mischief. The first wife went out and commanded the
boys to come away. Her own boys ran past unharmed, but when Susan's boy,
the youngest of the three, came out, she caught him, beat him, threw him
on the ground, and kicked him.

This is but one of many instances, where women are living in this way,
being married to one man for time, and sealed to another for eternity.
This narrative was given me by one who had lived in the family for
several months, and saw and heard what is herein stated.

A coarseness of feeling and sentiment, scarcely credible, is another
result of this state of society. Kimball one day met a Mr. Taussig, a
Prussian brother. "Brother Taussig," he said, "are you doing well?"
"Yes, sir," was the reply. "Then you do well for the church too," said
the Second President; "how many women have you?" "Two, sir." "That is
not enough; you must take a couple more. I'll send them to you. Do you
hear?" "Yes, sir." On the following evening, when the brother returned
home, he found two women sitting there. His first wife said: "Brother
Taussig," (all the women call their husbands "brother,") "these are the
sisters Pratt." They were two widows of Parley P. Pratt. One of the
_ladies_, Sarah, then said: "Brother Taussig, Brother Kimball told us to
call on you, and you know what for." "Yes, ladies," replied Brother
Taussig, "but it is a very hard task for me to marry two." The other
remarked, "Brother Kimball told us that you were doing a very good
business, and could support more women." Sarah then took up the
conversation: "Well, Brother Taussig, I want to get married, anyhow."
The good brother replied, "Well, ladies, I will see what I can do, and
let you know."

The next day, Brother Taussig visited the Bishop, and effected a
compromise. By marrying Sarah he was released from the other. After he
had lived awhile with the three wives, Sarah became dissatisfied, and
applied to Brother Brigham for a divorce. Brother Taussig was summoned
before the President, and made but feeble resistance to the application,
admitting that he could not properly maintain more than two wives. The
divorce was granted, and Brother Taussig was called upon by the clerk
for $10. For not having the money, he received a cursing from the clerk,
and Sarah was retained in the royal presence, with the assurance that it
was "no divorce," until the money was brought in. Brother Taussig went
on to the street, borrowed it, and brought it into the office,--and thus
ended this disgusting serio-comic conjugal farce.[239:A]

Other incidents are more serious in their nature. One of them, which
came to my knowledge, would be too horrible to relate, were not the
facts well authenticated.

An old man, a brewer by occupation, married a young girl, as a second
wife. The husband and the first wife abused her shamefully. Finally,
after a long course of ill-treatment, the husband descended to the level
of the brute. On one occasion, which was but a few days after her
confinement, exasperated by her refusal to yield to his wishes, he
dragged her out of bed by the hair, took her down cellar, and kept her
there several days and nights, upon bread and water, until her cries and
entreaties were overheard by persons in the Overland Stage-Office, which
was near by. The matter was investigated, and the poor and almost dying
woman released from the clutches of the fiend. She was taken violently
ill, and soon after lost her reason entirely.

No notice was taken of this transaction by the church authorities, and
the inhuman husband went unpunished.

Wife-whipping is by no means uncommon in Utah. Many names might be
mentioned of men of high standing in the church, who make no scruple of
using personal violence to keep their wives in due subordination. It is
a common saying, that a man who is good at managing cattle, will be able
to manage his women.

One would suppose that it would be very difficult to induce women to go
into "plurality" under such circumstances. On the contrary, so
infatuated are they with the religious view of the subject, that many of
them look upon it as a duty to be performed, and a cross to be borne, no
matter at what sacrifice.

One of the sisters, in conversation with me, expressed her views upon
polygamy as follows: "Oh, it is hard," she said, "very hard; but no
matter, we must bear it. It is a correct principle, and there is no
salvation without it. We had one, (meaning a plural wife,) but it was so
hard, both for my husband and myself, that we could not endure it, and
she left us at the end of seven months. She had been with us as a
servant, several months, and was a good girl; but as soon as she was
made a wife, she became insolent, and told me she had as good a right to
the house and things as I had, and you know," she said, "that didn't
suit very well. But," continued she, "I wish we had kept her, and I had
borne everything, _for we have got to have one_, and don't you think it
would be pleasanter to have one you had known, than a stranger?" I told
her I thought it would, if it had to be done, but I hoped my husband
would not take one. She said, "He'll have to do it, if you and he want
to be saved."

That the system of polygamy is really distasteful to the women of
Utah,--that they are unhappy and dissatisfied, especially the first
wives, is sufficiently shown by the public admissions of the church
authorities. The admission of Young to that effect, made in the
strongest language, has already been given. Jedediah Grant, one of the
"three," also conceded the same fact in a sermon preached at the Bowery,
in September, 1856, in the following language:--

     "We have women here, who like anything but the Celestial Law
     of God; and if they could break asunder the cable of the
     Church of Christ, _there is scarcely a mother in Israel but
     would do it this day_. And they talk it to their husbands, to
     their daughters, and to their neighbors, and say _they have
     not seen a week's happiness since they became acquainted with
     that law, or since their husbands took a second wife_."

Nothing but the strong appeals constantly made to their religious faith
and moral sentiments, could hold them where they are for a single day.
Many instances might be given, illustrating the workings of the system.

The writer has no disposition to bring private individuals into public
notice, especially those who deserve only to sink into obscurity. But as
this is a subject which affects the whole country, and must eventually
be disposed of upon the basis of _facts_, we shall give two or three
other instances, citing cases of persons so well known, that the facts
will not be questioned for a moment.

Mr. Townsend, a hotel-keeper at Salt Lake, married a young wife. The
other wife became disgusted, and refused to remain in the house. So, in
another house back of the hotel, lived the first wife, leading a
miserable, unhappy life, looking upon the second wife as an interloper,
having an unutterable contempt for her, and refusing to speak to her.

Mrs. Captain Hooper, an intelligent and lady-like woman, says she does
not like to think of the subject,--would rather not talk about it;
admits that if her husband were to take a second wife, it would make her
very unhappy, but says it is a part of her religion, and she believes it
would be her duty to submit. It is known that Brigham urges Captain H.
to take a second wife, and it is thought the Captain will be forced into
it by the absolute power, whose behests he must obey, no matter how
contrary to his own inclinations it may be. He was once seen to come out
of the President's office with tears in his eyes, after having had a
conversation upon the subject.

T. B. H. Stenhouse, an active, intelligent man, holding the office of
Postmaster at Salt Lake, under the Federal Government, has a beautiful
and accomplished wife, and an interesting family of eight children. For
a long time after arriving in Utah, he remained true to his wife. She
lived in constant apprehension that her husband would "go into
polygamy," and so much was she opposed to it, that she once said to me
in his presence, that if he did, she could not and would not live with
him longer.

Mr. Cook, the Superintendent and Assistant Treasurer of the Overland
Stage Company, who was accidentally killed in California, was, during
his lifetime, on intimate terms with Stenhouse, and is supposed to have
exercised considerable influence to prevent him from embracing the
pernicious system. It is known that on one occasion, Cook, hearing that
Stenhouse contemplated something of the kind, threatened him with a
prosecution under the Anti-Polygamy Law of Congress.

Cook was killed, as stated, and soon after, Stenhouse, freed from any
restraint except the church and his own pliable conscience, married
Celia, daughter of Parley P. Pratt, a pert little miss, fourteen years
of age, and took her into his family, with his eight children and the
wife with whom he had lived so many years. And this too, in open
violation of a law of the United States, under the government of which
he holds a lucrative commission!


FOOTNOTES:

[219:A] _Deseret News_, October 1, 1856.

[225:A] _The Seer_, Vol. I. p. 41.

[227:A] _Times and Seasons_, Vol. V. p. 423.

[228:A] _Times and Seasons_, Vol. V. p. 474.

[228:B] _Millennial Star_, Vol. VI. p. 22.

[229:A] _Millennial Star_, Vol. X. p. 137.

[229:B] _Taylor's Discussion at Boulogne_, p. 8.

[232:A] _Illinois Laws of 1833_, p. 198. See also Gales' _Revised
Statutes_ of 1839, p. 220, and _Revised Statutes_ of 1845, p. 173, the
same law having been reenacted in 1845.

[232:B] _Revelation_, Sec. 24.

[232:C] _Book of Doctrine and Covenants_, p. 332.

[233:A] _The Seer_, Vol. I. p. 111.

[234:A] _The Seer_, Vol. I. pp. 43-47.

[239:A] To explain the part which Brother Kimball acted in this
affair, it afterward appeared that he was anxious to have Sarah
provided for because he wanted the house that Sarah lived in, for his
daughter, who was about to marry a son of Parley P. Pratt.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE ENDOWMENT.




_Dramatis Personæ._


     ELOHEIM, or _Head God_, Brigham Young.
     JEHOVAH, Heber G. Kimball.
     JESUS, Daniel H. Wells.
     MICHAEL, or _Adam_, W. C. Staines.
     SATAN, W. W. Phelps.
     APOSTLE PETER, Orson Pratt.
     APOSTLE JAMES, John Taylor.
     APOSTLE JOHN, Erastus Snow.
     WASHER, Dr. Sprague.
     CLERK, David O. Calder.
     EVE, Miss Eliza R. Snow.
     TIMOTHY BROADBRIM, _a Quaker_, Wilford Woodruff.
     DEACON SMITH, _a Methodist_, Orson Hyde.
     PARSON PEABODY, _a Presbyterian_, Franklin D. Richards.
     ELDER SMOOTH-TONGUE, _a Baptist_, Phineas H. Young.
     FATHER BONIFACE, _a Catholic_, George A. Smith.
     BROTHER and SISTER JONES,                           }
     BROTHER and SISTER WHITE,                           }
     SISTER MARY BROWN, _to be sealed to_ BROTHER WHITE, } _Endowees_.
     _Several other Candidates_,                         }




ACT I. SCENE I.


     [_Enter Candidates._

_Clerk._ Good-morning, brethren and sisters. Be seated. Brother White,
please state the time and place of your birth, date of your marriage,
and the time when you were baptized into the church.

_Bro. W._ I was born November 3d, 1801, in the town of Portsmouth, in
New Hampshire. I was married January 1st, 1824, and was baptized into
the church April 1st, 1860.

_Clerk._ Have you paid your tithing punctually? If so, produce your
receipts. [These are read, and handed back.] That is sufficient. You are
entitled to receive your endowments.

Sister White, will you state when and where you were born, and when you
became a member of the church?

_Sister W._ I was born September 18th, 1815, in the State of New York,
and became a member of the church in 1852.

_Clerk._ Sister Mary Brown, please state when and where you were born,
and when you became a member of the church.

_Sister Mary._ I was born June 20th, 1849, in Great Salt Lake City, and
was baptized into the church in 1860.

[The Clerk propounds the same questions to all the candidates, and
enters their answers in the record.]

_Clerk._ You will now proceed to the washing-room, the brethren on the
right, and the sisters on the left.

_Apostle Peter._ You will remove your shoes, that the dust of earth may
not pollute the holy ground on which you are about to tread.

[The candidates are then washed in tepid water, and each member blessed
with a blessing peculiar to each. They are then pronounced clean from
the blood of this generation, and a new name is given to each by the
Apostle Peter. They then return to the waiting-room, where the brethren
are anointed with oil, the sisters receiving their anointing in their
own washing-room.

This ceremony consists in pouring olive-oil upon the head of each, well
rubbed into the hair, nose, eyes, and mouth, and allowed to run down
over the person. It is accompanied by a blessing, similar to that
received at the washing. Brain to be strong, ears to be quick to hear
the words of God's servants, eyes to be sharp to perceive, and feet to
be swift to run in the ways of righteousness. This is the anointing
administered preparatory to being ordained a "King and Priest unto God
and the Lamb."

Thus greased and blessed, the "garments" are put on. A dress of muslin
or linen is worn next to the skin, reaching from the neck to the ankles
and wrists, and in shape like a little child's sleeping garment. Over
this a shirt, then a robe, made of fine linen, crossing and gathered up
in plaits on one shoulder, reaching to the ground before and behind, and
tied around the waist. Over this is fastened a small, square apron,
similar in size and shape to a masonic apron, made of white linen or
silk, with imitation of fig-leaves painted or worked upon it. A cap made
from a square yard of linen, and gathered into a band to fit the head,
and white linen or cotton shoes, complete the dress of the candidates.]


SCENE II. CREATION.

_Eloheim, seated upon his Throne._

     [_Enter_ JEHOVAH, JESUS, and MICHAEL.

_Eloheim._ "Ye powers of Heaven!" This day hath Satan, our rebellious
foe, been vanquished. Lest he again presumptuous rise, let us create new
worlds, and people them with beings who by slow degrees shall rise and
fill the place of those by him deceived. Go forth, ye heavenly
messengers; examine well the boundless realms of space, and bring report
from thence back to the Eternal Throne.

_Jehovah, Jesus, and Michael_, [all]. Eternal father! Great Eloheim,
Maker and King of the celestial worlds. Joyful we go, thy mandates to
fulfil.

     [_Exeunt_ JEHOVAH, JESUS, and MICHAEL.

_Eloheim._ Far into chaos proudly ride my messengers. Winds bear them
onward, o'er the deep profound.

     [_Reënter_ JEHOVAH, JESUS, and MICHAEL.

_Jehovah, Jesus, and Michael_, [all]. Almighty Ruler. The way is clear.
Send forth thy Word alone, and worlds will rise, and circle into space,
obedient to thy call.

_Elo._ "Silence, ye troubled waves! your discord end. Thus far extend,
thus far thy bounds. This be thy circumference, O world!"

_Jeh._ Behold the Earth. "Matter unformed and void; darkness profound
covers the abyss."

_Mich._ But see, "the Spirit of God outspread, and vital virtue infused,
and vital warmth throughout the fluid mass. Like things to like! The
rest to several place disparted." And in the air, "the Earth,
self-balanced, on her centre hangs."

_Elo._ "Let there be light."

_Jesus._ "Hail! Holy light. Offspring of Heaven, first born."

_Elo._ The light is good. Let darkness flee into the shades of night,
and light make up the day.

_Mich._ Hark! "the celestial choirs, when orient light, exhaling first
from darkness, they behold,--birthday of Heaven and Earth; with joy and
shout, the hollow, universal orb they fill."

_Elo._ "Let there be a firmament amid the waters, and let it divide the
waters from the waters."

_Jeh._ "Behold the firmament,--expanse of liquid, pure, transparent,
elemental air, diffused in circuit to the uttermost convex; partition
firm and sure, the waters underneath from those above dividing."

_Jesus._ The water still doth compass all the Earth, moulding the
plastic mass, and doth implant, within her genial breast, the seeds of
various life.

_Elo._ "Be gathered, now, ye waters under Heaven, into one place, and
let dry land appear." Land, freed from your prison-house, arise, and be
called Earth. Ye waters,--seas. Now "let the Earth put forth the verdant
grass, herb yielding seed, and fruit-tree yielding fruit after her kind,
whose seed is in herself, upon the Earth."

_Mich._ Oh, sight sublime! The Earth, till now, barren and fruitless
was; "her universal face" now clothed in "pleasant green." Listen, ye
Gods! The morning stars, which in the vast expanse of Heaven, circle
their rounds, together sing. The sons of God, swift-winged angels, shout
for joy.

_Elo._ "Let there be lights, high in the expanse of Heaven, to divide
the day from the night; and let them be for signs, for seasons and for
days, and circling years; and let them be for lights, as I ordain their
office, in the firmament of Heaven, to give light on the Earth." "Two
great lights,--great for their use to man,--the greater to have rule by
day, the less by night; the stars I also set in the high firmament, to
illuminate the Earth, and rule the day in their vicissitude, and rule
the night, and light from darkness to divide."

_Jeh._ Behold, "the thousand, thousand stars, that now appear, spangling
the hemisphere," the luminaries bright, that rise and set, and crown the
glory of the fourth new day.

_Elo._ "Let the waters generate reptile, with spawn abundant; living
soul; and let fowl fly above the Earth, with wings displayed, on the
open firmament of Heaven, and the great whales, and each soul living,
each that creeps, and in the waters generate, and each bird of its
kind,--let each be blessed;" "be fruitful, multiply, and in the seas and
lakes, and running streams, the waters fill: and let the fowl be
multiplied."

_Jesus._ Let Heaven rejoice, let Earth be glad, and hail the dawning of
the fifth new day.

_Elo._ This is the sixth and last morn of creation. Let every creature
forth, from his genial mother, cattle and creeping thing, and beast of
earth, each of his kind. All, all is good, and pleasing in my sight.

_Jesus._ "Now Heaven in all her glory shines. Earth, in her rich attire,
consummate, lovely, smiles; air, water, earth, fowl, fish, and beast are
here, and yet there wants the master work of all yet done; a creature
endued with reason, which erect may stand, and self-acknowledged, govern
all the rest."

_Elo._ "Let us make man, in our own image, man in our similitude, and
let them rule over the fish and fowl of sea and air, beast of the field,
and over all the earth, and every creeping thing, that creeps the
ground." Thou art created male and female, in the form and likeness of
the Gods. Go forth, be blessed; "be fruitful, multiply, and fill the
earth, subdue it, and throughout dominion hold" over all, all else that
breathes upon its bosom. Now all is finished, all complete and perfect.
Immortal Gods, let us to our high seat ascend, that from our lofty
throne our perfect works we may behold.

[To represent the creation of man, Jehovah, Jesus, and Michael stroke
each candidate separately, pretending to form; and by blowing into their
faces, pretend to vivify them. They are then supposed to be as Adam,
newly made, and perfectly ductile in the hands of their makers. A deep
sleep then falls upon the new Adam, and ribs are extracted, out of
which, in another apartment, their wives are formed. They are then
commanded to awake, and their wives are introduced to them; after which
they file by twos into the garden.]


SCENE III. GARDEN OF EDEN.

     [_Enter_ ADAM and EVE, and Endowees.

_Eve._ "Well may we labor, still to dress this garden,--still to tend
plant, herb and flower, our pleasant task enjoined." "Let us divide our
labors," each where seemeth good; and thus, as night draws on, our task
will be accomplished.

_Adam._ "Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond compare, above all
living creatures dear! A doubt possesses me, lest harm befall thee,
severed from me; for thou knowest what hath been warned us, what
malicious foe envies our happiness."

_Eve._ "Offspring of Heaven, and all Earth's Lord! That such an enemy we
have, who seeks our ruin, both by thee informed, and from the parting
angel overhead; but that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt, to
God or thee, because we have a foe may tempt it, I expected not to
hear."

_Adam._ "Daughter of God and man, immortal Eve,--for such thou art;
from sin and blame entire; I, from the influence of thy looks, receive
access in every virtue. Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee
feel when I am present, and thy trial choose with me,--best witness of
thy virtue tried."

_Eve._ "If this be our condition, thus to dwell in narrow circuit,
straitened by a foe, how are we happy still, in fear of harm?"

_Adam._ "O woman, best are all things as the will of God ordains them;
therefore go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more."

_Eve._ "With thy permission then, and thus forewarned," I go.

[Enter Satan, in the form of a serpent, half man, half snake. He
discovers Eve in a bower of roses, and watches her at a distance.]

_Satan._ "Thoughts, whither have ye led me?--what hither brought us?
Hate, not love, but all pleasure to destroy." [He approaches Eve.]
"Wonder not, sovran mistress, fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair, at
my appearance, half man, half beast, but approach and view this goodly
tree, the fruit of which such wonders work."

_Eve._ "Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither," for "of this
tree we may not taste or touch; thus hath our God commanded."

_Satan._ "Indeed! Hath God then said, that of the fruit of all these
garden trees ye shall not eat, yet lords declared of all in earth or
air?"

_Eve._ "Of the fruit of each tree in the garden we may eat, but of the
fruit of this fair tree, amidst the garden, God hath said, 'Ye shall not
eat thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.'"

_Satan._ "O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving plant; mother of science!
Now I feel thy power within me clear, not only to discern things in
their causes, but to trace the ways of highest agents, deemed however
wise. Queen of this Universe! Do not believe these rigid threats of
death;--_ye shall not die_." Your tyrant ruler knows full well, that in
the day ye eat thereof, ye shall be as Gods, and good from evil know.
"Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste."

[Satan plucks the fruit and presents it. Eve receives it, and after
considerable hesitation, tastes, and finally eats it. Adam soon after
enters.]

_Eve._ "Hast thou not wondered at my stay? Thee have I missed;" for I
have tasted of the tree to us forbidden, and such delight till now have
never felt. Taste thou, [offers him the fruit,] and be a God.

[Adam stands amazed and sorrowful, dropping a garland from his hand.]

_Adam._ "O fairest of creation! Some cursed fraud of enemy hath beguiled
thee, and me with thee hath ruined; for with thee certain my resolution
is to die." [He eats.] Oh, fruit delicious, fit indeed for Gods. From us
withheld, lest being Gods, we cease to obey our tyrant Lord.

[They soon begin to see their true condition. They reproach each other.
They discover their nakedness, make aprons of fig-leaves, and wear them.
The voice of Eloheim is heard in another part of the garden.]

_Elo._ "Adam, where art thou? Why hast thou fled and hid thyself? What
hast thou done?"

_Adam._ O Lord, my Maker and Preserver! Thy voice I heard, when thou
didst walk amid the trees, but being naked, I did fear to see thy face.
Confusion dire and shame filled all my soul.

_Elo._ "Who told thee thou wast naked? Hast thou then eaten of that
tree, to thee forbidden?"

_Adam._ The woman whom thou gavest me did give this fruit unto my lips;
and I did eat.

_Elo._ O woman, fair but frail. Why hast thou done this deed of sin?

_Eve._ "The serpent me beguiled, and I did eat."

_Elo._ "Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed above all
cattle, each beast of the field. Upon thy belly grovelling thou shalt
go, and dust shalt eat, all the days of thy life. Between thee and the
woman I will put enmity, and between thine and her seed: her seed shall
bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel." And thou, O Eve, "thy sorrow I
will greatly multiply by thy conception: children thou shalt bring in
sorrow forth, and to thy husband's will thine shall submit; he over thee
shall rule." And thou, O Adam, "because thou hast hearkened to the voice
of thy wife, and eaten of the tree concerning which I charged thee,
saying, 'Thou shalt not eat thereof;' cursed is the ground for thy sake;
thou in sorrow shalt eat thereof all the days of thy life; thorns also
and thistles it shall bring thee forth unbid; and thou shalt eat the
herb of the field; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till
thou return unto the ground; for thou out of the ground wast taken; know
thy birth; for dust thou art, and shalt to dust return."

_Elo._ [To Jehovah, Jesus, and Michael.] "Behold the man is become as
one of us, knowing good from evil; and now, lest he in some unguarded
hour put forth his hand, take of the tree of life, and live forever, we
must forth from hence expel him." We will place from Eden eastward
cherubims, and flaming sword, turning which way soever he may attempt an
entrance.

_Adam._ "O miserable of happy! Is this the end of this new, glorious
world?--and me, so late the glory of that glory? Accursed of blessed,
hide me from the face of God, whom to behold was once my height of
happiness."

_Eve._ "O unexpected stroke, worse than of death! Must I thus leave
thee, Paradise?--thus leave thee, native soil,--these happy walks and
shades, fit haunt of Gods, where I had hoped to spend, quiet though sad,
the respite of that day that must be mortal to us both? O flowers! that
never will in other climate grow, my earliest visitation and my last at
even, which I bred up with tender hand, from the first opening bud, and
gave ye names! Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or rank your tribes,
and water from the ambrosial fount? Thee, lastly, nuptial bower! by me
adorned with what to sight or smell was sweet! From thee, how shall I
part, and whither wander, down into a world, to this obscure and wild?
How shall we breathe in other air, less pure, accustomed to immortal
fruits?"

_Elo._ O man, thy cries of penitence and woe have reached my ears. I
will a plan unfold, obedience to which, rendered with deep humility,
shall by degrees redeem and bring you back to Heaven.

My holy priesthood I henceforth establish upon Earth. To those endowed
with that high calling, as unto me, shalt thou with reverence bow. Their
power supreme, commands indisputable, in my stead, I appoint them unto
you. They are to act henceforth as I myself.

[Here oaths of inviolable secrecy, with the penalty of throat-cutting,
are administered to the awe-stricken and intimidated neophytes. They are
sworn to render implicit obedience to the priesthood, and to depend upon
them for everything; especially not to touch any woman, unless given
through the priesthood.

A sign, a grip, and a key-word are given to the endowees, and the _First
Degree of the Aaronic Priesthood_ is conferred.]

_Elo._ You are now endowed with one law of purity, one key of truth, and
one power of priesthood. Go forth into the world, ye fallen ones, and
seek for truth. Obey the voice of God and his holy priesthood, and I
will send to Earth a Saviour, that through faith and obedience you shall
again inherit your lost estate, again enjoy the ambrosial fruits in the
celestial kingdom of the Gods.

     [_Exeunt all._


SCENE IV. THE WORLD.

     [_Enter_ ADAM, EVE, Endowees, and Sectarians.

_Timothy Broadbrim._ I feel the movement of the Spirit to speak unto
thee. Thou knowest that the world is lost in sin and wickedness. But ye
should "resist not evil," but "overcome evil with good." "If a man take
away thy cloak, give him thy coat also." Raise not thy hand to harm a
fellow-creature. "Charity suffereth long and is kind!" See that no
brother be in want; look ye after the widow and the fatherless.

_Deacon Smith._ Brethren and Sisters,--I rise to address you a few
words, founded upon the following passage of Scripture:--"And there
shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth." Oh, this is a
fearful doom. Oh, ye sinners, hear. There is a lake which burns with
fire and brimstone; you are on the very brink; do you not see thousands
of the damned weltering in its burning waves? You are, as it were, on a
greased plank, sliding, and sliding, as swift as the wheels of Time can
roll, down to this awful gulf. [Sisters begin to shriek and faint.] Flee
from the wrath to come; fly to Jesus; come to the mourners' bench; cry
mightily to God for help. He alone can save you. Come, come, come to
Jesus. Brethren and sisters, sing,--

     "Where shall the guilty soul find rest?" etc.

_Parson Peabody_ [speaking through his nose]. My dear hearers, this is a
fallen world. We are all in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. Satan, the great enemy of mankind, is ever seeking our
destruction. Let us close our hearts against his wiles, and come to
Jesus, and if we are of the elect, foreordained from before the creation
of the world, we shall be saved; and if not, we shall be lost. We can do
nothing of ourselves. We are in the hands of a just and wise God, who
doeth all things well.

In the language of the divine poet,--

     "If you can, if you can't;
      If you will, if you won't;
      You'll be damned if you do,
      You'll be damned if you don't."

Let the brethren remember their covenants, and let them bring their
offspring to the altar, and there consecrate them to God, through the
ordinance of sprinkling; and if they are to be saved, they will be
saved. Otherwise, though not a span long, they will go down to the
bottomless pit.

_Elder Longface._ Brethren,--The subject of my discourse will be found
in the following text: "Whom he did predestinate," &c.

We learn from this,--1st, That we are sinners. 2d, We need a Saviour.
3d, That we must be baptized by immersion. 4th, That we should exclude
from the communion-table all such as are not immersed. 5th, That many
are called, but few chosen. 6th, That those who are chosen will be
saved, without their own action in the matter. 7th, That those who are
not chosen will be damned, no matter what they do, in and of their own
strength; and lastly, in order to have the least opportunity to be
saved, you must join the Baptist Church.

The Lord grant that many may embrace the truth as it is in Christ Jesus,
and unite with "our church," and be saved. The brethren will sing,--

     "O, when shall we see Jesus," &c.

_Father Boniface_ [with pages, robes, candles, &c.]. _Te Deum laudamus._
[They sing.] O Divine Queen of the skies, Holy Mother of God, to thee we
lift up our voices. Grant us thy divine intercession with thy dear Son,
that we, through his precious blood, may be made clean. Bless thy
believing children, make them faithful to their Holy Father the Pope,
diligent in counting their beads, and saying their matins and vespers. O
Holy Mother, keep them from all sin; especially grant them grace to eat
no meat on Friday, and we will ever adore and bless thee, Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit. Amen.

Let the choir sing _Ave Maria_. _Benedicite._

     [_Enter_ SATAN.

_Satan._ Good-morning, brethren. I love you all; you are my friends. I
am gratified to find you so faithful in assisting me to build up my
kingdom. Rest assured, you shall be rewarded. You shall be kings and
princes when I succeed in setting up my throne upon the Earth.

     [_Enter Apostles_ PETER, JAMES, and JOHN.

_Peter._ Why dost thou tempt the children of men, and lie in wait to
deceive them?

_Satan._ "Let me alone. What have I to do with thee," thou follower of
Jesus? I know thou hast the holy priesthood of God,--

_Peter, James, and John_, [all.] And in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the holy priesthood, we command you to depart from hence.

[The Devil foams, hisses, and rushes out, chased by the Apostle Peter.]

_James._ My children, hearken now unto my voice. When in these last days
God saw the lost condition of mankind, his heart was moved with pity,
and He sent with me Peter and John, and commanded us, saying, "Go ye to
Earth, and seek me a good man, of the lineage of Joseph, who was carried
away into Egypt, and of the lineage of the prophets, even Joseph Smith.
Restore to him the lost priesthood. Bestow upon him the keys of power;
make him Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, and let him reëstablish my church
upon the Earth." Behold, this was done, and the same power and authority
has now descended from Joseph to Brigham. Hear ye him, the
representative of God on Earth. Him reverence and obey, and ye shall
advance toward the kingdom of Heaven.

[An oath, penalty, the heart to be plucked out, with agonizing details,
is administered. The utmost secrecy is impressed, and the _Second Degree
of the Aaronic Priesthood_ is conferred, with signs, grips, &c.]




ACT II. SCENE I.

_Room with an altar in the centre._


     [_Enter Apostles_ PETER, JAMES, and JOHN, with the candidates for endowment.

_Peter._ Dearly beloved, you are now in the way of salvation. Be
faithful to each other, and all your brethren. Betray not the secret
things of Zion to the ungodly gentiles. Think not with your own
thoughts, but come to the priesthood. They are the mediators between God
and man. Obey, without murmuring, whatever they command, though it may
seem to you unjust or unreasonable. Your hearts are not so fully
sanctified as to enable you to judge as to the merit of their acts. Be
ever ready and willing to forsake father or mother, husband or wife,
houses or lands, for the glory of Zion, and the upbuilding of God's
kingdom on the Earth. And more especially, brethren, as you value your
eternal salvation and temporal welfare, speak no evil of the Lord's
anointed.

[An oath is now administered, with particulars the most disgusting and
revolting. Another sign, key-word, and grip, are communicated, and the
_First Degree of the Melchisedec Priesthood_ is conferred.]


SCENE II.

     _Another room with an altar in the centre; on it the Bible,
     Book of Mormon, and Book of Doctrine and Covenants. Jehovah in
     the room, and Eloheim in the next, looking on. The candidates
     are ranged round the altar. The Apostles are also present._

_Peter._ You are now in a saved condition, and acceptable in the sight
of God. You are to enter on the work of the Lord, in truth and
sincerity.

"Behold now," saith the Lord, "the wicked and ungodly gentiles; they
have slain the Prophet Joseph, persecuted the saints, and mocked at my
priesthood. Therefore, O Israel, arise in thy strength, go forth and
revenge the wrongs of my people on this perverse generation. They have
spilled the blood of the saints, and wasted their substance. Therefore
let their blood be spilled, and let their substance be wasted."

Let the curse of God rest on this nation and Government. Let wars and
famine, and cruel pestilence overtake them, and let the Church of God,
in its glory and power, rule over all the nations, and fill the whole
earth.

Therefore, brethren, be ye vigilant; and let no opportunity pass to
vindicate the name of your God; and if you cannot do it, teach it to
your children. Let them take it from their mother's breast. Teach it to
them from your bed of death, and leave it for an inheritance, that all
people may know that the God of Israel has set his hand to gather his
people, and to destroy the wicked from off the face of the earth.

[Here another oath is administered, binding the endowee to revenge the
death of Joseph Smith on this generation; to cherish constant enmity
toward the United States Government, doing all in his power for its
overthrow; to baffle its designs, to refuse submission and renounce all
allegiance, and to obey the church authorities, and no other.

Curses the most frightful, penalties the most barbarous, accompany the
obligation, to add to its binding efficacy, and to insure secrecy. A new
sign, grip, &c., complete the _Second Degree of the Melchisedec
Priesthood_.]

_John._ You are the children of the Most High, endued with powers and
blessings. Your robes of righteousness, which you must henceforth wear,
in token of your covenants, are on the wrong shoulder, and none but
God's priesthood can set them right. [The robes are changed to the other
shoulder, and the candidates are stationed in a circle, around the
altar.]

_Peter._ Little children, you are now chosen of God to carry on his
mighty work, and He, through his servant, will teach you how to pray,
that your supplications may reach the eternal throne, and call down an
immediate answer.

[Peter kneels on his right knee, takes hold of the hand of one of the
standing brethren, all of whom are united by a fantastic intertwining of
hands, and prays slowly, all repeating his words after him:]

"O, God, ruler of the celestial world, we have this day taken upon
ourselves covenants and powers from thy hand. Make us faithful to those
covenants; and if we obey not thy commands, let thy curses descend upon
our heads. Make us quick to hear and obey God's servants in the holy
priesthood, and if we ever divulge anything that we have received, let
the curses this day pronounced, fall upon our heads. Make us faithful in
Zion and in the upbuilding of her cause, and at last receive us into thy
celestial kingdom, with all the gifts, powers, and blessings this day
pronounced upon the faithful in Israel. Amen."

_Peter._ Brethren, you are now members of the holy orders of God's
priesthood. Henceforth you are entitled to all the blessings and
privileges of the same.

[The endowees, fitted for Heaven and celestial glory, pass "behind the
vail," a new name is whispered very softly and quickly to each; certain
marks, resembling the Masonic square and compass, are cut in the under
garment, on the left breast; also a similar one on the knee. The
candidates are then ushered into the full light and glory of the
celestial kingdom. The brethren turn back to the vail, and admit their
wives, whose garments are marked in a similar manner.]


SCENE III. THE CELESTIAL KINGDOM.

     _In the centre of this apartment is an altar, nicely
     cushioned, with a cushioned ledge to kneel upon. The men kneel
     upon one side and the women upon the other, each brother
     holding the hand of his wife, also of the woman to whom he is
     to be sealed, with the patriarchal grip. The ceremony of
     sealing for eternity then commences._

_Eloheim._ Children of Earth, you have been redeemed by the blood of the
Lamb, and the power of my holy priesthood. You have been faithful unto
the end, and shall now receive a crown of glory. In like manner as I
gave Eve unto your father Adam, while he was yet pure and holy, I give
unto you wives and children, that you may be Gods in your season, and
that worlds may be peopled by your posterity. [Each candidate is asked
the usual questions, and after the answers have been received, Eloheim
proceeds:]

Because of your faithfulness in all these things, I seal upon you the
blessings of the Holy Resurrection, with power to come forth in the
morning of the first resurrection, clothed with glory, immortality, and
eternal lives; and I seal upon you the blessings of thrones and
dominions, and principalities, and powers, and exaltations; together
with the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and say unto you, be
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, that you may have joy
and rejoicing in your posterity, in the day of the Lord Jesus. All these
blessings, together with all other blessings pertaining to the new and
everlasting covenant, I seal upon your heads, and enjoin your
faithfulness unto the end.

[The candidates dress, get a lunch, and return to the "celestial
kingdom" to hear a lecture by Kimball, explanatory of the whole scheme.
The signs, tokens, marks, and ideas are many of them taken from the
Masonic Order. "The intention of the mystery is to teach unlimited
obedience to Brigham, and treason against the country."]




CHAPTER XIV.

BRIGHAM AS GRAND ARCHEE OF THE ORDER OF THE GODS.

     Organization of the Order of the Archees.--The Grand Archees.
     --The Archees.--The Danites.--Organization of Brigham's
     Celestial Kingdom.--Doctrine of Adoption.--Case of Dr. Sprague.
     --Description of Leading Danites: Bill Hickman, Porter
     Rockwell, Robert T. Burton.--Affidavits.--Recent Attacks on
     Emigrant Trains.

          "There on that throne, to which the blind belief
           Of millions raised him, sat the Prophet Chief.
           .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
           On either side, with ready hearts and hands,
           His chosen guard of bold believers, stands;
           Young fire-eyed disputants, who deem their swords
           On points of faith more eloquent than words;
           And such their zeal, there's not a youth with brand
           Uplifted there, but, at the Chief's command,
           Would make his own devoted heart its sheath,
           And bless the lips that doom'd so dear a death."


The Order of the Danites has been, for many years, an established
institution in the Mormon Church.

Brigham and his two Counsellors form the First Presidency of this Order,
under the style of Gods, or Grand Archees. These are, at present, Young,
Kimball, and Wells. A few, also, of the Apostles, hold the rank of Grand
Archees. These have the power of life and death.

Next in importance, is a body of men called Archees. They are entitled
to sit in Council with the Gods or Grand Archees, in matters relating to
the taking of life. This "Quorum," as it is called, also includes some
of the Bishops and Presidents of other quorums in the church. Their
office is to examine cases of offenders thought to require a summary
disposal, and submit the result of such examination to the Grand
Archees. In some cases, where the utmost discretion is required, they
act as agents and swift-winged messengers, to carry into effect the
decrees of the Gods.

The Archees have discretionary and independent power over the lives of
all gentiles and "apostates."

Next in rank are the Danites, whose office is to assist the Archees in
the execution of their bloody deeds. These are formed into bands of
fifty men each. One band, at least, belongs to each Archee, they serving
under him as minutemen. These "Danite Bands" are generally composed of
inferior officers and teachers, constables, and policemen, and those
who, having committed heinous crimes, as murder, theft, adultery, &c.,
would sooner be sworn to serve in this bloody office, than have their
deeds exposed and receive their justly merited punishment.

The officers in all these grades are solemnly sworn to secrecy, and to
the duties of their respective offices, on pain of instant death.

Where the danger of discovery is imminent, and the matter in hand too
important to be trusted to the Danites, the Archees meet and perform the
dirty work themselves; as in the case of Secretary Babbett, Brewer, and
the unlucky attempt on Dr. Hurt. In other cases, the Danites are called
upon; instance the Parishes, Potter, Bowman, Mountain Meadows, &c.

The Danites are also expected to act as spies upon the federal officers
and other gentiles; to watch the feelings and spirits of the saints, and
to report the first indications of disaffection. Such cases are at once
attended to, and if they are deemed of a dangerous character, are
summarily disposed of.

The spoil is divided, one half going to the Grand Archees, and the other
half to the Archees and Danites who are employed in the commission of
the crime.

When Judge Cradlebaugh attempted to bring to justice the perpetrators of
the Mountain-Meadow Massacre, and various other crimes, several bishops
and many other leading Mormons fled to the mountains, where they
remained several weeks. Their place of refuge they named "Mount Kolob,"
which means "the residence of the Gods."

The remark is frequently made in Utah,--"Brigham is the only God I care
a d-- about." The deep meaning of this is only to be explained by
reference to this organized system of crime, taken in connection with
the organization of the "celestial kingdom."

The theory is, that Brigham Young is a God in embryo. That he is laying
the foundation here for a celestial kingdom. That there will be created
for him a world, which his posterity will inhabit, and of which he will
be the King and God.

His kingdom will be constituted as follows:--

1st. Himself as God.

2d. His wives as Goddesses and Queens, each ruling her own posterity,
with Brigham as husband and God.

3d. His sons and their families.

4th. The daughters, by the celestial law, would, when married, pass out
of their father's kingdom, and be added to the husbands'. To obviate
this difficulty, every man who marries one of the President's daughters,
is obliged to be adopted by and sealed to his father-in-law. The
daughter is thus retained to augment her father's kingdom, by the
addition of her family. This is one reason why female children are so
lightly esteemed in Utah. They cannot add to the father's glory, but
must go to glorify others.

5th. Many young men who have no families, and therefore no kingdoms, are
sealed to Brigham, to add to his celestial glory,--in some instances,
also, men of families, who have not ambition enough to aspire to
kingdoms of their own. This relationship pertains to this world as well
as to the next. Brigham becomes a father to them here, supports them if
necessary, and demands their respect and obedience.

A case recently occurred in Salt Lake, which fully illustrates the power
which Young exercises over this class of his subjects.

Dr. Sprague, an Eastern man, has been at Salt Lake about twelve years.
During most of that time he has officiated in the Endowment House, in
the washings and anointings. He has also had charge of the Tabernacle,
and acted as family physician to the inmates of the Harem.

He has a wife and two children. His son is on a mission, and the
daughter, a little girl of thirteen, is an invalid. Mrs. Sprague is a
model New-England housewife. She has toiled early and late to procure
the comforts, and some of the luxuries of life. By the most persevering
effort, they at length succeeded in building a beautiful house, and
Doctor Sprague's garden is the prettiest in Salt Lake.

The family removed to their new residence in the fall of 1862, and had
but just furnished it. By the Mormon law of adoption, the property of
the adopted child belongs to the father, or is under his control. Dr.
Sprague is the adopted son of Brigham Young. His whole property is worth
not less than $10,000.

Mrs. Emeline Free Young has been very melancholy since Brigham married
Amelia. Her health continued to decline until it was thought advisable
to remove her from the Lion House, the scene of her joys and sorrow, and
situate her more pleasantly. Accordingly one day Brigham called on Dr.
Sprague and wife, and coolly told them that he wanted their place for
three or four years, for Emeline, until he could build her one. At the
end of that time they could have it again, and in the mean time they
could live in the house formerly occupied by J. M. Grant, which he would
have repaired for their use.

The husband and wife were astonished and confounded at this request, and
Mrs. Sprague, under the first impulse of her indignation, said "she did
not relish the idea of giving up her house to people who read novels
every day." "Very well," replied the Prophet, "if you prefer to incur
my displeasure rather than to let me have your home, you can do so."
With this he left them.

The Doctor and his wife began thinking the matter over. It would never
do to incur the displeasure of Brother Brigham. He was their father in
this world, and their God in the celestial kingdom. Then the Doctor was
advancing in years, and should he lose his situation in the Endowment
House and Tabernacle, where would be the support for himself and family
in his declining years? He had served his adopted father so long and
faithfully, should he break with him now? It would never do; so, after
many sleepless nights and much anguish of spirit, he made up his mind to
make the sacrifice. As to Mrs. Sprague, she cared not for herself, but
her poor sick child! She had lived for years almost entirely in the
beautiful garden, and how could she leave it now? With frail and
faltering step she had wandered amid the flowers and fruit, culling this
bright geranium and that lovely rose, plucking this beautiful
strawberry, and that luscious bunch of grapes, and by this sweet
communion with Nature, the child seemed to receive afresh the
life-giving principle. She was now to be torn from her little paradise,
by whom, and for what? No wonder if the heart of the mother grew
somewhat stony at the reflection.

When the poor girl heard that she must leave these "delightful shades,"
she wept until oblivion wrapt her senses, and in a fit of convulsions,
she forgot, for the time being, at least, her cruel fate.

The sisters came to condole with Sister Sprague; said it was too bad.
"Sister Sprague, it is too bad, but you had better do it than to have
Brother Brigham's curse resting upon you."

Emeline, who is really a kind-hearted creature, came and wept with
Sister S., saying she did not want her home, "but Brigham," said she,
"has set his mind upon it, and we don't any of us _dare_ to speak to him
about it."

Young remained inexorable,--the change was made; and to-day the whilome
favored wife and now cast-off mistress of Brigham Young, occupies the
beautiful residence of Dr. Sprague, the fruit of his many years of toil
and economy.

_Bill Hickman_ is one of the most notorious of the Danite leaders. He is
now about fifty years of age. He is a man of medium size, heavy set, of
florid complexion, troubled of late years with weak eyes, causing him to
wear goggles. He is of Southern birth, and a strong secessionist, but
professes much friendship for the United States Government, and the
federal officers. He is wily and cunning, with much of the _suaviter in
modo_, and is something of a lawyer. He glories in a household of seven
"women" and about twenty children, but does not maintain them in the
highest style.

_Porter Rockwell_, another noted character, is somewhat of the same
style of Hickman. Shorter of stature, with the Utah floridity of
complexion, and very voluble in conversation. Anything that is all right
with Rockwell, is "on the square." It is "wheat"; and nearly every act
and expression of a stranger, is of that character.

_Robert T. Burton_, Sheriff of Salt Lake County, and Collector of
Internal Revenue, who bids fair to rival or outdo all the others in his
lawless deeds, is a tall, wiry man, one it would be hard to hit with a
bullet. He is cool and imperturbable; in fact, never thrown off his
balance, never wanting in case of an emergency. No fitter person to
carry out the plans of Young could be found within or without the
Territory, and upon him Brigham relies implicitly. With or without a
"writ," he is always ready.

It is not my purpose to enter into a history of the many crimes to be
traced with more or less certainty to the doors of these and other
Mormon leaders. Some of them will be found collated in the appendix to
the speech of Judge Cradlebaugh, already mentioned. Others are touched
upon in the pages of this volume.

One or two affidavits, from a large number in the writer's possession,
will here be given, to illustrate the workings of the Mormon system, and
to show how little the perpetration of crime stands in the way of the
prosecution of the plans and purposes of the church leaders.

     "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, } _ss._
       TERRITORY OF UTAH.       }

     "---- of said Territory, being duly sworn, says:--

     "About ---- years ago, I was living on the ---- River, in the
     ---- Ward, and was Bishop of that Ward. Was in good standing
     in the Mormon Church.

     "During that summer, a man who had had a difficulty with a
     Bishop living near me, was killed. When the man was missed,
     the Bishop refused to help look for him. Myself and several
     others turned out, and after considerable search, found the
     body. It was perforated by two balls. One had entered the
     back, the other, the back of the head. The difficulty related
     to a girl, whom the Bishop wanted to marry, for a plural wife.

     "A relative of the murdered man went to Salt Lake City, and
     related all the facts to Elias Smith, Probate Judge of Great
     Salt Lake County, (Mormon,) asking his advice. This relative
     told me afterward, that Judge Smith said, 'Keep still for a
     while.' Nothing was ever done. No examination, coroner's jury,
     or investigation of any kind.

          (Signed) ---- ----

     "Subscribed and sworn to before me, at Salt Lake City, this
     18th day of April, A. D. 1863.

     "CHARLES B. WAITE,

     "_Associate Justice for Utah Territory_."

     [Taken in presence of two witnesses.]


     "UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, } _ss._
       TERRITORY OF UTAH.       }

     "----, of said Territory, being duly sworn, says:--

     "I have resided in the Territory of Utah about eight years.
     Some time in the fall of 1855, two men, one of them named
     Frank Keene, rented a house on East Weber, in Weber County, in
     this Territory. They rented of a Mr. Cox, and paid the rent up
     to the last day of March ensuing. Some time in February Cox
     endeavored to take possession of the house. The tenants
     remonstrated, and the matter was referred to the Teacher of
     the district. Cox was a Mormon; the tenants were not. The
     Teacher decided they should remain until the lease expired.
     Cox appealed to the Bishop of the Ward, Abiah Wadsworth.
     Wadsworth heard the case. The Bishop at first confirmed the
     decision of the Teacher; but immediately afterward, he said,
     as the tenants were gentiles, they must leave; and turning
     round to his clerk, directed him to write a notice to them to
     leave within a week. There were two or three feet of snow on
     the ground. Frank Keene was destitute of means. They both left
     as ordered. Nearly a month remained of the time for which rent
     was paid, and there was no pretence that the lease had been
     broken. It was a very severe winter, and a famine was
     prevailing.

     "The next winter, a man by the name of Jones was denounced,
     and his life threatened, in a church meeting. The cause was
     this: He had loaned Lorenzo Snow, in England, one hundred
     pounds sterling, to print the 'Book of Mormon' in the Italian
     language. Upon arriving in the Territory, Jones tried to get
     payment of the money, but could not. It was because he
     insisted upon having his money, that he was denounced.

     "The meeting was held at Centreville; and so much excitement
     was raised against Jones, and so many threats made against
     him, that he fled for his life. At the same time, the order
     was given, that no one should feed or entertain him, but he
     should be left to perish. Stoddard, one of the High-Priests,
     told me that the Bishop was so angry that he came down from
     the stand to kill Jones, in the meeting, but he fled. I saw
     Jones some weeks afterward. He corroborated these statements,
     and said the Bishop tried to kill him.

     "I have often heard the doctrine of cutting the throats of
     apostates preached from the pulpit, particularly during the
     year 1856, when, for several months, I scarcely attended
     meeting without hearing such preaching. They would say, 'If
     you find a man with his throat cut, pay no attention to it.'

     "At one time, my life was threatened by a Danite, and his
     intention to take my life was sanctioned at a meeting, by the
     Bishop and authorities. No cause was alleged, except a trivial
     remark made by my wife, reflecting slightly on one of the
     First Presidents. The remark had been exaggerated and
     attributed to me, and although it was fully explained, I was
     followed and threatened for over a year. At that time my wife
     and myself were members of the Mormon Church, in good
     standing.

     "In December, 1857, Bishop Abiah Wadsworth, of East Weber
     Ward, gave permission to his friends to steal cattle for beef,
     from gentile merchants, and aided them in so doing. In
     carrying on these operations, they took cattle belonging to
     Mormons who had purchased them of gentile merchants. Having
     the brand of those merchants upon them, it was supposed they
     belonged to gentiles. The taking of the Mormon cattle gave
     rise to a church meeting to investigate the affair. I was
     present at that meeting. The result was, that those who had
     taken cattle which were proved to belong to Mormons, should
     pay for them. It was also determined at the same meeting, that
     those who had taken cattle belonging to gentiles, should pay
     their value to Brigham Young, as Trustee of the Emigrating
     Fund. The gentile owners of these cattle had been driven out
     of the Territory.

          (Signed) ---- ----

     "Subscribed and sworn to before me, this 2d day of May, A. D.
     1863, at Great Salt Lake City.

     "CHARLES B. WAITE,

     "_Associate Justice for Utah Territory_."

The names of these affiants, and some of the circumstances tending to
identify them, are omitted, as the writer does not feel at liberty to
place their lives in danger. We do not hesitate to say, however, that
the evidence furnished by them is entirely reliable. Both of these
witnesses saw Burton shoot Morris, and corroborate Dow's affidavit on
that point.

Many of the murders committed on the Plains, and attacks on emigrant
trains, usually attributed to Indians, may be traced to the Mormons.
Some light is thrown upon these transactions by the following statements
furnished by men who were crossing the Plains in the summer of 1863.


     _Statement of James P. Veatch._

     "I am going to Oregon. Am from Newbern, Marion County, Iowa.

     "We travelled on the road from Salt Lake City to within eight
     miles of the City of Rocks, when we turned north, and went
     about three miles. There we struck the old California Road,
     which passes by the City of Rocks. Just before reaching the
     road, we came to a large camping-ground, or corral, covering
     about an acre.

     "Here we saw rifle-pits and entrenchments, and some half a
     dozen ox-yokes,--also bones of cattle. We then proceeded east,
     on the same road, some three or four miles, where we found a
     wagon-bed,--also a letter written by a man named Bradley, and
     directed to Indianola, Warren County, Iowa. About half a mile
     farther, we found a small provision-box. [This statement was
     made at a camp on Snake River, a few days after Veatch and his
     party had passed the scene of the massacre.] We also found a
     Bible, a copy of Wesley's Sermons, and a large Testament.
     These books were pretty well decayed. Some of them we still
     have. Also a volume entitled 'The Wide, Wide World.'

     "About seventy-five yards farther, we found two graves of
     grown persons; no names on them. They had the appearance of
     being last year's graves. We then drove four or five miles,
     and camped near a creek emptying into Raft River.

     "Next morning, after going about two miles, we came to where
     five or six wagons had been corralled. Here feather-beds had
     been opened, and feathers scattered; many were still matted on
     the ground. There was an old chair or two partly burned; also
     a chest, with the hinges torn off, and the lock broken open.
     Also several books: a spelling-book, Bible, melodeon
     note-books, etc. Also 'The Journeyings of the Children of
     Israel.' The name of James H. Smith was in the Bible and
     another book; that of Caroline Smith in another. [Some of
     these books are now in the writer's possession.]

     "There were also the bones of twelve or fifteen head of
     cattle, which must have been killed last summer. There were
     signs of men having been there within a few days. There is no
     emigration on the road this season; but there were the fresh
     tracks of three wagons,--mule and horse teams.

     "About three fourths of a mile beyond this place, we crossed
     the creek. There I saw three or four skull-bones. Others of
     the company saw more of them. At this place a skeleton was
     found, nearly complete. A little farther on, we found a
     cast-iron cooking stove, broken in pieces. Men had lately
     been at this place. A handful of buckshot was found.

     "Near the junction of this with the Oregon road, we saw two
     graves,--one of a man from Keokuk, Iowa, buried in August,
     1862; the other, of a lady 23 years of age, named E. J. Adams,
     and marked, 'Shot by Indians on the 9th, and died on the 12th
     of August, 1862.'

     "Fourteen wagon-tires _and a twelve-pound cannon-ball_ were
     found at this place. We carried the ball to our
     camping-ground, and there left it.

     "Two young men, Francis Kelsey and Harrison Edwards, told us,
     that when they went down, about five weeks ago, they saw two
     wagons nearly complete, at the place where we noticed the
     wagon-bed, but when we passed, they were gone.

     "I know that a train went from Newbern, Iowa, starting about
     the 11th of May, 1862, bound for Oregon. George Leeper, from
     that train, was killed by Indians. A train from Indianola,
     Iowa, was attacked by Indians last summer, their property
     taken, and several of their number killed and wounded. The
     survivors were assisted back to Salt Lake City, _by the
     Mormons_. John Gamble, of Knoxville, Iowa, can give further
     information concerning this matter; also Rev. Joseph Howard,
     Newbern, Marion County, Iowa."


     _Statement of W. F. Lawrence._

     "I am from Appanoose County, Iowa. At our first camp, after
     striking the Oregon Road, I saw three wagons approaching; they
     were going eastward. A man from the wagons came to our camp.
     He was a short, thick-set person, with light complexion, light
     hair, and full, round face, considerably freckled; downcast
     look. He said he was from the outside settlements of Salt
     Lake, near Lovelands, and was out here gathering up old irons.
     Said they came to a place on Snake River, where they could
     walk across on the rocks, but did not dare to go farther, for
     fear the Indians would steal their horses. Said his party
     consisted of three white men and one Ute Indian, whom they had
     brought along to recover their horses, should the Indians
     steal them.

     "He asked if they could camp with us; and being told they
     could, said he would go up and drive the wagons down; but
     instead of doing so, the party went off in a direction which
     would be twenty miles to water,--and this was near sundown.

     "The night before, a man had been among our cattle, and when
     our guide cried 'Halt!' he ran off toward the road. This man
     was supposed to be young Bernard, the '_Mormon from the
     outside settlements_.'"




CHAPTER XV.

RECENT EVENTS.--CONCLUSION.

     Personal Appearance and Character of Brigham Young.--His
     Aims and Purposes.--Solution of the Mormon Question.--New
     Complications.--Military Reviews of Mormons.--Governor Durkee.
     --Counteracting Influences.--The Mines and Miners.--Rev.
     Norman McLeod.--The "Salt Lake Vedette."--Administration of
     General Connor.--Murder of Brassfield.--Order of Young for the
     Expulsion of the Gentiles.--Order for the Murder of Eighty
     Men.--Difficulties concerning the Public Lands.--Murder of Dr.
     Robinson.--The Gentiles flee in Terror.--The Government fails
     to protect its Officers and Citizens.--The Hero of Three Wars
     of the Republic hunted through the Territory.--Rev. Mr. McLeod
     warned not to return to Utah.--The Reign of Terror commenced.
     --The Gentiles call for Help.


Brigham Young is a man of medium height, compact frame, with a manner
deliberate and impressive. There is less of ostentation, however, in his
bearing toward strangers than might be expected in a religious
pretender. His hair is sandy, and inclined to curl; features regular,
and expressive of great determination.

In conversation he is pleasant and affable, but is restive under the
slightest contradiction or opposition. Strangers are favorably impressed
with the first visit to his office. They go to see and hear, and Brigham
looks well and is a good talker. He has talent, and is not destitute of
genius; when, therefore, he is master of the field, and has the choice
of topics, he never fails to make himself interesting, if so disposed.
Indeed, is it not in itself interesting to see and hear the Mohammed of
America?

His early education was very limited, and his sermons are illiterate.
But in that most important of all fields of education, a knowledge of
mankind and of human nature, he is proficient. It is true, that even
here he sometimes grossly errs in his estimate of men. This is because
his experience is mostly confined to certain phases of human nature. In
those phases he is an adept. Outside of them, he brings to bear a strong
judgment, upon a limited range of facts, and if he misses the
conclusion, he has the tact to retrieve his error as speedily as
possible. He has no pride of consistency, which conflicts in the
slightest degree with the accomplishment of his purposes. If necessary
to attain his ends, he is one thing to-day, and another to-morrow, and
all in the name of the Lord!

Much has been said as to his sincerity in his religious professions and
belief. In his younger days he may have been sincere; doubtless was. The
character of his religion, and the degree of his sincerity, at the
present time, may be inferred from the following incident.

A physician at Salt Lake was urged by Brigham to join the church. He had
lived in the city several years, and was doing a good business, and it
was pressed upon him as a reciprocal duty. The Doctor, like too many of
his profession, was tainted with infidelity. "I wouldn't mind joining
your church," said he, "but I don't believe in your religion. In fact,"
he added, with emphasis, "I don't believe in _any_ religion." "Oh,"
replied Brigham, "that don't make any difference. Come and be baptized,
and it will all be right!"

The Doctor _was_ baptized, and became a good enough Mormon. He received
as his reward, from the hand of Brigham, a beautiful young lady as a
"second wife."

Young's talent is all of a practical character,--his shrewdness is ever
ready to extricate him from any difficulty or emergency. As a financial
and political leader, he is far superior to Joseph Smith. As a religious
leader, he is much his inferior. Smith was brave; Young is cowardly.
Smith was enthusiastic and impetuous, while Young is cool and
calculating.

Brigham is a good speaker. Oratory, however, he uses as a means to
accomplish certain ends; and he seldom, even when most excited, says
anything that has not its object. His manner in the pulpit is
impressive and authoritative; and he sometimes rises to a high degree of
eloquence. His illustrations are apt, his sentences frequently pungent
and sarcastic.

He is lamentably deficient in moral sense. No falsehood staggers him, no
blasphemy shocks him. Why, then, should he hesitate at the perpetration
of any crime which will conduce to the accomplishment of his
life-purpose. Even the traveller Burton, his admirer and panegyrist,
thus frankly expresses his doubts as to this phase of his character: "I
cannot pronounce about his scrupulousness; all the world over, the
sincerest religious belief, and the practice of devotion, are sometimes
compatible not only with the most disorderly life, but with the most
terrible crimes; for mankind mostly believes that '_Il est avec le ceil
des accomodements_.' He has been called hypocrite, swindler, forger,
murderer. No one looks it less." This is, perhaps, true; but therein
lies his hypocrisy.

We have already shown that polygamy originated in the passions and lusts
of himself and followers, and was afterward reduced to a system and
promulgated as part of the Mormon religion. So with other phases of the
system. The Celestial Kingdom, the Grand Archee, the Prophet, the Seer,
the Revelator,--all tend to self and self-aggrandizement. Everything
must yield and become subservient to the purposes of his unholy
ambition. Principles, conscience, the moral sense, Christianity, the
divine brotherhood of man, human liberty and republican institutions,
the sacred associations of the home-fireside and of the family altar,
all the thrilling sentiment and ennobling effect of love, the purity and
fidelity of the marriage relation, all the rights of property and life,
all the relations of man to God,--yea, God himself, with all the
machinery of Heaven and the spiritual world, including angels, spirits,
and demons,--are brought under contribution to this one man, and made to
revolve about him,--a confused constellation of chaotic elements from
the mental, and moral world. Neither social nor political restraint
does he recognize. Setting himself above all law, human and divine, he
becomes a law to himself and his deluded followers.

How long this state of things is to last, how big this God-defying
creature is yet to swell ere he is checked in his tyrannical and
blasphemous career, how long this theocratic monarchy is to stand in the
centre of the Republic, remains to be seen.

But the question will be asked, "Is there any remedy other than by the
strong hand? And would not that increase rather than diminish the number
of his followers?" Whether there can be any peaceful solution of the
question is doubtful. Inflamed by power, blinded by ambition, he will
not tamely submit to the laws and the constituted authorities, so long
as he has thousands of obedient followers around him, ready to move as a
single man at his word of command.

The only hope of a peaceful result lies in the gradual assimilation of
the "gentile" with the Mormon element. A wonderful change is already in
progress in this respect, caused by the presence of United States
volunteers, the influx of miners, and the preaching of true religion.
This is seen by Young, who already trembles, as he turns his thoughts
into the future.

Fearful that the migration of miners into the Territory would tend to
lessen his power, and desirous of removing the government troops from
Camp Douglas, he spent several months in the spring of 1864, in inducing
the farmers to unite in raising the price of their produce, and
enlisting the people generally in favor of a combination against the
gentiles. To the same end he has been laboring for years.

On Monday, the 8th of August, 1864, a Convention of Delegates from the
several Wards in the Territory assembled, in accordance with this scheme
and by direction of the "President," at the Tabernacle, in Great Salt
Lake City, to adopt measures for the establishment of the prices of
produce _upon a gold basis_.

The scheme signally failed. Temporarily, supplies for the troops were
brought across the Plains, and were purchased as they could be had. But
General Connor more than hinted that if this plan should be persisted
in, what supplies he could not purchase at a fair price with the
currency of the country, he would _take_. This had the desired effect,
and after some further spasmodic efforts, this attempt to lay an embargo
upon the traffic of the people with the Government, was abandoned.

This meeting, like every other in Utah, merely gave expression to the
preconceived views and preconcerted measures of the leaders. No steps
were taken to raise the wages of the mechanic or laborer. Brigham
denounced the mechanics bitterly, because they were opposed to raising
the price of produce, calling them a parcel of thieves and rascals. He
indulged in a tirade of abuse and vulgar language, unfit for
publication.

This may be cited as one of the instances in which he misjudged human
nature. By espousing the interests of one class against those of the
other, instead of attempting to reconcile them, he introduced a new
element of discord into his already inharmonious kingdom. Two of the
delegates at the meeting had sufficient manly dignity and moral courage
to plead the cause of the mechanic and laborer; also of the poorer class
generally; showing the amount of misery and suffering that would be
entailed upon them by the adoption of the proposed measures. To which
Young replied, in a tone of sarcasm and contempt, that even if he were
to build houses for the poor, and provide them with all the necessaries
and comforts of life, they would not be satisfied unless they had free
admission to his house and the privilege of listening to his daughters
playing on the piano.

The fact that leading Mormons were found to vindicate the people,
notwithstanding the degraded condition which such language implies, and
openly to oppose Young's measures in a public meeting, is a hopeful one,
and of deep significance.

In pursuance of the same policy of segregation of the faithful, and
preparatory to the accomplishment of his ambitious schemes, Young has
established a system of militia training and reviews, confined
exclusively to Mormons. This system he sedulously fosters and maintains,
commanding the Mormon militia as _Governor of the State of Deseret_.

On the 2d of November, 1865, such a review was held on the plains of
Salt Lake Valley, near the Jordan River. On that occasion Governor
Durkee, who had lately arrived in the Territory as the successor of the
lamented Doty, visited the Mormon troops and marched in a procession
headed by Brigham Young. The Organic Act of Utah makes the Governor the
Commander-in-Chief of the Militia, and it would seem to have been more
consonant with the spirit of that provision, and more conservative of
the dignity of his position, to have headed the procession, or if not
permitted to do so, to have dispersed it as an illegal assemblage.

General Connor, who has lately returned to Salt Lake from a brilliant
Indian campaign, is the military commander of the Department of Utah. He
does not look with favor upon the marshalling of military forces
composed exclusively of Mormons, and considers such gatherings but
little better than displays of rebels in arms. The progress of events
will soon determine whether the military organization of the Mormon
militia is conducive to loyalty and good order, or to anarchy and
rebellion.

Notwithstanding these attempts to organize and nationalize his
followers, there are, within the dominions of Brigham Young, and among
the masses of his adherents, various conflicting elements, furnishing
hopeful indications to the statesman and the lover of his country. It
may reasonably be expected that Young will soon appear to the deluded
people in his true character; not as a branch of the Divinity, but as a
selfish, corrupt, ambitious, and very dangerous man.

To this end, every attempt to enlighten and disabuse them, should be
encouraged, and such changes in the Organic Act should be made as may be
necessary to protect the rights of gentiles resident in the Territory.
The extraordinary jurisdiction now exercised by the Probate Courts
should be taken away and limited to the District Courts. The Governor
should not only be authorized, but _required_ to take the leadership and
control of the militia of the Territory. The laws of Congress against
polygamy should be rigidly enforced. Mormon postmasters and other Mormon
federal officers should be removed. These and kindred measures should be
adopted and enforced, until the authority of the Federal Government
shall be fully vindicated and acknowledged.

Among the agencies already at work to accomplish this desirable end, and
to redeem Utah from her enthralment, may be mentioned the discovery of
mines of precious metals, and the large influx of miners,--the preaching
not only of a purer Mormon faith, under the auspices of Joseph Smith
Jr., but the promulgation of the Gospel itself, and of the principles of
Christianity in their purity, by Rev. Norman McLeod, a Congregational
minister of great boldness and talent, who is now firmly established in
the Territory,--the extended and controlling influence of the "Union
Vedette," a daily and weekly paper published at Salt Lake City, and
edited with an ability which is but a synonym for immense moral,
intellectual, and political power,--and above all, the military
administration of General Connor, who, by the discreet but firm hand
with which he has held a check upon the movements of unprincipled church
leaders, by the establishment and support of the journal just mentioned,
and by the encouragement given to gentiles and disaffected Mormons, has
done more to undermine and overthrow the whole system of Mormonism than
all other influences combined!

Much is to be expected from the discovery of valuable mines of gold,
silver, and copper, in various localities in Utah. Already mining camps
have been established, mining companies formed, and villages and
settlements of miners are springing up in different directions. In Rush
Valley, west of the Oquirrh, or West Mountain, about forty miles
southwest from Salt Lake City, is a flourishing mining town called
Stockton, which has been built entirely since the winter of 1863-4. The
mines in this valley are good, and are attracting much attention abroad.
Over fifty ledges have been discovered, which prospect well in gold and
silver. In Cottonwood Canyon copper mines have been discovered yielding
75 per cent. of pure ore. Extensive arrangements have been made for
bringing on machinery, building mills, &c.

It has steadily been the policy of Brigham to discourage prospecting,
and to prevent, if possible, the opening of these mines to the gentile
public. It has long been known that such mines existed, not only from
the whisperings and traditions of dissatisfied saints, but by the
boastings of Young himself, whose vanity would not permit him to be
entirely silent upon a subject so well calculated to magnify his own
importance. On one occasion he said to Bishop Simpson, "I can stand in
my door and see plenty of gold and silver."

These hidden riches, thank God, have been brought to light. Miners are
flocking in by thousands, and their rights will be protected, if
necessary, by the strong arm of a strong government.

Mormonism must soon give way before the advancing tide of American
civilization.

Brigham Young, with his band of desperadoes, may not much longer despise
and trample upon our laws, and outrage the rights of our people. If he
is to be permitted to continue his system of heathen polygamy, he will
be obliged to leave the Republic he has discarded and would have
overthrown, and fleeing from the scenes of his impieties and his crimes,
set up his kingdom in some new refuge,--perchance in the Sandwich
Islands, which have long been one of the stakes of Zion.

The events of the last two years have not been of a character to inspire
confidence either in Young and his associates, or in the policy, or
rather want of policy, of the government, in connection with the affairs
of that Territory. The same spirit of lawlessness and violence which
has marked the entire history of the Territory still prevails. Partially
repressed for a few years, and kept in check by the determination and
known bravery of General Connor and his officers, it has now, since
their retirement from the service and the withdrawal of nearly all the
military stationed at Camp Douglas, broken out more fiercely than ever.

The disbanding of the volunteers was immediately followed by
denunciations of the gentiles, and threats and warnings of every
description. A letter containing the representation of a bloody hand was
sent to the "Vedette" office.

Anonymous communications were frequently received by leading gentile
citizens. Fiery and vehement declamation was indulged in from the
rostrum; and the prophecy was frequently made that in a few months not a
gentile would be left in the Territory. Yet that class of proscribed
citizens kept on in the even tenor of their way; the "Vedette" appeared
as usual, always bold and determined in its opposition to the wrong and
injustice prevailing around it. There was danger that the prophets would
be brought into disrepute and contempt.

At this juncture, it having been determined "in council" that a blow
should be struck, the community was startled by the announcement of one
of the most atrocious murders recorded in history.

On the evening of the second of April, 1865, Squire Newton Brassfield, a
resident of Austin, Nevada, temporarily residing in Salt Lake, was shot
down in the streets while in the company of the United States Marshal,
and under his protection. The particulars, as well as the pretext for
this bloody murder, are fully given in the following editorials taken
from the "Salt Lake Vedette," of April 4th, 1865:--

     "We are called upon this morning to chronicle one of the most
     cold-blooded and inhuman murders that has ever fallen under
     our notice--unparalleled even in the bloody record of Utah's
     foulest crimes. The victim of this last exhibition of the
     hellish doctrine of 'blood atonement,' promulgated by these
     fiends of hell from the rostrum of their Tabernacle, is Squire
     Newton Brassfield, late a resident of Austin, Nevada, by
     business a freighter, and aged about thirty years. The
     circumstances which led to his murder are briefly as
     follows:--

     "On the evening of the 27th ult. Mr. Brassfield was married by
     Judge McCurdy, of the Supreme Court, to Mary, _second_ wife of
     A. N. Hill, a Mormon missionary now in Europe. A short time
     after the marriage, Brassfield went with his wife to her late
     residence to get her clothes and household goods which had
     been packed up ready for removal. While there he was arrested
     by the city police, charged _with resisting an officer_, and
     lodged all night in the county jail. The next morning he was
     taken before the Probate Court to answer the charge, and bound
     over in the sum of five hundred dollars to await the action of
     the Grand Jury. The next day two indictments were brought
     against him, one on the charge above named, and the other for
     larceny,--for being present and assisting in taking away his
     wife's goods and clothing. He gave bail in the sum of one
     thousand dollars. On Monday last his counsel, Major C. H.
     Hempstead, quashed the indictment for resisting an officer,
     and proceeded to trial on the charge of larceny. The trial was
     not concluded when the court adjourned on Monday, and was to
     have been continued on the following day.

     "The wife had two children, one nine and the other five years
     of age. About these children a contest was evident--Mrs.
     Brassfield claiming them, and the friends of Hill being
     determined to keep them from her. The mother obtained a writ
     of _habeas corpus_ from Judge McCurdy, and the Hill party from
     the Probate Court, each claiming the right to the custody of
     the children. The writ of Judge McCurdy was first executed,
     and a hearing held by him last Saturday night. Major Hempstead
     argued the case for the petitioner, and claimed that as Hill
     had a wife living at the time of his alleged marriage with
     Mrs. Brassfield, it was illegal and void, and that, as there
     was no legal father, the mother was entitled to the custody of
     the minor children. Thus the legality of polygamous marriages
     was made a direct issue in the case. Judge Snow appeared
     against the petitioner and in the capacity of Deputy
     Attorney-General of the Territory, and desired further time to
     prepare the case of the defendant, and the hearing was
     continued until Monday evening at seven o'clock.

     "At that hour the house was crowded, the friends of both
     parties being present in large numbers. After a few
     preliminary remarks and the filing of some papers by Judge
     Snow, the hearing was again adjourned until Wednesday morning
     at ten o'clock. The children in the mean time had been
     committed to the custody of the United States Marshal, Hosmer,
     until further orders of the court, and on Monday the writ from
     the Probate Court was served on him, when he appeared before
     Judge Smith and stated that he held the children by order of
     Judge McCurdy, and declined to produce them in that court,
     when he was threatened with an attachment for contempt, and
     warned that unless he produced the children _he would be
     imprisoned in the county jail_! The Probate Court of Salt
     Lake, imprisoning a United States Marshal, for obeying an
     order of the Supreme Court! Our readers can make their own
     comments.

     "Thus stood the several phases of the case at the adjournment
     of Judge McCurdy's court on Monday evening. The court
     adjourned at about half-past eight o'clock, and on his way
     home, and while in company with the United States Marshal,
     Hosmer, Mr. Brassfield was shot and killed; adding another to
     the long list of victims of Mormon 'law' and Mormon
     'justice.'"


     "STATEMENT OF MARSHAL HOSMER.

     "About half-past eight o'clock on Monday evening, the second
     instant, I was accompanying Mr. Brassfield home to the
     National Hotel from Independence Hall. As we turned the corner
     by the small building west of the hotel, a man who stood
     between the bay-window and door of that building advanced one
     step from the corner and fired at Mr. Brassfield, the shot
     taking effect in his arm and side; four buck-shot entered the
     arm, one striking the elbow joint and breaking the arm. The
     fifth shot, which was much larger than the others, entered his
     right side. When the gun was fired Mr. Brassfield fell, and
     said, 'O my God! I am shot!' He was carried into the
     International Hotel, where he lingered in agony about
     forty-five minutes and then expired. The assassin, after
     firing, ran across the street, and turning the corner by the
     theatre, continued in a northerly direction. As he passed the
     St. Charles Restaurant, he was fired at twice by a policeman.
     I lost sight of him as he turned the corner of the theatre."


     "THE FEELING AMONG THE PEOPLE.

     "It would be useless to deny the fact that in the opinion of
     the gentile community of this city, the killing of Mr.
     Brassfield was a deliberately planned scheme, concocted and
     advised by men high in authority in the Mormon Church. It is a
     reminder of the days that were, and a foretaste of what will
     be again 'when the troops are removed.' The community is
     struck dumb at the appalling audacity of the affair. Men say
     but little, but the lowering brows and compressed lips
     everywhere visible, bespeak a rising storm, which, when it
     bursts, will be very hard to control."


     "THE SPIRIT OF ASSASSINATION.

     "From time to time during the past nineteen years, the people
     have been almost palsied with the announcement of dark and
     fearful crimes committed within the limits of this
     Territory--crimes of the greatest magnitude and of the
     blackest character have been perpetrated, and in no known
     instance have the guilty parties been brought to the tribunal
     of justice.

     "The Mountain Meadow massacre, the Parish, Potter, and Forbes
     murders, the assassination of Sergeant Pike on the main street
     of Salt Lake City, in broad daylight, were all committed with
     an impunity and immunity from punishment having no parallel
     elsewhere in the country.

     "Last Monday evening the community was astounded with the
     intelligence of another foul assassination committed on
     Theatre Street, only a few steps east of Main Street.

     "The man who was assassinated was known throughout Nevada, and
     more particularly at Austin and Reese River, as one of the
     best and most reliable citizens of that State, and was engaged
     in the freighting business between this place and Reese River.
     His conduct, while here, was that of a good, quiet, peaceable
     citizen, violating no law of the land, interfering in no way
     with the legitimate business of any person, and honored and
     respected by all who knew him."

This high-handed outrage was immediately followed by a fulmination from
Brigham Young, warning the gentiles to leave the Territory, and throwing
out various dark hints of the consequences in case the warning should be
disregarded.

The serious character of this order was well understood in that
community, and had the effect to cause many citizens to quietly take
themselves out of harm's way.

For the information of those who may doubt whether anything criminal was
intended by this edict, or whether Young would scruple in the use of
means in carrying out his plan of getting rid of the gentiles, we refer
them to the Order of Brigham issued in 1858, for the murder of eighty
men by his Danite followers. The following is a copy of the Order:--

     "SALT LAKE CITY, _April 9, 1858_.


     "SPECIAL ORDER.

     "The officer in command of escort is hereby ordered to see
     that every man is well prepared with ammunition and have it
     ready at the time you see those teamsters a hundred miles from
     the settlements. President Young advises that they should be
     all killed to prevent them from returning to Bridger to join
     our enemies. Every precaution should be taken and see that not
     one escapes. Secrecy is required.

     "By order of Genl. DANL. H. WELLS.
       JAMES FERGUSON, _Asst. Adjt. Genl._"

The teamsters alluded to were eighty in number, discharged from
Johnson's command when at Fort Bridger, and were _en route_ to
California. Maloney, who commanded the escort, is and has been for four
years employed at Camp Douglas. He was too humane to execute the order.
He however preserved it, and it is now in the possession of Hon. John
Titus, Chief Justice of the Territory. The signature of Ferguson is
authenticated under oath, by two prominent Mormons of Salt Lake. The
Mormons have on several occasions attempted to take the life of Maloney,
and only a short time since destroyed a house of his near Camp Douglas.

About this time a new source of difficulty arose in the settlement of
the public lands. The entire body of land in the Territory belongs to
the United States Government, subject to the claims of Indian tribes
roving through the country. The land has never been open to market. But
very little of it, indeed, has ever been surveyed.

The Mormons claim to own the valley of the Salt Lake, and all the
adjacent country; not only that which they have reduced to possession,
but the square miles of adjoining land untouched by human being.

But the gentiles were not disposed to concede the rightfulness of these
claims. In the summers of 1865-66, various settlements were made upon
the public lands in Utah, under the National Homestead Act, by
anti-Mormon or gentile citizens.

The Mormons affected to consider this an infringement of their rights,
and from denunciations and threats proceeded to open violence to prevent
these intrusions.

Some account of these outrages is given in the following extracts from a
letter written by Captain S. E. Jocelyn, and published in the "Chicago
Republican," of January 4, 1867.

As the writer is fully posted in relation to the recent history of the
Territory, I have given other quotations also, from the same letter:--

     "CHICAGO, _Dec. 28, 1866_.

     "It has been my fortune to reside in Utah Territory during the
     last four years, whence I have recently arrived in your city.
     While _en route_, and since my arrival in 'America'--for so
     the gentiles are accustomed to call the Eastern States--I have
     observed a great and universal interest existing on all hands
     concerning affairs among the Mormons.

     "As early as last spring threats were made by the Mormon
     authorities toward certain parties, not Mormons, then doing
     business of one kind or another in Salt Lake City, looking to
     the forcible entry of their premises and the destruction of
     property without due process of law. These threats were of a
     general character, and it was believed that, under cover of
     breaking up certain places where disreputable business was
     carried on, it was the intention to destroy other
     establishments of a different character, but interfering with
     certain monopolies of the city and church patriarchs. To
     prevent this, the local military commander, under constructive
     orders from Gen. Sherman, called upon Brigham Young to exact a
     promise that no violence should be done to private property
     without due process of law, which, after some hesitation, was
     obtained. Matters progressed smoothly until the adjournment of
     Congress, for, fearing the effect on that body of any violent
     measures inaugurated against gentiles, Brigham kept his
     promise strictly. But no sooner did the telegraph flash across
     the continent the announcement of the adjournment of Congress,
     than his pent-up wrath broke forth, and he openly urged the
     policy of violence toward the gentiles. With regard to the
     public lands, he said repeatedly that he owned land, and
     plenty of it, and any man who attempted to 'jump' the same
     should have 'a preëmption title which would last till the
     resurrection.' This was called forth by the fact that a number
     of locations had already been made by discharged soldiers and
     others upon unoccupied land lying along the west bank of the
     Jordan River, contiguous to Salt Lake City, and there was
     considerable talk of many others following in the same course,
     induced by the prospective coming of the Pacific Railroad, and
     a desire to obtain as eligible situations for homes convenient
     thereto as possible. But the idea of allowing gentiles to
     settle in any considerable numbers in the vicinity of Mormon
     communities is totally at variance with the well-understood
     policy of the leaders, and must, therefore, be prevented by
     every possible means--else, what would become of polygamy?
     Hence the hostility of Brigham Young to any such scheme as
     they contemplated, for in it he scented danger to his favorite
     institution, and hence, too, his threat of death to 'land
     jumpers.'

     "Now the fact is that there has never been, to my knowledge,
     one foot of land '_jumped_' in Utah; in other words, no
     locations whatever have been made or attempted by gentiles
     except upon totally unoccupied lands. But, in violation of the
     Territorial organic act, the Legislative Assembly of Utah has,
     from time to time, granted away to Brigham Young, and others,
     certain valuable timber and tracts of arable lands for a
     nominal consideration, and it is to protect these from gentile
     intrusion, as well as for reasons already stated, that a reign
     of terror has been inaugurated.

     "As early as last August, the writer of this article called
     attention, in the columns of the 'Salt Lake Vedette,' to the
     threats being made by the Mormon Head Centre to inflame the
     passions of his followers, predicting the result which has
     already been reached, and putting his language on record, that
     it might be known who should be held responsible when the
     event transpired.

     "On the night of September 24th occurred the Jordan outrage,
     in which a number of land preëmptors were attacked about
     midnight by a gang of some forty or fifty ruffians, disguised
     and armed, and flagrantly abused, their houses destroyed,
     themselves thrown into the river, and their lives only saved
     by a promise to leave the Territory within forty-eight hours.
     One in attempting to get away, was fired upon and wounded, but
     effected his escape--very fortunately for the entire party
     beyond a doubt, for there can be little question that the
     original purpose was to put them all out of the way, which
     would certainly have been accomplished had any of the forty or
     fifty shots fired at the fugitive taken fatal effect. The
     better nature of some of the party prevailed over the
     malignant influence of the master whom they served, and they
     probably hoped to reach the result he desired--terror to
     gentiles--by less sanguinary means than those he contemplated.
     The result proved them wrong, for the parties warned did not
     leave the Territory, though any further attempts to secure
     homesteads were abandoned. Then followed the demolition of a
     portion of Dr. Robinson's premises, three of the city police,
     including the chief, being identified as accomplices, and held
     to answer therefor. Then the abduction of Mr. Weston, of the
     'Vedette,' to a remote part of the city, where he was
     subjected to the most shameful indignities at the hands of a
     half score of miscreants, some of whom, at least, he
     recognized as belonging to the city police."

These outrages were closely followed by another atrocious murder, only
equalled in ferocity and cold-blooded cruelty by that of Brassfield.

On the 22d day of October, 1866, Dr. J. K. Robinson, a prominent and
influential citizen of Salt Lake City, who had recently had some
difficulty with the city authorities, was shot in the streets, but a few
steps from his own door. He had retired for the evening, when he was
called up and requested to go a short distance to attend upon a
neighbor, who, it was alleged, had broken his leg.

He quickly obeyed the call, followed his summoners a few rods from the
house, when he was brutally assassinated by those who had him in charge.
The following allusion to this murder is from the letter of Captain
Jocelyn already quoted from:--

     "I do not hesitate to state my most earnest conviction that
     Brigham Young is the author of Dr. Robinson's assassination,
     and in this I do not go one iota beyond the public opinion of
     all gentiles in Salt Lake City, and, I have no doubt, of the
     Mormons as well, could their secret thoughts be known. He
     signified his consent, which was the victim's death warrant;
     some of his satellites--probably Daniel H. Wells--made the
     detail for the execution; and not the least hideous feature of
     the whole affair is, that, in all probability, the
     perpetrators of that most atrocious crime feel no guilt for
     this deed, have no visitations of remorse or compunctions of
     conscience in consequence, but consider that they have only
     done their duty and proved their faith in thus obeying the
     behests of their Prophet. I will trace the chain of evidence
     leading to the foregoing conclusion; Brigham Young is the
     Mormon Church, since therein his word is law. It is the
     deliberate policy of the church to isolate Mormonism from the
     intrusion of persons averse to the peculiar faith it teaches.
     That such is the burden of the discourses of its leaders
     throughout the Territory, and has been for years, will not be
     seriously disputed by any sensible Mormon. Hence their
     strenuous efforts to settle up the valleys, or the more
     desirable portions, by gathering the saints together from all
     parts of the world, and concentrating their force in Utah. In
     Missouri they controlled one county by this means; they now
     control, and will, if possible perpetuate their authority over
     an entire Territory which, they hope may become a State, under
     the absolute dominion of Brigham Young. To effect this,
     gentiles cannot be permitted to mingle with Mormons unopposed,
     nor to settle in their vicinity, on account of the dangerous
     influence they would thus exert. The control of the church
     authorities over personal actions extends to every possible
     circumstance. When the headquarters of the District of Utah
     were established in Salt Lake City by order one year ago, his
     authority was exercised to prevent the lease of any buildings
     for that or any other public purpose, and the person from whom
     they were finally obtained was afterward 'cut off' from the
     church for disregard of 'counsel' in that particular, and has
     since been subjected to all manner of petty persecution in
     consequence. Dr. Robinson had leased certain city property,
     which he managed without regard to the wishes of the Mormon
     magnates. Formerly the property of an elder in the church, it
     was now the place where the 'Vedette' newspaper found refuge,
     when driven from every other covert. Moreover, Dr. Robinson
     was foremost in encouraging the idea that gentiles, as well as
     Mormons, had rights in Utah, and among them a right to a
     portion of the public domain, whereon to build themselves
     homes. Acting upon this unorthodox theory, he, with others,
     had procured the survey of certain lands near the city,
     including the famous Warm Sulphur Springs, and had taken all
     the necessary steps to perfect a title, according to act of
     Congress regulating the location of cities on the public
     domain.

     "The buildings in process of erection thereon were demolished,
     and there the matter rested for more than a year, when it was
     formally revived by Dr. Robinson, who brought the case before
     the United States Third District Court, praying to be put in
     possession of his property, from which he was unlawfully
     restrained.

     "About the same time other parties began locating on vacant
     land near the city, as already stated. No objection was made
     by any person, however, until Brigham Young began his
     inflammatory harangues, giving the key-note of assassination.
     Early in October the semi-annual conference convened in Salt
     Lake City, and it was attended beyond all precedent. To the
     thousands there assembled he repeated all his violent
     language,--and no man knows better how to inspire his hearers
     with his own purposes,--concluding by taking a vote, in
     effect, whether the policy thus strenuously urged should be
     adopted and at once inaugurated.

     "What more was necessary for him to do? Not to strike the
     blow, surely, for there were hundreds ready to do that; all
     they wanted was to be told _who_, _where_, and _when_. The
     event was predicted by the writer in a communication to the
     'New York Tribune,' dated ten days previous to Dr. Robinson's
     assassination. None knew, indeed, on whom the blow would
     descend, but all felt sure it was impending. To my personal
     knowledge many of those who believed or knew themselves under
     ban took extraordinary precautions to meet the threatened
     danger.

     "On Saturday, October 20th, Dr. Robinson, acting under legal
     advice, called on Daniel H. Wells, Mayor of the city,
     'Lieutenant-General' of the Utah militia, and only second to
     Brigham Young in the church, to demand payment of the city for
     damages done to his premises by police acting under Wells's
     orders without due process of law. Wells no sooner learned
     that he was the person contesting the Warm Springs case, than
     he ordered him from his house, with every circumstance of
     gross insult. On the night of Monday following Dr. Robinson
     was murdered. The full moon made the night almost as light as
     day. There were at least seven of the assassins. They did the
     deed, knowing that within twenty steps a witness was observing
     them. They did not rifle the pockets of their victim. The
     deduction is irresistible. No mere murderers would commit so
     heinous a crime under such circumstances, unless certain of
     adequate backing and sure protection. He had no personal
     enemies. Who desired his death? Who could protect his
     murderers? I leave the answer to public opinion, which, I
     trust, may soon compel our timid lawgivers to do their duty.
     For myself, I have no doubt on the point. I know as well as I
     ever hope to know who caused the murder of Dr. Robinson. I
     feel and write warmly on the subject, for the victim was my
     intimate friend. Not three days before his foul murder, he
     expressed to me a sense of the danger he felt himself exposed
     to in attempting, single-handed, to fight the Mormon
     authorities of Salt Lake City. The event very soon proved how
     prophetic were those fears. I was by his side only a few
     minutes after he was stricken down--held his hand and felt the
     last faint pulse that flitted from his heart when he died. Who
     could look upon such a sight--a strong man basely stricken
     down in his early prime by assassin hands, his family crushed
     with the awful weight of such a sorrow--and not feel it a duty
     to use every means which honor allows to bring the
     perpetrators to punishment. During my residence in Utah I have
     carefully studied the Mormon system, and confidently assert it
     to be dangerous to the commonweal. I have traced the
     connection between public utterances of the leaders and crimes
     wherewith they have been charged, and entertain no doubt of
     their guilt from evidences found in their own record.

     "Well, Dr. Robinson sleeps in the cemetery at Camp Douglas,
     the second victim of Mormon hatred to gentiles, within the
     year, whose ashes repose therein. They sleep as do the
     Parishes, the innocents slaughtered at the Mountain Meadows,
     and the hundreds of other victims who have perished to appease
     the insatiate demon of blood-atonement--the tutelary deity by
     whose fell assistance Brigham Young maintains his power, and
     hopes to accomplish his evil purposes."

The following comments upon the same affair, together with the closing
portion of the eloquent speech of Governor Weller before the Coroner's
Jury, are taken from the "San Francisco Bulletin" of November 16th,
1866:--

     "SAN FRANCISCO, _Nov._ 16th.

     "The gentiles of Salt Lake may find very great attractions in
     a business way in that city, but they do not dwell in very
     secure habitations. Now and then one of their number is taken
     off as stealthily as when a wolf pounces down upon the fold.
     Bassfield made himself obnoxious by a marriage, and his days
     were numbered. The manner of his taking off was well known,
     but it availed nothing to trace the crime to its perpetrators.
     Mormon vengeance selects a shining mark even though it lets
     its bolts fly in the dark, and there is always a Mormon moral
     to the tragedy.

     "The recent assassination of Dr. J. K. Robinson, in Salt Lake
     City, does not differ in its diabolical features from others
     which preceded it. He was a representative man, and as such,
     the murder may have peculiar significance.

     "Robinson in 1864 was Assistant Surgeon of United States
     Volunteers, and soon after took charge of the hospital at Camp
     Douglas, near Salt Lake City, and sometime after, being
     mustered out of the service, he settled down in that city as a
     regular practitioner of medicine, which pursuit he followed
     with success, and was a leading man, at least among the
     gentiles. Indeed, it was said that no man stood higher,
     socially or morally. It seems that Robinson was at the time
     contesting a claim known as the Warm Springs, before the
     United States Territorial Court, and with good prospect of
     ultimate success. His opponents were, of course, Mormons, and
     may have chosen a more expeditious way of quieting title by
     quieting the claimant at the same time. But certainly a Mormon
     jury could have settled the claim without blood; only there
     might not have been such an impressive and saintly moral for
     the benefit of the gentiles.

     "But there were other reasons why Robinson's permanent absence
     was deemed far more desirable than his presence. He had been
     very active in educational and religious enterprises, not
     altogether after the pattern prescribed by the saints. Nearly
     two years ago Rev. Norman McLeod, a Congregational minister,
     commenced preaching at Camp Douglas, and finding so much
     encouragement from Gen. Connor and the whole gentile
     community, he established a preaching station in the city, and
     finally organized a church. An intelligent congregation was
     gathered every Sunday to hear a gentile preacher in the city
     of the saints. Money was liberally subscribed, and a church
     edifice, we believe, was in process of erection. A
     Sunday-school was organized, and considerable assistance was
     sent from this city. Dr. Robinson was the Superintendent of
     the Sunday-school, and was very effective in all matters
     connected with the new religious society. Some time in March
     last, Rev. Mr. McLeod was summoned to Washington by a
     Congressional Committee to state the results of his
     observations concerning the attitude of the Mormons toward the
     Federal Government, and such other knowledge concerning the
     workings of Mormonism as he possessed. There being no
     alternative, he obeyed the summons. But previous to his
     departure Dr. Robinson, his intimate friend and room-mate, was
     united by him in marriage with the daughter of the late Dr.
     Kay, a lady identified also with the new religious enterprise.
     Six months or more afterwards, and before McLeod's return,
     Robinson was called up in the night on pretense that he was
     wanted professionally, waylaid and murdered.

     "A fact of some significance comes out at this juncture. Gen.
     Connor, who had taken a warm interest in the religious
     society, and was the fast friend of Robinson and McLeod,
     telegraphed to the latter, who is still at the East, advising
     him not to return as his life was in danger. Thus, the leading
     layman in the society was assassinated, and the pastor warned
     by his best friend that it is not safe to return. It may be
     said that the gentile society had, from the beginning, exerted
     a quiet but powerful influence against polygamy, and already
     much of doubt and skepticism on this point had begun to
     pervade the Mormon community. In New Zealand and some other
     places, the natives sometimes roasted and ate a missionary. In
     Salt Lake they assassinate him and throw him to the dogs. At
     the coroner's inquest, ex-Governor John B. Weller being
     present as counsel on behalf of the friends of the murdered
     man, addressed the jury and submitted the following suggestive
     propositions:--

     "'And upon this evidence I have a few plain questions to
     propound, which I will leave you and others to answer. I do
     not propose to discuss them, simply because I could not do so
     without increasing the excitement which already exists, and
     producing an exasperated state of feeling, which could not at
     the present time result in any public good.

     "'1. If my associate, Judge Stout, the City Attorney, had been
     murdered under the circumstances Dr. Robinson was, would the
     police have exhibited a greater degree of vigilance and
     energy?

     "'2. Would the attention of the 4000 people who assembled at
     the 'Tabernacle' (where secular affairs are often discussed)
     on the succeeding Sabbath have been called to the crime and
     exhorted to use every effort to ferret out the assassins?

     "'3. Could any prominent Mormon be murdered under the same
     circumstances and no clew whatever found to the murderer?

     "'4. Would any portion of the five hundred special police have
     been called into requisition or ordered on duty?

     "'5. Would any of the numerous witnesses who saw the assassins
     fleeing from their bloody work, have been able to recognize
     and name them?

     "'6. Have we not utterly failed to prove, after full
     investigation, that Dr. Robinson had a personal enemy in the
     world, and have we not proved that he had had difficulties
     with none except the city authorities?

     "'7. Is there any evidence that he had done anything to make
     personal enemies, unless it was having the Chief of Police and
     two others bound over to answer a charge of riot?

     "'8. Would he have been murdered if he had not by his land
     claim raised a question as to the validity of the city
     charter?

     "'9. Would the ten-pin alley have been destroyed if it had not
     been his property, and that he had a suit pending against the
     city?

     "'10. Would the Mayor of the city have ordered him out of his
     house two days before he was murdered, if he had not
     understood that he claimed damages from the city for the
     wanton destruction of his property?

     "'11. Is it not remarkable that a gang of men could go to a
     bowling alley, nearly surrounded by houses, within sixty steps
     of the most public street in the city, between the hours of
     eleven and twelve o'clock at night, demolish the windows and
     break up with axes and sledges the alley, and no witnesses
     found to identify the men or who knew anything whatever about
     the perpetrators of the act?

     "'12. Are not the jury satisfied that some witnesses have
     withheld evidence calculated to fasten guilt upon certain
     parties, because they feared personal violence?

     "'13. Is there not an organized influence here which prevents
     the detection and punishment of men who commit acts of
     violence upon the persons or property of gentiles?

     "'14. If a Mormon of good standing had been murdered, would
     the Mayor, to whom the Chief of Police reports, have been
     informed of the act before ten o'clock the next day?

     "'15. Would the Chief of Police have gone to bed as soon as he
     heard of the crime, and waited three days before he visited
     the scene of the murder?

     "'16. Was the murder committed for the purpose of striking
     terror into the gentiles and preventing them from settling in
     this Territory?

     "'17. Is it the settled policy of the authorities here to
     prevent citizens of the United States, not Mormons, from
     asserting their claims to a portion of the public domain in
     the regularly organized judicial tribunals of the country?

     "'18. Are all legal questions which may arise in this city
     between Mormons and gentiles to be settled by brute force?

     "'19. Do the public teachings of the Tabernacle lead the
     people to respect and obey the laws of the country, or do they
     lead to violence and bloodshed?'

     "He then referred to the practices and teachings of the
     Mormons and the natural results that flowed from them:--

     "'Whilst following the practices of some of the patriarchs of
     old they have also adopted the creed, "An eye for an eye, and
     a tooth for a tooth." What has been the result of these
     teachings upon society here? There are a number of respectable
     men in this city, some of whom have families, who dare not go
     upon your streets at night! Nor are they men who are afraid of
     shadows. They have shown their courage upon the field of
     battle in defence of the honor of the country, and would not
     shrink from meeting any of them single-handed in the light of
     day. But they do not choose to meet an organized band of
     assassins at midnight. They dare not go to your theatre or
     other public places of amusement. Is it not hard that here, in
     an American Territory, supposed to be under the protection of
     our national flag, citizens who have perilled their lives to
     sustain the supremacy of our laws and the integrity of the
     government, are compelled to remain in their houses at night
     to escape the hands of murderers? men who have violated no
     law, trespassed upon the right of no one, but have simply
     incurred the displeasure of the dominant party? Can this state
     of things be tolerated on American soil? A government which
     habitually fails to give protection to its people must soon
     cease to command their confidence or respect. But I do not
     choose to pursue this subject further.

     "'In this connection, however, I feel called upon to notice
     the extraordinary efforts which have been made and are still
     being made at the Tabernacle, as well as by the press, to
     destroy the confidence of the people in the courts established
     by the Federal Government in this Territory. Judges selected
     by the government, because of their legal attainments and
     sterling integrity, have been sent out here to administer the
     laws and preserve the peace and order of society. If, in the
     faithful discharge of their duties under the oath they have
     taken, they make a decision in conflict with the interests or
     the opinions of the dominant party, they are bitterly
     denounced and every effort made to impair their power and
     lessen their influence. To effect this, slander and ridicule
     are generally employed. If a Federal Judge will decide every
     question which arises between a Mormon and gentile in favor of
     the former, he can have an easy and quiet time. He can have as
     much fulsome praise as he deserves. But if he decides in favor
     of the latter, "uneasy lies the head that wears a crown".'"

The murder of Dr. Robinson, following so closely upon that of
Brassfield, and the outrages upon Williamson and his companions, quite
unsettled the nerves of those gentiles who had had the hardihood to
remain, and they now fled in terror from before the face of the
infuriated fanatics, to whose tender mercies they had been turned over
by that government which should have afforded them the fullest
protection.

The garrison stationed at Camp Douglas, instead of being strengthened as
it should have been, had been disbanded and withdrawn, till scarcely a
corporal's guard remained; not enough to inspire the least respect for
the government or its representatives. General Connor, whose name had
been a terror to the offender for three years, now found himself an
outcast and a refugee, in the land which had so lately been under his
control. Finding his life constantly in danger in Salt Lake City, he
removed with his family, a few months after the assassination of
Robinson, to Stockton, in Rush Valley, forty miles west of Salt Lake,
where he now resides. He is engaged in mining operations, and having
considerable capital invested in developing the silver mines in that
locality, cannot well leave without much financial sacrifice. His life
is in constant danger, as well as that of every anti-Mormon resident of
the Territory.

The following extract from a letter of General Connor, dated Salt Lake,
December 26, 1866, written just before his removal to Stockton, will
give some idea of the condition of the Territory at that time:--

     "Matters are getting worse here. You will see by the 'Vedette,'
     that the merchants have addressed a card to Brigham Young, in
     reference to his action in not permitting the people to trade
     with gentile merchants. Several gentiles established themselves
     in business in the outer settlements. Some of them have been
     ordered to close their stores, and are doing so, and are glad
     to get away with their lives.

     "Of the hundreds who came here to spend the winter, all or
     nearly all have left, and many of the old gentile inhabitants
     are leaving, or preparing to do so in the spring, if nothing
     is done for us by Congress or the Administration."

The Rev. Mr. McLeod who, previous to the murder of Robinson, had made a
visit to the States, was cautioned by his friends, by telegraph, not to
return, as his life was in danger.[297:A]

Many fled the Territory. But a small number remained. And from that
Spartan band the cry now comes up for aid and protection.

Will that cry be heeded by the government of their country? Or will that
same masterly inactivity which has hitherto characterized the course of
the Federal Government on this subject, still prevail?

This is a question which now demands the serious attention of Congress
and of the country.

If the Mormons are to remain in the country, it would seem to be time
that some system were adopted to enforce the execution of the laws among
them. I am aware that the subject is one of some difficulty, but one
would suppose that among all those who have been grappling with the
great questions of Southern reconstruction, enough statesmanship might
be found to devise some efficient mode of protecting life and property
in Utah.

Let us at least hope the attempt will be made.


THE END.


FOOTNOTES:

[297:A] Rev. William Roberts, also one of the ablest ministers on the
Pacific coast, was deputed, at the last annual Methodist Conference of
Oregon, to act as a missionary at Salt Lake. He proceeded to execute
the mission, but after a short stay, returned to his former charge in
Idaho, there to remain till such time as American citizens in Utah
should be protected in their lives and property.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


The following corrections have been make to the text:

     Page ix: Description of the Harem.[original has a comma]

     Page ix: THE ENDOWMENT.[original has a comma]

     Page 5: Here new difficulties arose.[period missing in
     original]

     Page 12: following boundaries, to wit:"[quotation mark missing
     in original]

     Page 20: Brochus and Zerubbabel Snow, Associate
     Justices;[semi-colon missing in original]

     Page 21: spirits of the audience, he[original has "be"] turned
     to the Judge

     Page 29: It is not our purpose to detract from the merits of
     any one.[period missing in original]

     Page 57: taking with them their household goods[original has
     "gods"], and provisions

     Page 130: and the interpretation[original has
     "intrepretation"] of tongues

     Page 133: Each has another[original has "an" and "other" on
     two separate lines--the hyphen is missing] part

     Page 155: _Thirdly_[original has "Thirdy"], They must be
     baptized

     Page 158: The passage was: '[quotation mark missing in
     original]To us there is but one God

     Page 163: this small remnant[original has "remant"] of the
     tribe

     Page 228: then editor of the "Star,"[original has single
     quote]

     Page 233: that which God had[original has "aad"] joined
     together

     Page 255: "O, when shall we see Jesus," &c.[original has
     extraneous comma]

     Page 256: the prophets, even Joseph Smith.[original has
     extraneous quotation mark]

     Page 259: upon the faithful in Israel. Amen."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     Page 276: diminish the number of his followers?"[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     Page 282: after the marriage, Brassfield[original has
     "Brassfied"] went

     Page 287: a preëmption[original has "pre/emption" split across
     a line break] title which would last

     On pages 294 and 295, in the original, all of the numbered
     paragraphs are missing an opening single quote inside the
     opening double quote. The single quote has been added.

     Page 296: "'[single quote missing in the original]In this
     connection, however

     Page 296: "uneasy lies the head that wears a crown"[quotation
     mark missing in original]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mormon Prophet and His Harem, by C.V. Waite

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MORMON PROPHET AND HIS HAREM ***

***** This file should be named 44414-8.txt or 44414-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/4/1/44414/

Produced by Heiko Evermann, Lisa Reigel, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Google Print)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
