The Project Gutenberg EBook of Valere Aude, by Louis Dechmann

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Valere Aude
       Dare to Be Healthy, Or, The Light of Physical Regeneration

Author: Louis Dechmann

Release Date: February 8, 2005 [EBook #14985]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VALERE AUDE ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Karen Dalrymple and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





Valere Aude
(DARE TO BE HEALTHY)

_or_

THE LIGHT _of_ PHYSICAL REGENERATION


A vade mecum on
BIOLOGY _and the_ HYGIENIC-DIETETIC
METHOD _of_ HEALING


By
Dr. Louis Dechmann
Biologist _and_ Physiological Chemist


Second Edition (Compendium) 1919
SEATTLE. WASHINGTON
Christmas 1918


WASHINGTON PRINTING COMPANY
SEATTLE USA
1919




DEDICATION

  "Dispel this cloud, the light of Heaven restore;
  Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more!"

  (Pope)


To you of that great voiceless multitude,

     "THE  PEOPLE"--

You whose bewildered cry is still for light; whose silent tragedy our
well beloved Longfellow could so well portray:

  "O suffering sad humanity!
  O ye afflicted ones, who lie
  Steeped to the lips in misery,
  Longing, and yet afraid to die,
  Patient, though sorely tried!"

To you and your needs this brief epitome of a coming greater work is
given as a fitting Christmas offering--

     "LET THERE BE LIGHT!"

It is the cry which despairing, deluded humanity, in the darkness of its
frenzied ignorance, has flung back hopelessly to heaven since first the
spirit of an Infinite Intelligence brooded upon the race. It is the
appeal of man's immortal unity to the All-Father, from age to age, for
knowledge sufficient for its hourly needs, since ever, back in the far
dim ages of the earth, primeval man, beetle-browed, furtive and
fashioned fearsomely, first felt the faint vibration of a Soul; and,
like an awakened giant, that chief of human faculties, a Mind took form
which, pressing on along the uncertain way, has scaled the giddy heights
of knowledge where genius, enthroned, does battle with an envious world
of shams and greed and venal prejudice. Led by the resistless pulse of
power it follows still that "banner with a strange device:
Excelsior!";--for, ever onward yet it wends its way where'er the devious
pathway trends, whose troubled, varied course is time, whose bourne is
in eternity.

But where seek we, then, the answer to a cry so shrill, that smites the
high face of heaven from a world in pain?

Shall we seek it where false learning leads us in the quest?--Ah no.

It comes, not in the crash of Sinai's thunders with the rockings of a
riven sphere, as in the allegoric stories of a puerile past.

Softly it falls--yes, almost fearfully--from the fervid lips of some
lone world-neglected persecuted man--some patient toil-worn son of
science, whom Genius loves to call her own--though, haply, to the
schools, to fortune and to fame unknown. One whose transcendent,
superconscious mind has dared, Prometheus-like, to snatch from heaven
the fire of the immortal gods and offer it in benefits to all mankind.

Thrice happy he upon the sensory surface of whose open mind such seeds
of knowledge and of wisdom fall, and happy the land where one and all
may dare to warm chill hands and hearts before its sacred flame; that
halcyon land, the Ultima Thule of our fond imaginings, wherein true
freedom reigns; wherein the legalized tyranny of the chartered
libertines of a so-called learned profession shall be finally relegated,
in common cause to the limbo of a sordid and degraded past. For these
are they who seek to maintain a strangle-hold on science, who paralyze
the arm of individual research and, even in this advancing age, still
block the path of progress and of peace, of universal freedom and
equality of intellect, to all beyond the narrow limits of their own
elect.

Thus then, to the free fraternity of the open mind I dedicate this
brief resumé of the product of long years of study and of toil,
steadfastly believing that therein is found the missing dimension for
their urgent need, suited alike to all who hold that to maintain the
health of body and of mind is a worthy object for enlightened man. To
you, mothers of the land, who recognize your duty, towards God and to
the State, to rear your children healthy, strong and good to look upon.
To all whose keener common-sense looks upon Nature, the Creator, as
logically therefore, the healing power also. To all endowed with wit to
understand the obvious truth that, not by poisonous drugs is healing
wrought, but by such reasonable help as man's intelligence can afford,
to second nature's effort to that end; and further, that, in order to
achieve success, it is useless to attack, suppress or remove the
symptoms of disease by force of drugging or the knife, whilst the
_cause_ of the evil is left untouched, unthought of, and, too
frequently, unknown. Truth and reason alike proclaim: remove the cause
and the symptom _must_ disappear.

To all, then, to whom the ever blessed triad of health, hope, and
happiness on earth, are dear, the sanctity of child-life and the
improvement of the race; and especially to those whose clearer mental
vision can grasp the stupendous fact of eternal Universal Unity--the
oneness with that mighty Primal Cause, the great Life Principle,
immanent and active throughout all nature; can grasp and assimilate the
idea that everything that has life is, each in its separate form and
degree, but a medium through which the Infinite Universal Source of
Life--that vast, ineffable power which we, blindly, designate as God--or
Good--seeks expression in the scheme of evolution whose aim sublime is
pure perfection, as its ultimate, attainable, though far off goal.
Directed and attracted by an intelligence we call divine, it is a hope,
instinct with ability, implanted by that Power in the soul of man, as
patent in his ceaseless struggle upward toward the light of fuller
knowledge; it is a power, restricted, only in degree, by that individual
sense of human limitations fostered by false prophets and grounded in
the vitals of the race.

To you all, this brief precis is presented, as a guide, with the
author's benediction, coupled with the fervent hope that, reading the
scientific deductions and precepts therein contained you, too, may see
Regeneration's Light and seeing, may

     "_Dare to be Healthy._"

LOUIS DECHMANN,

_Christmas, 1918. Seattle, Wash._



"Dare to be Healthy"




FORE-WORD


_To the Reader_:

The volume, shortly to be published, and to which the ensuing pages are
designed to serve the purpose of stepping-stone or forecast, has been
compiled for the purpose of placing before the public the experiences of
thirty-five full years of my life as a biologist and physiological
chemist, devoted to the sifting and solution of vital problems of health
and eugenics and in the practice of the resultant knowledge of the laws
of life discovered in the course of my research.

I would beseech you, in your own vital interest, to peruse these pages
thoughtfully and with an open mind. There are throughout America
already, thousands of steadfast disciples who are daily reaping the
benefits of the teachings contained therein; and I would that you also
may be added to that goodly multitude, to enjoy together with them the
best advantages emanating from systematic study along the most advanced
lines of modern thought and science. The facts are correlated and
simply expressed with the earnest desire to bring within the scope of
the layman the good that may accrue. It is, however, not for the laymen
alone that this work is undertaken, but for unprofessional and
professional alike, be he medical student or practitioner or other
interested person; for to each and all I present herein the best that a
lifetime of research has enabled me to wring from nature's secret store
for the betterment and conservation of human life and the help of human
kind.

In the development of my movement I have formulated a system under which
all may participate in the benefits of my message, though possibly
prevented by circumstances in some cases from coming within direct
personal contact with myself.

This system comprises the following:

The "Dare to be Healthy" Club.

The "Dare to be Healthy" Lecture Course.

The "Dare to be Healthy" Hygienic Dietetic Course.

Full particulars regarding these will appear at a subsequent point in
this prospectus.

LOUIS DECHMANN.




INTRODUCTION

          "... Argentea proles,
  Auro deterior, fulvo pretiosior aere."

  (Ovid)


  Succeeding times a silver age behold
  Excelling brass, but more excelled by Gold.


Hessiod, in his celebrated distribution of mankind, divides the species
into three orders of intellect.

"The first place," says he, "belongs to him who can, by his own powers,
discern what is fit and right, and penetrate to the remoter motives of
action.

"The second place is claimed by him who is willing to hear instruction
and can perceive right and wrong when they are shown to him by
another;--but he who hath neither acuteness nor docility--who can
neither find the way by himself, nor will be led by others, is a wretch
without use or value."

"You are seeking truth," quoth Adalbert von Chamisso, "_Remember that
the world clings more firmly to superstition than to faith_,"--or, to
borrow expression from an equally inspired source,--remember that
perverse humanity rarely fails to favour, rather, what Shakespeare terms
"_The seeming truth which cunning times put on to entrap the wisest._"

Courageous, then, must be the knight who sets his lance in rest to tilt
against the windmills of the world.

Nevertheless, although the truth is still banned as "heterodox" by
common consent--or tacit connivance--an attitude patent to commercial
instincts in view of the cataclysm which must naturally ensue, with
deadly results to the vested interests of orthodoxy, so soon as the
long-trusted barriers of plausible and pretentious mystery and
importance shall be swept away by the rising tide of popular
indignation. When the masses become educated to discriminate between
truth and falsehood and thus shall come into their rights, then and not
till then, will the dawn of physical salvation break.

Still, I maintain, there are, and have been all along the way, eminent
medical men of high intelligence, who, unlike the drones of the medical
hive, have dared to think for themselves and have even dared to speak
their thoughts.

Thus, for instance, spoke Sir William W. Gull, Physician to her late
Majesty Queen Victoria: "Having passed the period of the goldheaded cane
and horsehair wig, we dare hope to have also passed the days of pompous
emptiness; and furthermore, _we can hope that nothing will be considered
unworthy the attention of physicians which contributes to the saving of
life_."

Again, an authority of the first rank, Prof. Oesterlin, says in his
noted work on the Materia Medica:

"_The studious physician of our century will hardly expect to accomplish
by force, through some strange drug or other, that which only nature can
bring about when assisted by all the rational accessories of hygiene and
dietetics._

_Nature alone can furnish the beneficient means, sufficient for all
needs_,"--which the science of medicine never has afforded and never
can.

As we survey the civilization of our age and its medical science, we
see, on the one hand, the crude superstitions of the masses, the subtler
superstitions of the educated classes; gross materialism, bewildering
Darwinism, pessimism, and degenerate political economy; on the other
hand, unmitigated quackery and cupidity, with its weight of oppression
on humanity,--everywhere confusion instead of harmony.

Very surely,--and perhaps more speedily than we think--a reaction will
come, when our present degenerate system of medical subterfuge--misnamed
science--will have passed away, to be replaced by accredited methods of
natural healing consistent with the dignity of an enlightened,
self-respecting people.




       "Ignorance is the curse of God:
  Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven"

  (Shakespeare)

THE HYGIENIC-DIETETIC METHOD OF HEALING


Biology, the Science of life, has developed under my hand that system of
natural healing which I practice, in common with some of the most
successful physicians on the continents of Europe and America.

Although based upon the same biological laws, their systems of
therapy--or healing--differ materially from one another. My system is
entirely my own, developed during the last thirty-five years to that
degree of perfection it has attained today.

I am, naturally, honestly proud of the success achieved during this
strenuous period, yet am I still as anxiously imbued as ever with the
spirit and habit of research which is now directed to the endeavour to
further simplify my method of treatment, by further discoveries in the
realm of that most abstruse of the sciences, _Physiological Chemistry_.

In this baffling but wonderful domain I am inspired by the ambitious
hope that some, at any rate, of the many unsolved problems of the
Science of Life may yet give up their secrets to the demand of my
persistency, exerted in the interest of the well-being of humanity.

After centuries devoted by the faculty to a futile and arrogant attempt
to counteract the disturbances of health, which we call diseases, in the
stereotyped manner known as "orthodox;" after endless complications,
infinite "specializing"--in itself a futility--and unblushing complicity
with the powers that be, we find them now at length, baffled,
discredited, but unashamed, cast back, discomforted, upon Mother
Nature's kindly breast, their victims humbly seeking healing in simple
unity from her ample store.

Based upon this firm foundation, we term the new departure the "Natural
Method of Healing."

The greatest physicians of all time, from Hippocrates to our own day,
were satisfied to be simply _natural_ physicians. They were not
satisfied to merely suppress the symptoms of suffering and to quiet the
sufferer by abnormal appliances. Their higher, more ambitious aim was to
reach the active source of distress--and in this they succeeded.

For, not only did they achieve where others failed, but, in addition to
healing, they also _prevented the recurrence_ of disease, and, more
noteworthy still, they established a system of Prophylactic Therapy,
which is the highest function of the healing art; namely, the
_prevention of disease_ by treatment _before full development_, or, in
other words, the _preservation of health_.

It is not the object of this brief brochure to enter into the devious
details which a full explanation of this practical, successful, modern
method would require. It is designed merely for those who, after
experiencing disappointment and failure in other directions, have had
recourse, as a last alternative, to advice and assistance, from myself.

Such patients, as a rule, have heard of my method from others; have
heard that it differs widely, in its frank simplicity, from the empty
pomposity of the old-school "orthodox" elements, though of the
principles of the old-school teaching they have really little or no
conception, beyond a crude, unwholesome, fear of the unknown, consequent
upon the, _very necessary_, veil of mystery with which its votaries
surround themselves--a semi-superstitious sentiment inherited from a
malignant past and one which does little credit to the vaunted modern
civilization of today.

On this point of difference they ask for enlightenment, and naturally
enquire as to the nature of both, but especially of this new hope which
is held out to them as a refuge in their hour of despair.

This information it is equally my duty and my desire to give, and in the
most convenient and simple form, shorn of all shroud of mystery; for my
object is to educate and not to conceal.

It is my chief desire that patients should thoroughly understand the
methods and principles of the New-School of Healing and should exercise
their own intelligence as to its merits as compared with the old, and,
being once thoroughly convinced--not by faith, or fear, or fashion, nor
yet biased by the unfair influence of the false prestige of a legalized
monopoly detrimental to the interest of the people--they should
forthwith honestly test the new deliverance by faithfully following my
advice and instruction, to their own unfailing ultimate benefit and
relief.

As a labour of love towards the world in general and the people of my
adopted country in particular, I have made it my duty to formulate the
substance of my researches in the field of science--researches which
represent the struggles of a lifetime--in a large and comprehensive work
which, to the scientist as well as to the laymen, will constitute in the
most detailed and complete degree a reliable guide to the conservation
of health which, even now, in the immediate present, has come to be
regarded not only as a scientific phase of education, but as a duty
incumbent upon every citizen. Should sickness supervene, as well it may
sometimes, despite all reasonable precaution, the knowledge and
instructions contained therein are sufficient, if closely followed, to
prevent, for the most part, the serious consequences of disease and to
afford the patient the necessary enlightenment to enable him to
co-operate with the hygienic-dietetic physician in the task of restoring
him to health and ability.

This book, entitled "_Regeneration_" or "_Dare to be Healthy_," will
consist of some three thousand or more pages. It will be published
shortly; and, in the common interests of human health will, I trust,
find prominent place on the book-shelf of every home whose inmates
either belong to the ever increasing number of the followers of my
patients, or who, by careful study of my teachings therein contained,
may be finding their independent way back from the dreary depths of
suffering to the glad plains of health.

In following up the general outline of the "New Regeneration" these
pages will not lend themselves to the otherwise necessary encounter with
what are now admitted to be the recognized errors of the, temporarily
dominant, medical school, save in so far as it may be requisite to
remove from the mind of the layman pernicious and antiquated ideas to
which he has been long and persistently educated, or to protect those
who have ceased to believe in them from the pitfalls to which, as an
alternative, they may be exposed amongst the numberless unscientific,
quasi-miraculous, healing cults, or the equally pernicious nostrums of
the spectacular advertising medicine vendor, both of whom reap golden
harvests among the ranks of the so justly disappointed and despairing
people.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is, nevertheless, an imperative duty to issue this necessary warning;
namely, that the public should safeguard itself against the absurd, but
possible mistakes of confusing the Legitimate Scientific School of the
Hygienic Dietetic Method of Biological Healing with the nebulous cults
aforesaid. There is no vestige of resemblance between them, either in
thought or principle, and nothing could be more fatal and foreign to the
truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is one thing, and one only, which, like the rest of the community,
we share with them in common, and this is that _growing spirit of
profound distrust_ with which all classes seem daily more and more
constrained to regard the Medical Fraternity and all its ways.

It is the general knowledge of the existence of this sentiment which has
called into being the present epidemic of curious cults and
catholicons--due, it would appear, more to this insidious temptation to
such _commercial enterprise_ than to any other cause--and which form so
prominent a feature throughout all sections of the community--and
especially in the press--throughout the length and breadth of the land.
To such, in an alarming degree, the public turns, in protest, as it
were, against the tyranny and turpitude of this "learned profession,"
with its kindred corporations and its studied callous disregard of
scientific advancement in any direction which might tend to jeopardize
or reduce the profitable exercise of its own obsolete methods, its
system of poisonous medicaments, and dangerous operations and
anti-toxins.

There is no possible efficacy or help to be derived from other
teachings, whatsoever they may be, except from those based absolutely
upon the solid foundation of biological fact. Since Johannes Müller
(1833) wrote the first book on physiology and its chemistry, more than
a thousand so-called "Authorities" in that branch of science have tried
to find some of the secrets of nature pertaining to physiology. A very
few (about 10 or 12) may be named as great men who discovered certain
laws and solved certain problems. But the majority added nothing to
Müller's discoveries. Most of them became teachers or authors, one
plagiarizing the work of the other, eulogy being very liberally
distributed on all sides, but valuable deductions from the great
masters, very few have been able to make, and even those were more or
less suppressed by the "orthodox school." In less than half the time
since 1833, i.e. 85 years, it was my good fortune to give more valuable
deductions and practical applications to the student and the reader,
than the mediocre talents of the "old school" were able to give.

       *       *       *       *       *

I pretend to no miracles and expect none; nor do I arrogate to myself
any so-called _super_-natural secrets or powers; I simply maintain that,
aided by the erudition of the great scientists of the past and present,
this system has finally been brought to a point which should rightly
have been always the chief aim of Medical Science, namely, an _exact
knowledge of human nature and the human organism, as it is_.

With this vital knowledge at command I have been able to successfully
formulate a system for supplying the individual organism with any of the
various constituents of which it may be deficient, in a manner in which
it can best receive and assimilate the same, thereby maintaining a
correct balance between the constituents of the blood wherein lies
hidden the sole criterion of health and the fatal secret of disease.

Simple as this may sound, the way has been long and lonely until that
elusive goal was reached; and, even now, in the heat of the controversy
which ensues, we find ourselves sometimes in a somewhat parlous
position, placed, as it were, between two fires; on the one side are
those who, though not without sympathetic feeling for the
well-intentioned, earnest-minded believers in the errors now being
exposed, yet cast aside all scruples in the interest of humanity and
truth. On the other side are those obsessed by care and compunction for
these accredited practitioners who by reason of age or temperament are
unable or unwilling to assimilate new ideas or to relinquish the
theories of a life time in order to enter the field of competition with
the men of a younger generation.

Such is the impasse before which we stand.




REGENERATION OF THE RACE

BY THE LIGHT OF BIOLOGY AIDED BY PHYSIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY.

     "For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members
     of that one body, being many, are one body:... whether one member
     suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured,
     all the members rejoice with it."

     (St. Paul, I Corinthians, XII. 12 & 26.)

     "_DYSAEMIA, or Impure Blood is the cause and source of disorder in
     all constitutional diseases. So spoke the Master. Believe it who
     will, that, in a nutshell, is 'the burden of my song'--the Alpha
     and Omega of my teaching_."

     (From Chapter X. "Dare to be Healthy.")


_The Process of Natural Healing_ is the art of curing diseases by
natural methods.

As natural remedies, only those may be included which stand as vital
conditions in constant relation to the organism, assimilable thereby.

Among these are no poisons or chemical preparations, such as were
promulgated by Paracelsus and the medicasters; for these are elements
abnormal to the body, and call forth its reactionary powers, and so,
being useless, they are eliminated; or, after having served an improper
purpose, to _suppress_ some symptom of disease, they become embedded in
the tissues, there causing various forms of medicinal complication or
morbid condition.

Do we not produce blood poisons enough by our irrational diet and modes
of living? The human body is a microcosm--a world in minature--and as
such, exists in constant interchange with universal nature.

A definite relationship exists between it and the solid, fluid and
gaseous elements.

Solid food, water and air, elements of the universe, must become
elements of our bodies, if relations of universal unity are to be
maintained.

There must be a constant interchange of organic matter, and this
inter-transmission is the cause of life, of health, and of disease;
therefore, we must first of all see that the conditions of this process
are uninterrupted.

Food, air, water, light, exercise, must be so provided that they
condition the process of nutrition and metamorphosis.

Skin, lungs, kidneys, intestines, must always be in condition to
eliminate the abnormal products of decomposition.

If then disease be a derangement of the life process, it is self-evident
that disease is not confined to one organ alone, but that the whole body
is diseased.

The body, thus, being in fact an indivisible unity, the treatment we
employ in disease must, logically, act upon it as a united whole.

The modern school of medicine in its present, bacteria ridden frame of
mind or mania, looks upon the bacillus, or microbe, as the sole cause of
disease.

The cause, however, is not the bacillus, but rather the impure blood
which prepares a fertile soil for the development of those destructive
germs.

He who lives strictly in accordance with the rules of hygiene need not
fear the bacillus, for man is not born to sickness; he creates sickness
for himself by his irrational mode of living.

What does the world profit by bacteriological institutions if the people
continue to live in the old sins against health and hygiene?

Man may be born with a predisposition to disease, but not with disease
itself.

Our health depends entirely upon the conditions of our life.

In cases of predisposition to disease, therefore, as well as in disease
itself, according to the principles of hygiene, we must employ only the
hygienic and dietetic methods of treatment.

Is the medical science of the day, then, totally incompetent? You may
well ask.--Have the patient studies and researches of nearly two
thousand four hundred years, since the days of Hippocrates, been all in
vain?

The reply lies ready to your hand, from the lips of one of the brightest
scientific spirits that ever illumined this dull earth of ours with
knowledge and sincerity.

In Goethe's Faust the following lines are found,--lines which sad memory
brings back to the minds of many an unfortunate who, according to the
dictates of the medical science of today, is pronounced incurable--a
sufferer from one or other of the so-called chronic diseases--and in
dire need of both physical and spiritual support.

  "I have, alas, philosophy,
  Medicine, jurisprudence too,
    And, to my cost, theology
    With ardent labour studied through,
    And here I stand with all my lore,
    Poor fool, no wiser than before"

Like Faust, such sufferers study day and night the opinions of learned
doctors and follow their prescriptions with ardent zeal. The more they
study, the more doctors they consult, the more rapidly does strength
fail them, until at length they realize that, in spite of all their
lore, they are but "poor fools, no wiser than before."

For more than two thousand years it has been, in fact, as it is to a
great extent today; the physician prescribes to the best of his
knowledge, medicines compounded according to certain rules dogmatically
laid down in the schools.

Here we have at once the fatal mistake at a glance.

Instead of studying nature and the laws of nature, instead of using
natural means to _heal disease_, they administer deadly poisons to
_allay suffering_, poisons, which doubtless may be able to repress pain
or to temporarily suppress the symptoms of disease; but can _never
remove the cause_, which alone may rightly be called healing.

The drugs prescribed by thousands of physicians today, with but a casual
acquaintance with their action, are bound by their nature to produce
evils worse than the disease itself.

To cite an instance:

Physicians prescribe creosote in cases of consumption to stop the
expectoration of blood.

Creosote will do this, and may suppress the cough, as well as the
accompanying pain; but will it cure consumption or destroy or remove the
cause of this deadliest of diseases?

On the contrary, it inevitably produces laryngeal phthisis after a very
short time. It destroys the head of the windpipe and the patient dies in
consequence of the destruction of one of the most important organs of
the body.

In most instances the physician is either oblivious or unaware of these
facts. He follows those old-standing doctrinal sophisms laid down by
human "science" but discredited by nature.

His courage is called "audacity" by those who have not lost all feeling
for humanity.

Meanwhile, those who regard medical science from a business standpoint
only, are very quick to pronounce judgement upon any natural treatment
of disease and to condemn the most successful natural physicians as
charlatans and frauds.

In order to be competent to decide upon a correct course in the
treatment of disease the physician must possess a thorough chemical
knowledge of all the fundamental substances of which the human organism
is constructed. With the patient therefore rests the responsibility of
choosing his physician, since no physician can be of any assistance who
cannot define what substances are deficient in the blood, and who does
not possess the requisite technical knowledge to supply this deficiency
by adequate dietetic means.

In my nutrition cell-food therapy for constitutional diseases, I have
followed consistently upon the lines of one of the greatest masters of
physiological chemistry that the world has known, who, in one of his
medical colloquies spoke as follows: "In order to thoroughly understand
any form of sickness or disease, so as to undertake the cure of the
same, it is first of all necessary to picture before one's mental
vision the ways and means of its inceptive formation, and by degrees to
trace its origin, step by step, before one is enabled to decide upon
adequate remedial measures conformable to the individual stages of the
same."

In this sense it has ever been my strenuous endeavor to fathom the
secret of the inception of constitutional diseases; but the entire
medical literature did not advance me further than pathological anatomy,
which informs us that the original cause of disease is a change in the
form of the cellular elements of different digestive organs,--in
explanation of which the customary technical terms are used, such as
"atrophy," "degeneration," "metamorphosis," etc. But, I reasoned with
myself, this surely cannot be seriously regarded as the origin of
disease!

The cause of the visible changing of the cellules must be sought in the
conditional interstitial substances which cause the invisible changes or
shiftings of the cellular forms, and which are scientifically termed
"_Changed nutritional conditions_."

By the aid of physiological chemistry I was successful in finding a
pathway to the centre of those mysterious occurrences of life.

And this was my course of reasoning: As the cellules, which are the
smallest individual elements of the human system, are only _products of
the blood_, and for their composition require the different chemical
substances in sufficient quantities, it is obviously necessary to fathom
what those chemical elements of the cellules may be, what form they take
in their mutual relation to the separate parts of the body, and in what
way they enter the organism.

In this manner I obtained a clear insight into the actions of the
so-called _mineral material_ in the organism, and it gradually became
obvious to me that everything is dependent upon the introduction of the
proper _sanguifying or nutritive_ mineral salts into the blood.

On this basis I founded the so-called "_organic nutritive cell-food
therapy_" (called the Dech-Manna therapy).

The point may be raised that the elements of the food we eat or drink
are heterogeneous and that the mineral matter in them is naturally and
casually acquired, according to the properties of the soil they grow in.
This is the general opinion, but not the fact. Our vegetables, grain,
meat and milk contain too much phosphoric acid and sal ammoniac, and
this is due to the use of artificial and animal fertilizers, while the
sulphurics are very often entirely missing.

Von Liebig says: When we consider that the sugar refineries of Waghausel
have an annual output in the market of 600,000 lbs. of potassic salt,
which is taken from the soil by the turnips of the Baden fields without
being replaced, and that there is cultivated in Northern Germany, year
by year, with the assistance of guano, an immense amount of potatoes
solely for the manufacture of spirits, and that these potato fields are
consequently robbed of the essential ingredients which potatoes should
contain, and as these elements are only partially replaced by the
insufficient component parts of the guano, we cannot be in doubt as to
the condition of these fields. The ground may be ever so rich in
ingredients, but it is exhaustible. The analysis of our blood indicates
that, in order to remain healthy, it must contain twice as many
sulphuric as phosphoric salts.

We talk glibly about a natural mode of living, a simple diet; but where
in our civilized countries can we find food that really serves healthy
sanguification?

The crux of the question is this: Why do we propose to _heal naturally_
and not also to _nourish naturally_?--The latter is, to say the least of
it, just as important as the former. But if both were practiced
conjointly, a beneficial object might be more quickly and surely gained.

It is true, we are taught to eat more vegetables than meat; that our
bread lacks the chief nourishing qualities, and so on; but we have
hitherto been in no wise informed as to the substances that are
relatively harmful or beneficial to us.

Why is it then that the science of the sanative power of nature, as well
as medical science, is still in doubt in regard to the relation that
must absolutely exist between the separate component parts of our
nourishment in order to obtain normal healthy sanguification?

_The reason is that the application of a real chemistry of life has
never been comprehended until now._

According to my judgment it is Von Liebig and Julius Hensel who showed
us the paths we are to take to the field of enquiry most important of
all; for without a sound body all the coveted acquisitions of modern
times are worthless to us.

The solution of the question how to prevent the degeneration of mankind
would be a simple and natural one, if history and proverb had not taught
us that as often as a new truth appears "the very oxen butt their horns
against it." They cannot help this, the "disposition" is natural; for
when Pythagoras had found the Master of Arts, Mathesios, he was so
overjoyed that he sacrificed one hundred oxen to the gods, and ever
since that time oxen are attacked with an hereditary fright whenever a
new truth appears,--the human ox is no exception.

Of what use to us, for instance, are the Roentgen X-rays in diseases of
the nerves when there is a generally diseased condition of the blood,
which, as we now know, is also the primary cause of lung, liver, stomach
and kidney troubles, cancer, scrofula, rheumatism, gout, obesity,
diabetes, and the rest?

In such cases _chemistry_ is necessary, in order to ascertain what
ingredients are missing in the blood; they cannot be detected
microscopically.

What blunders are continually committed in the treatment of nerve
diseases! No one considers the physiological law that _no parts of the
nerves can perform their functions lastingly and naturally unless they
are continually supplied with blood permeated_ with oxygen; and for this
purpose iron is most necessary as an adequate ingredient.

Physicians of the old-school do prescribe iron plentifully, but in
inorganic form; and because it is not organized it is indigestible and
is excreted. That is why the treatment of the diseases of the nerves,
which are so general and widespread, has been so unsuccessful.

It is not generally known that organized ammonium phosphate (Lecithin),
which is the mineral foundation of the Neurogen I prescribe, will
regenerate the nerve cells if consumed in the proper proportions. It is,
likewise, little known that although a person with diseased lungs be
placed under conditions where he may acquire an ample quantity of pure
air--that is oxygen--and may consume as much as four quarts of milk
daily, he will nevertheless most certainly be doomed to perish if his
food does not contain the elements of iron, lime and sulphur in
sufficient quantities.

These simple physiological laws have been ignored and medical men have
given us instead, the teachings of the school of bacteriology with its
pitiful illusions and its endless train of suffering and sorrow.

The testimony of many patients who have undergone treatment in the best
physical culture and so-called, natural healing establishments both in
Europe and America, serves to show that their success has been but
partial and one-sided; that is, they have abandoned their wrong albumen
theory, and their state of health has consequently improved. But,
practically, the treatment has failed; for complete and final
recovery--that is, full and correct nutrition and strengthening of the
nerves, has not been accomplished. Such failure is due to the fact that
certain essential constituents have not been supplied. These vital
constituents my organic nutritive cell-food therapy is designed to
provide.

What is lacking in the field of practical science, as authoritatively
voiced by the unprogressive faculty of today, is an absence of chemical
knowledge, especially on the part of the physician and the naturalist;
and, as likewise, the so-called scientific farmer upon whose assurances
we so naturally rely for the wholesome production of food is woefully
ignorant on matters of agricultural chemistry, the logical consequence
is that in all civilized countries great mistakes have been
unconsciously made and perpetuated, detrimental to the health of man and
beast alike and vitally prejudicial to the healthy sustenance of the
race.

_Where are the most vitally necessary mineral substances_ to be found in
nature?

It is an established fact that the fields, on which our nutritive salts
or cell-foods--our vital sustenance--are grown, were originally formed
from decayed primitive rock and _this primitive earth-crust matter is
composed of the same mineral substances that are found in normal blood_.
Therefore, our physical welfare and our capacity to resist disease is
clearly dependent upon the condition of our fields. We must always bear
this in mind--the old truism--that,

     "AS A MAN EATS, SO IS HE."

_We are thus, directly, the products of our fields._

Wrongly fertilized, our fields must produce sickly vegetation, and this
in turn will produce a sickly race and disease in cattle.

Primitive rock consists of granite, porphyry, gneiss and basalt,
deposits which are still found upon the earth in immense quantities, and
in the same condition as thousands of years ago.

As a matter of fact, proposals have been made by noted scientists to
utilize pulverized rock of this kind as compost to _assist_ the fields
in a natural way, and so to restore them to their former producing
power, which would thus enable plants, animals, and man, alike, to
regain those substances indispensable to proper sanguification and
general growth.

The agricultural experiments performed with this stone dust fully
confirm this assumption.

One of the most important tasks of today is to indicate to the farmer
new ways and means of promoting and increasing growth for the food
supply of the nations.

Why, then, I imagine I can hear it asked, if this fact be true and
demonstrated, has it not been applied?

This question may be answered by another. Why does not the natural
system of Hygienic Dietetic Healing find general application in cases of
sickness, since its success is so obviously greater than even that
claimed by medical science?

To this vital question upon which so much of human life and happiness
depends, the weak and degrading answer must suffice; to the effect that
the last vestige of public respect for the sciences would be shaken, and
many wise theories would fail of their imaginary virtues and succumb,
before humanity's best birthright--the quality of healthy blood, kind
nature's ample gift to all,--could be wrested from the selfish hand of
tyranny and mankind enabled to secure from nature's willing hand the
succour that an Infinite Providence offers to disease.

A physician to whom I once explained my theories, heard me for some
minutes and then he said "Well, and so you want to create healthy blood
in this way?" "Yes, surely," I replied. "We have no use for that," he
callously exclaimed, "there would _be no business in that_."

_Hence Mankind must degenerate and Disease of all kinds ride rampant_
through the land, rather than upset the firmly rooted fallacies of the
past or foil the ghoul-like greed of a certain set of conscienceless
practitioners.

To the first of these the terse old Latin satire would apply:

  "Homine imperito nunquam quidquam injustius
  Qui, nisi quod ipse fecit, nihil rectum putat."

  (Terentius.)


  "Who is there so unreasoning as he, that learned drone,
  Who reckons nothing perfect save what he himself hath known."

  (M.B.)

To the second let an outraged public reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

But meanwhile, as the hideous holocaust proceeds, the mills of God grind
slowly but mysteriously secure. The eternal law of equity is working
still; and from every evil there proceeds a good. Truth may be hidden in
the nether deeps, but some day the strained tension breaks, the balance
reversing brings it to the light. Its spirit works for ever, like a
ferment, hidden long, deep down in the Universal heart of things; for
with majestic, unimpressionable tread, sublimely the silent force of
human progress moves; slow and inevitably sure, the great indwelling
spirit of a vast eternal energy leading man ever upward to the True and
Best.

Against this axiom, alas, graceless and suicidal seems the unwisdom of
the world, in action against all who offer it salvation from its pain;
aye, though he be Christ or Commoner.

Rather be wrong in league with wealth and power than be right--and stand
alone. This is now the worldly wisdom of the sage.

Genius at grips with material and religious power, fares ill; as with
far-famed Copernicus, or "starry Galileo and his woes"; or, in a brave
woman's daring words:--"He, who dares to see a truth not recognized in
creeds, must die the death."

"A time of transition is a time of pain," is a truism well recognized by
all, and he who would press Regeneration upon the world--weak, weary and
unthinking as its people are--must run the gauntlet of the bitter
antagonism of the exploiting clans on this benighted sphere, though
later he may see, across the bourne that bounds life's earthly day, a
stately monument, perchance, by gratitude upreared, where pious crowds
pay tribute to his name.




HYMN OF HEALTH

(From the Greek)

  Health, thou most frangible of heaven's dower,
  With thee may what remains of life be spent;
  Cease not upon me, thus, thy gifts to shower,
  And in my soul to find a tenement.

  For what is there of beauty, wealth or power,
  Of gentle offspring, or the wiles of love,
  But owes its solace, sweet, in every hour,
  To thee, thou regent of the powers above.

  The spring of pleasure blooms if thou but bless,
  And every step upon the Autumn way
  Is lit by thee, parent of happiness!
  Without thee sadly sounds life's roundelay.

  (M.B.)


Health is one of those intangible inestimably precious possessions, like
life and liberty, to which all are entitled by natural Law. Yet are
there but few who are careful to conserve this priceless heritage. It is
a boon all too often unappreciated until lost, and once lost, it may not
always be regained, though intense be our regrets and our endeavours
exhaust the field of human resource.

Again, although the possession of passable health may be ours, it is a
condition rarely totally untroubled and continuous and, therefore,
cannot be correctly classified as perfect health.

These simple definitions may seem to the reader trite and trivial; but
how many of us, let me ask, give thought to their vital vast
significance.

Never to need a physician; ever to be unconsciously guarded against all
access of disease; to maintain the fair form and vigor of the body
without effort, so that no depleting influences can find a hold; this is
the health ideal by nature set, the standard to which the earliest
progenitors of our race may doubtless have conformed, but upon which
succeeding generations have sedulously turned their backs.

Philosophers have defined this physically perfect state.

Historians have immortalized it in heroic tomes.

Poets have extolled it in great epic verse.

Artists have depicted it in portraiture and tapestry.

Sculptors have expressed it in the life-like stone.

The sick have longed for it.

Saints have prayed for it and, in the search for its fabled, false elixir,
alchemists have sacrificed their lives. It remained for the smug, "sober
judgment" of our day to pronounce it "unattainable"--unattainable!

This, however, is a matter of small moment; for, as Whittier reminds us:
"The falsehoods which we spurn today were the truths of long ago"--and
although men part reluctantly with favorite--and lucrative--fallacies,
and "Faith, fantastic Faith, once wedded fast to some dear falsehood,
hugs it to the last," nevertheless this false belief, like so many other
sapient pronouncements of human wisdom, must be subjected to final
reversal.

The ideal state of health is, truly, "unattainable" when we refuse to
yield obedience to the simple laws of nature--when we continuously
persist in interference with her work and embarrass her with artificial
substitutes, defying her august hygienic precepts by our manner of life.

Not so, however, if we yield to her inducements, fulfil her
requirements, and submit ourselves freely to her unerring will.

There is less of fault than of weakness in the fact that so many of us
fail to give nature the opportunity to rear us as healthy men and
women, to keep us more free than we are from suffering and disease.

Her ways are ways of pleasantness and follow on the lines of the veriest
simplicity.

The preservation of health must needs, then, move along these self-same
simple lines.

It is ignorance, in most cases, rather than unwillingness that brings
upon the race the punishment we call disease.

But how can they be expected to learn who have no teacher? And how can
they teach who are themselves untaught?

It is incumbent upon those who have acquired knowledge to impart
life-saving truths, and _there is no greater benefactor of his kind than
he who reduces life's problems to their simplest terms_.

"He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty." Such is the dictum of King David, the
psalmist, as expressed in the Hebrew Scriptures.

All that man's intellect can conceive of the Almighty is bounded by its
expression in Nature.

It is neither arrogant, nor irreverent, then, to claim with reasonable
confidence that the devoted service of long years of close application
to research in Nature's secret dwelling-place may entitle such an one to
share the guidance of the Almighty mind and inspire him to share its
favours with his fellow man.

       *       *       *       *       *

This then, the Author of this brochure, realizing vividly and with
sympathy, humanity's sore need, has been constrained to formulate, for
the benefit of those desirous to learn;--a means of enlightenment
suitable and accessible to all. For although, to quote from Goethe,
whose transcendent mind was almost omniscient in all mundane things:

  "Allwissend bin ich nicht; doch viel ist mir bewusst."
  (Omniscient am I not, though much I know.)

Yet "Unity is strength," and in conjunction with associated minds, such
knowledge as I have may amply suffice to save many a sad sufferer from
hereditary doom.

The scheme, or, to be more explicit, the Club, I purpose to inaugurate,
is fully expounded in detail in the succeeding pages.




THE DARE TO BE HEALTHY CLUB

  All other things the mandate, "must", obey,
  Man only has the power, "I will", to say.

  (After Schiller.)

  (M.B.)


Thoughtless and imitative, men follow custom, careless where it may
lead, and unconsciously imitate each other.

Strong harmful habits grow, which overcome the opposing will and fickle
fashion rules where common sense should reign.

Such instances are common to us all.

A combination opposed to such influences is the force we need and for
this purpose I propose to establish a Club for the study of the ways and
means of health.

THE DARE TO BE HEALTHY CLUB.

The Club will be comprised of those who desire to pursue a course of
Health Study by correspondence.

This combination will constitute the first and only Club of its kind in
the world.

It will unite in its membership a group of independent thinkers,
representative of all parts of the American Continent.

The purpose of the Club will be to teach the science of Regeneration--to
teach them to "dare to be healthy" according to the laws and teachings
of biology.

These teachings will consist of a two years' course in _Biology_,
dealing with its most important branches, in _Physiology_, _Anatomy_,
_Hygiene_, _Physiological Chemistry_, _Pathology_, according to
biological facts, and _Therapy_ in accordance with biological and
physical laws and precepts.

All methods of _natural healing_ will be explained in detail, including
diet, breathing exercises, and rest.

The comprehensive aim will be to inculcate the principles which govern
the process of perfect metabolism--that is to say, the changes of
nutritive matter within the body--as the means of bringing into being a
race endowed with health and beauty and therefore predestined to
happiness.

The course of instruction will be based upon the literature of science,
including certain fundamental teachings from the pen of the author of
the present pamphlet, which comprises, moreover, extracts from the
works of distinguished scholars whose theories have been tried and
tested during the last thirty-five years.

Its precepts will be based upon personal experience and actual practice,
the outcome of careful and patient observation.

The series throughout will be formulated with a view to the purpose of
graduating later from among those who follow the course, a body of
competent instructors capable of transmitting the knowledge they have
acquired to others, privately or professionally. But remember the axiom
of Cicero:

     "Not only is there an art in acquiring knowledge but also a rarer
     art in imparting it to others."

The first question, then, which will naturally arise in the mind of the
reader will be:

_What is This Method of Regeneration?_

The reply to this question is in reality a simple one, but in order to
explain and define the word "Regeneration" from a purely scientific
standpoint, it will be necessary to cite the results of the author's
researches and to outline his method of healing by regeneration, showing
how he purposes to lead the way from a dark past and a dull present
into a brighter future.

Before doing so, however, it may perhaps conduce to a better
understanding if I quote from the remarks of an eminent local authority
on the chemical composition of the body--a subject "new," as it appears,
to the general medical practitioner of the day though, for over a
quarter of a century freely expatiated upon by the great Biologists of
the period.

The extract is taken from a recent article by Assistant Surgeon General
Dr. W.C. Rucker, of the United States Public Health Service, and reads
as follows:

"Much of the advance of modern medicine has been accomplished through
the development of physiological chemistry which is even yet a new
science.

"Although so new, it is assuming such importance as to make it manifest
that the physiology of the future will be written largely in terms of
chemistry.

"We have come to realize that the body is in a literal sense of the
word, a chemical laboratory. The foods we eat, the fluids we drink, the
gases we breathe are complex chemical compounds which the body must
take apart and put together again in such a way that the materials may
be delivered in a shape that will enable the cells to store them. It is
then the business of the cells to utilize these materials for TISSUE
BUILDING and in the production of energy, in the form of work and heat.
The body manufactures different kinds of products, some beneficial,
others harmful. Thus for example, excessive muscular effort throws into
the bloodstream fatigue products that are poisonous. A person utterly
tired out is really suffering from acute poisoning. On the other hand,
to resist invasion by infectious diseases, the body manufactures
anti-poisons that kill the enemy germs--making in other words, its own
medicine."

The physical processes here mentioned by Dr. Rucker are fully explained
in my book, "Dare to be Healthy," chapter VI, VII, VIII, and the natural
principles involved have been practiced by me for over 30 years. I
mention the fact simply as corroborative evidence of the authenticity
and value of the work shortly to be published.

"Art may err, but Nature cannot miss,"--is an aphorism attributed to
the poet Dryden. It adequately supports Dr. Rucker's wise, significant
and timely pronouncement and reminds me of an illustrative incident
recorded in connection with the world famed physician Boerhaave of
Leyden,--Holland's chief centre of learning--who lived some 250 years
ago, when doctors knew less than at present of the circulation and
functions of the blood.

Boerhaave, it appears, conceived the idea of a sort of posthumous
pleasantry, of a distinctly lucrative nature, at the expense of his
medical brethren. Professional ignorance and popular superstition had
alike surrounded his name with a halo of mystery and he was credited
with almost miraculous powers of healing and the possession of the
Secret of Disease and Health.

At the sale of effects, following his death, there was a great gathering
of the most celebrated physicians of the day and his books and records
fetched fabulous prices. But one special tome, ponderous, silver-clasped
and locked, entitled: "Macrobiotic, The True and Complete Secret of
Long, Healthy Life," was the cynosure of every avaricious eye. The
auctioneer shrewdly reserved it until the last. Amidst a scene of
unparalleled excitement and competition the Great Book was at length
knocked down to a famous London physician for no less a sum than seven
thousand Gulden. When opened with eager anticipation before the
disappointed bidders, its pages were found to be blank--with one
exception. Upon this one was inscribed in the handwriting of Boerhaave
himself, only these ten words:

"_Keep the head cool, the feet warm, the bowels open._"

Turning to an excited audience it was thus the great London authority
spoke:

"I once heard it said that the world is simple; that health is simple;
that it is the folly of man that causes all complications, and that it
is the delicate task of the true physician to reduce everything to its
original simplicity. Heaven knows that our great Master, Boerhaave, has
solved life's problem. To me this truth is well worth the 7,000 Gulden I
pay to secure it; while to you, my friends, who have travelled from
distant parts of the globe in search of it, receive from me the legacy
of our Master and also be, likewise, content."

The moral that this story teaches is the same eternal lesson of all
time, as expressed through the medium of Biology: that not by art or
artifice can health be cheaply snatched at will from the Infinite
Sources of Life, but that by consistently following the guidance of
Nature's Laws the healthy functions of the human organism may alone be
correctly maintained, or, when driven by ill-treatment into decline, it
is the rational scientific assistance we afford to the efforts of
Nature, by which alone we may hope to re-establish that normal condition
of health. For, in the worthy words of Wordsworth I may say: "So build
we up the being that we are."

The writer does not claim for this method so great a degree of
simplicity. But he does base it upon the same truth that simplicity and
a return to natural conditions are the only ways of effectively healing
the diseased body.

Guided by the great masters of biology and physiological chemistry, his
object has been to determine the elements of which the twelve main
tissues of the human body are composed and to learn in what manner these
tissues suffer from the various diseases which attack them.

Were I desirous of emulating the illustrious Boerhaave, I might
concentrate my work into these few words: _Supply the system with the
necessary constituents of its tissues and at the same time assist the
organism by means of simple and natural appliances, and REGENERATION
will continue until the desired physiological condition is reached._

In so doing, I fear, I should bequeath but little to the comprehension
of humanity.

I desire that all shall benefit by the diligent research work of my
life. I desire to leave my legacy to humankind clearly and distinctly
defined, in rules carefully expressed in the Course of Study I have
prepared.

I do not expect them to be accepted without controversy. Nor do I look
for gratitude from those whom I seek to benefit. I have no delusions and
the satisfaction of having delivered my message will be my sole reward.
I can only trust in this more enlightened age, that history as poetized
by Pope may not repeat itself:

  "Truths would you teach, or save a sinking land?
  All fear, none aid you, and few understand."

My solace, even so, for the nonce would be the knowledge of life and
health restored to the faithful, though, comparatively, few and the
confidence that truth must, in the issue, at length prevail, convincing,
victorious over all.

Before proceeding further I wish it to be distinctly understood that it
is no part of my scheme or intention to seek in any way to eliminate the
physician.

As there are, in fact, no two human organism exactly alike, so also is
there divergence, more or less, in each individual case, in disease; and
however apparently similar the symptoms may be, the knowledge and
experience of a physician becomes necessary in order to determine
correctly what the ailment is and how general principles should be
applied in each particular case.

On the contrary, I purpose to explain fully the secret causes of disease
and their removal, in pursuance of the belief held in common with
fair-minded physicians the world over, that a better knowledge of the
human organism and hygiene on the part of the layman, would be of equal
advantage alike to physician and patient.

Drawing aside the veil from professional secrecy and allowing the
patient to know the why and the wherefore of things, means positive
success for my hygienic-dietetic system of healing, because it is the
only system which can ultimately survive in the light of general
knowledge and wisdom.

No knowledge, no precautions, will always prevent disease. It is the
natural incidence of the law of cause and effect that man, collectively,
cannot expect to go through life unmolested by disturbances of health.
From the very outset the tendency to disease is inherited; and indeed
today, although we have now learned how to combat the enemy, yet
opposing hosts are seen to be so vast and strongly entrenched about us
that we realize to some extent the years that must elapse before mankind
can be entirely set free from his hideous heritage, the harvest sown by
past ignorance, deception and neglect.

But, from the malignant evil of internecine strife Universal Good is
rising with an awakened nation's cry--a cry for freedom and release from
the ever-lengthening chains of pernicious interests and obsolete
institutions. The moment of release is at hand: That pyschological
moment of which James Russell Lowell sings:

  "Once to every man and nation
  Comes the moment to decide,
  In the strife of Truth with Falsehood,
  For the good or evil side."

And knowing what the People know--they who have borne so long, in grimly
impotent silence, under the guise of Freedom, the fortunes of the
slave--can we for one moment doubt what view their lawful, reasoning
demand for redress will take and whether or no it will prevail? The
hundred million voices of the Union sternly answer: NO!

In effecting this release, so far as the Science of Healing is
concerned, my system, which I claim to be entirely original, will be
found particularly efficacious, for it presents plainly and
convincingly, in the light of the most recent discoveries, the truth
that _all constitutional diseases are but the variations of one basal
deficiency_; that the entire art of rational healing lies in a knowledge
of the component parts of the body tissues, in a determination of the
tissues involved in the process of degeneration in each specific
instance, and in the subsequent treatment thereof by means of supplying
to the blood the elements necessary to regenerate the tissues in
question.

From this brief explanation may be judged the importance of the
hygienic dietetic physician in cases of sickness. The quack and
charlatan it is who persuade people to believe that they do not need the
physician, and compel them to pay for this belief in money and in
health. It is the obvious duty of every one to seek aid in case of
sickness from some physician who is a profound and professed advocate of
the only sensible, practical method of treatment; but, at the same time
I would make it possible for all to acquire sufficient knowledge to
enable them to judge for themselves whether the attendant summoned
responds in some measure to this requirement, the simple and logical
course of which contains at least some ray of hope for all who suffer.

       *       *       *       *       *

It may not be amiss to cite here a brief outline of the teachings of the
four bright particular stars who have served as beacon lights in the
history and development of medicine. Not only does the modern medical
world acknowledge the doctrines of these four men as the foundation upon
which the practice of healing has been raised to a science, but
moreover,--_a point much more important for our consideration_,--it
also admits that the least essential part of the work of Hippocrates,
the "Father of Medicine;" namely, his _statement of theory_, is the part
which has been accorded permanent prominence, whilst the portion of
greatest value in his labours; that is to say, the _practical part_, has
been neglected and ignored.

The following passages are taken from the article entitled "History of
Medicine" in the Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th. Edition, vol. XVIII,
pages 42-51.

"_Hippocrates_, called the 'Father of Medicine,' lived during the age of
Pericles, (495-429 B.C.), and occupied as high a position in medicine as
did the great philosophers, orators, and tragedians in their respective
fields.

His high conception of the duties and position of the physician and the
skill with which he manipulated the materials that were at hand,
constituted two important characteristics of Hippocratic medicine.
Another was the recognition that disease, as well as health, is a
process governed by what we call natural laws, learned by observation,
and indicating the direction of recovery. These views of the 'natural
history of disease' led to habits of minute observation and careful
interpretation of symptoms, in which the Hippocratic school excelled and
has been the model for all succeeding ages, so that even now the true
method of clinical medicine may be said to be the method of Hippocrates.

One of the important doctrines of Hippocrates was the healing power of
nature. He did not teach that nature was sufficient to cure disease, but
he recognized a natural process of the humours, at least in acute
disease, being first of all _crude_, then passing through _coction_ or
digestion, and finally being expelled by resolution or crisis through
one of the natural channels of the body. The duty of the physician was
to 'assist and not to hinder these changes, so that the sick man might
conquer the disease with the help of the physician.'"

"_Galen_, the man from whom the greater part of modern European medicine
has flowed, lived about 131 to 201 A.D. He was equipped with all the
anatomical, medical, and philosophical knowledge of his time; he had
studied all kinds of natural curiosities and was in close touch with
important political events; he possessed enormous industry, great
practical sagacity, and unbounded literary fluency. At that time there
were numerous sects in the medical profession, various dogmatic systems
prevailed in medical science, and the social standing of physicians was
degraded. He assumed the task of reforming the existing evils and
restoring the unity of medicine as it had been understood by
Hippocrates, at the same time elevating the dignity of medical
practitioners.

In the explanation and healing of diseases he applied the science of
physiology. His theory was based upon the Hippocratic doctrine of
humours, but he developed it with marvelous ingenuity. He advocated that
the normal condition of the body depended upon a proper proportion of
the four elements, hot, cold, wet and dry. The faulty proportions of the
same gave rise, not to disease, but to the occasions for disease. He
laid equal stress upon the faulty composition or dysaemia of the blood.
He claimed that all diseases were due to a combination of these morbid
predispositions, together with injurious external influences, and thus
explained all symptoms and all diseases. He found a name for every
phenomenon and a solution for every problem. And though it was precisely
in this characteristic that he abandoned scientific methods and
practical utility, it was also this quality that gained for him his
popularity and prominence in the medical world.

However, his reputation grew slowly. His opinions were in opposition to
those of other physicians of his time. In the succeeding generation he
won esteem as a philosopher, and it was only gradually that his system
was accepted implicitly. It enjoyed great, though not exclusive
predominance until the fall of Roman civilization."

"_Thomas Sydenham_, (1624-1689) was well acquainted with the works of
the ancient physicians and had a fair knowledge of chemistry. Whether he
had any knowledge of anatomy is not definitely known. He advocated the
actual study of disease in an impartial manner, discarding all
hypothesis. He repeatedly referred to Hippocrates in his medical
methods, and he has quite deservedly been styled the English
Hippocrates. He placed great stress on the 'natural history of disease,'
just as did his Greek master, and likewise attached great importance to
'epidemic constitution,' that is, the influence of weather and other
natural causes on the process of disease. He believed in the healing
power of nature to an even greater degree than did Hippocrates. He
claimed that disease was nothing more than an effort on the part of
nature to restore the health of the patient by the elimination of the
morbific matter.

The reform of practical medicine was effected by men who advocated the
rejection of all hypothesis and the impartial study of natural
processes, as shown in health and disease. Sydenham showed that these
natural processes could be studied and dealt with without being
explained, and, by laying stress on facts and disregarding
_explanations_, he introduced a _method_ in medicine far more fruitful
than any discoveries. Though the dogmatic spirit continued to live for a
long time, the reign of standard authority had passed."

"_Boerhaave._ In the latter part of the seventeenth century a physician
arose (1668-1738) who was destined to become far more prominent in the
medical world than any of the English physicians of the age of Queen
Anne, though he differed but little from them in his way of thinking.
This was _Hermann Boerhaave_. For many years he was professor of
medicine at Leyden, and excelled in influence and reputation not only
his greatest forerunners, Montanus of Padua and Sylvius of Leyden, but
probably every subsequent teacher. The Hospital of Leyden became the
centre of medical influence in Europe. Many of the leading English
physicians of the 18th century studied there. Boerhaave's method of
teaching was transplanted to Vienna through one of his pupils, Gerard
Van Swieten, and thus the noted Vienna school of medicine was founded.

The services of Boerhaave to the progress of medicine can hardly be
overestimated. He was the organizer and almost the constructor of the
modern method of clinical instruction. He followed the methods of
Hippocrates and Sydenham in his teachings and in his practice. The
points of his system that are best known are his doctrines of
inflammation, obstruction, and 'plethora.' In the practice of medicine
he aimed to make use of all the anatomical and physiological
acquisitions of his age, including microscopical anatomy.

In this respect he differed from Sydenham, for the latter paid but
little more attention to modern medicine than to ancient dogma. In some
respects he was like Galen, but again differed from him, as he did not
wish to reduce his knowledge to any definite system. He spent much time
in studying the medical classics, though he valued them from an
historical standpoint rather than from an authoritative standpoint. It
would almost seem that the great task of Boerhaave's life a combination
of ancient and modern medicine, could not be of any real permanent
value, and the same might be said of his Aphorisms, in which he gave a
summary of the results of his long experience. And yet it is an
indisputable fact that his contributions to the science of medicine form
one of the necessary factors in the construction of modern medicine."

       *       *       *       *       *

These extracts represent the principles of that bright constellation of
Master Minds who have gone before us and guided our footsteps through
tedious and tentative wanderings into the pathway of Truth. May their
undoubting, united testimony act as a reassuring, convincing influence
which will carry the reader back to the very fountain head of Medical
jurisprudence, through the medium of the Encyclopedia Britannica, the
highest accepted authority and criterion of authenticity in the English
speaking world; for, at the same time it will also provide a positive
and perfect safeguard and assurance of the solid basis and absolute
authenticity of my methods and teachings besides indicating definitely
the source and direction whence they are derived and establishing their
classical trend and legitimate purpose.




SYSTEM OF REGENERATION


In order to bring the entire system of regeneration under review, I
shall here endeavour to present in condensed form all the essential
points in my teachings. The reader will thus be enabled to picture to
himself his body, with its vital organs, clearly as in a mirror; he will
become familiarized with its composition and twelve principal tissues,
as well as with the sixteen elements of which they consist.

Man is a unit, and the human body an accumulation of millions of
separate cells, which are centres of life and which, in different
groupings and combinations, form the various organs that render
existence possible.

This existence is the natural sequel of the existence of former human
beings. They generated the life that is to be transferred by us to other
living beings.

The several functions of the organism combine to form a chain of
activities in which there must not be a single link missing, if life is
to continue.

These activities are comprised within an accumulation of cells which
are by no means stationary, for life means nothing more than the
constant dying, of the old cells and the reconstruction of the new. It
means that the human body as a whole is continually in a state of
composition and decomposition.

Not until the accumulation of cells we call the body is recognized as
one complete correlated and inseparable entity and the absolute
interdependence of the separate cells, each one upon the others, is
likewise accepted as the verified fact that it is--not until then will
the erroneous and obsolete idea be discarded, by which the various
organs of the body have been professionally treated as separate and
independent considerations, even to the extent of being dealt with, in
cases of disease, as totally aloof from one another and conveniently
classed as proper subjects for submission to the expert opinion of that
superior class of physicians who devote their attention exclusively to
special organs and are accordingly termed "Specialists."

Thus the question arises: What is the cause of _disease_? The question
does not apply to any one particular form of disease or class of
diseases, but to disease generally, as a concrete term meaning any
disorder which may manifest itself by individual disturbances in the
body; for such disturbance is but a variation in quantity or quality of
one general disturbance, a variation in the mechanism that controls the
work of keeping the existing cells in proper condition and replacing
those cells which are constantly being destroyed. It is a variation in
the process of _regeneration, which we term life_.

METABOLISM is the process which is constantly going on in the human
system, whereby the cells that have been consumed by oxidation are
removed through the excreta--the faeces, the urine, the perspiration,
and the exhalations from the lungs--to be replaced by new ones.

_Metabolism_, means change of matter. It signifies the course by which
nutritive material, or food, is built up into living matter. This
process is accomplished through the blood, which distributes the
necessary material to all parts of the body where cells need to be
replaced and carries away the consumed portions.

In the marvelous performance of its functions, when properly supplied,
it carries the elements that are essential to regeneration in the
correct proportions. When not properly supplied, these proportions
become incorrect and foreign formations may arise which are disturbing
to the organism.

In nature there is a constant tendency to counterbalance disturbances in
the proper proportion and by distribution of cell building material to
restore the normal condition. We may thus speak of the overwhelmingly
curative tendency of nature.

Metabolism is the function of the body which most constantly requires
attention. So, therefore, it is always through the blood that we must
assist nature in the process of counterbalancing and rectifying or
healing abnormal conditions.

It follows then, that, despite the apparent variety in _constitutional_
diseases, they are all practically the same. They are all disturbances
of metabolism through some irregularity in the quantitative or
qualitative condition of the blood.

Professor Jacob Moleschott, the great physiologist, has crystallized
this truth in the immortal words: "One of the principal questions to be
always asked of the physician is this: How may good healthy and active
blood be obtained? View the question as we may, we shall be forced to
acknowledge openly and explicitly or guardedly and indirectly that our
volition, our sensations, our strength, and our pro-creative powers are
dependent upon our blood and our blood upon our nutrition."

If such unity exists, why then the great difference in the human organs?
How is it that a bone in its stonelike hardness is essentially the same
as the exquisitely sensitive eye?

This is owing to the adaptive property of the cells, in the course of
their enormous accumulation, to different functions, which, again,
depends upon the varied arrangement of the constituent elements. These
elements all find lodgement in the blood, and are carried by it in
necessary quantities to the points where they are needed to assist the
organs in replacing consumed matter.

The difficulty found in grasping this idea of _unity_ has led to the
most momentous errors in modern medical science.

One result has been the undue attention paid to the study of anatomy,
insomuch that the different organs are regarded as wholly distinct
groups of cells. This is convenient from a descriptive standpoint, but
it tends too much to draw attention away from the source of life, and of
health. Only by noting the common characteristics of the cell
accumulations termed organs, are we enabled to supply the necessary
elements that may be lacking. And thus we arrive at the subject of _the
chemical analysis of the human body_ and its various organs, a subject
that has been badly neglected throughout the centuries.

It has been determined that the entire human body consists of a certain
number of chemical elements, appearing in different aggregations in
different parts. These aggregations repeating themselves in the various
organs.

Twelve principal aggregations of chemical elements have been established
and designated by the term _tissues_.

This fact led to the discovery of the truth that in the process of
healing attention must be given, not to the various organs, but to the
various tissues.

These tissues are dependent directly upon the condition and contents of
the blood, whose office it is to nourish them and which exhibits the
wonderful property of conveying to each tissue its selective
regenerative materials, _provided of course, that these elements are
present at the time in the blood_.

Sixteen definite elements have been established--and a seventeenth will
probably soon be added thereto--which, in their various combinations and
aggregations, form the different tissues of which the organs in the
human body are composed.

The prevalence of one or several of these elements in a certain tissue
forms the main or governing feature of that tissue. Thus, the prevalence
of potassium phosphate characterizes muscle tissue, the prevalence of
ammonium phosphate (lecithin) nerve tissue. Each one of the various
tissues consists of certain of these elements, and each tissue at every
point where it occurs is affected by the lack of any of its elements.

One of the greatest physiological chemists, Justus von Liebig, maintains
that, if one of the necessary elements in a chemical composition is
missing, the rest cannot fulfill their duties and the respective cells
must become diseased and degenerate.

This discovery, known as "the law of the minimum," has thrown additional
light upon the tasks before the new school of medicine.

Upon the basis of a careful diagnosis, the necessary nutritive salts or
cell-foods, carefully compounded in accordance with the law of
chemotaxis must be administered. This law discovered by _Engelmann_,
requires that these cell-foods must be administered in digestible and
assimilable forms so that the cells will be attracted by the chemical
reaction, which may be of a positive or a negative character.

This being so, we can easily build up the tissues, by studying their
chemical composition and supplying to the system that which is
necessary, in the form of food. The cell will take care of the rest.
Each tissue has its specific cell-system, and each cell will be
attracted only by those ingredients which are needed for the mother
tissue.

_To bring to a tissue through the blood the lacking constituent element
or elements is the only means of regenerating and healing diseased
cells._

In this connection we are considering only constitutional diseases.

It has been shown that the lack of certain chemical elements from the
blood signifies disease and that the variety of the disease depends on
which of the elements are either lacking entirely or are present in
incorrect proportion.

After this lack has been determined, the course to pursue in curing the
disease is to supply the lacking chemical elements in the form of
concentrated cell-food in _addition_ to the regular food.

This method displaces entirely the old system of filling the body
with poisonous drugs in order to _counteract the effects of the
disease_. Such a system may suppress the symptoms by benumbing the
nerves and preventing pain, it may counteract the natural process of
healing of which inflammation, fever and pain, are the outward
manifestations;--_but it can never cure_.

The discovery of dysaemia, or impaired blood supply, as the governing
cause of disease, has destroyed another idol of modern fetish worship in
medicine.

Since the discovery of various species of bacilli, which accompany
nearly every form of disease in some form or other, these have been
commonly declared to be the causes of diseases, and the tendency is to
find some poison that will kill the bacilli in order to cure the
disease.

The bacillus, on the contrary, is only the consequence, or symptom, of a
disease. The diseased and decomposing parts furnish fertile soil
suitable to the propagating of bacilli because of the lack of the normal
chemical elements in the blood and tissue. But to kill them, while the
underlying conditions for their reproduction remain unchanged, can,
obviously, never effect a cure. So the great hopes that have attached to
sero-therapy are doomed to disappointment, and the application of
anti-toxins prepared from the serum of animals, are fated shortly to
vanish in the wake of others of those strange temporary crazes which
periodically obsess mankind for a while and pass away.

The discovery that a dysaemic condition of the blood leads to certain
destructive processes termed diseases, was soon followed by the
apprehension that one of the principal factors in bringing about such
disturbance is _predisposition_,--in many cases heredity.

The term "Hereditary disease" signifies that the improper chemical
composition of the blood of one or both parents is transmitted to the
offspring, and that it causes in them likewise a degeneration of certain
tissues and of the organs composed of those tissues.

The hygienic-dietetic system of healing does not, however, regard
heredity as an invincible enemy, especially since my discovery of the
"Law of the Cross-Transmission of Characteristics."

It is in the solution of this problem of "hereditary disease" that my
system will eventually come into its own and will ere long be recognized
as the most rational and effectual therapy ever applied since the
beginning of the art of healing. It may be years before it is accorded
the proverbially tardy acknowledgment of the "orthodox" schools, but
that it will, nay _must_ be eventually adopted is virtually a foregone
conclusion--that is, if it be indeed the function or policy of the
physician of the future to adequately seek to succour the suffering and
regenerate the races of mankind. Of the physician of the present it can
at best be said in Goethe's incisive words:

  "Er halt die Theile in seiner Hand,
  Doch fehlt ihm leider das gelst' ge Band."

  He holds the parts within his hand,
  But lacks the mental grasp of all.

For full explanation of the significance of my law, I must refer you to
the first lecture in my book entitled "Within the Bud,"--and the lesson
therein on the theory of "Pangenesis," which space forbids my repeating
here. This lesson will convey conclusively to any thinking mind what
heredity really means. After a brief study of this interesting subject
the importance of the "Law of the Cross-Transmission of Characteristics"
will become amply apparent and the intelligent reader will undoubtedly
wonder why it has not been applied and acknowledged long ago. For
answer, I must refer you to the schools, whose policy it has ever been
to, at any rate, abstain from assisting, if not absolutely to
diplomatically hinder the development of fresh scientific discoveries.
But the time is fast approaching when a sharp and decisive end to this
iniquity will be demanded by the will of an enlightened people; only
then will the existing orthodox power be compelled to loosen its
obstructive grip which the interests of humanity have, so far, been
powerless to unclasp. But, to quote the stirring words of one who looked
with prophetic, faithful eye into the tangled problems of futurity:

  "The people will come into their own at last,--
    God is not mocked for ever."

My Law of the Cross-Transmission of Characteristics may be simply stated
as follows:

Under all conditions, the matter of sex is determined in the egg-cell at
the moment of fertilization.

Under all conditions, the sex is determined by a struggle for the
mastery in the egg-cell, between the energy of that egg-cell and the
energy of the male spermatozoon. In a crisis, when the life of one of
the two seeds is trembling in the balance, one of them--through the
exertion of its "Latent Reserve Energy," dominates, and engenders a
child of the opposite sex. This reversal of the sex is in conformity
with the Law of the _Cross-Transmission of Sex_; that is, the mother is
represented in the male offspring and the father in the female,--this
being the normal expression of the Law of Cross-Transmission of
Characteristics.

The "Latent Reserve Energy" is provided by nature for the "Preservation
of Species," and through this provision an impulsive, vehement energy
can, at the final moment of a crisis, be called upon for the salvation
of its kind.

A _seeming_ exception to this is due to the "Law of the Dominant" which
overrides the action of "Latent Reserve Energy," and is a provision of
nature for the preservation of the "Dominant," which is the most
prominent quality in nature.

When the subject is properly understood, this _seeming_ exception will
also become clear.

In the natural course, the study of heredity leads to the understanding
of _predisposition_. In other words, if you have understood heredity, it
will be easy to understand predisposition; for it means that the
protoplasm or seed, from whichever organism it may proceed, must contain
some of the salient characteristics of its ancestors, good and bad,
dominant and recessive. Not only will it contain characteristics from
father and mother, but from _all_ the direct ancestors. It is impossible
to know exactly which points will manifest themselves, but a good many
_bad_ points _may be_ eliminated by studying the ancestral line; and the
direct diseases or bad characteristics of a parent, _must be_ eliminated
by applying the Law of the Cross-Transmission of Characteristics.

For example: If the father has a certain disease or positive symptoms
of that disease, by no means create a girl, as she will certainly be
predisposed for that disease, and may pay the penalty, if "Regeneration"
is not begun early. The same principle applies to the mother. If she is
diseased, do not create a son, until "Regeneration" has been brought
about.

Furthermore, it will be possible to improve the offspring by encouraging
and promoting the good points, especially after studying and applying
the above law, as well as my law of the "Determination of the Sex at
Will."

Looking at the question from this point of view, we begin to realize the
enormous significance of my discovery. This supplies the main reason for
the study of the laws, for the "_Prevention of Diseases_."

Only when we know that every acquired characteristic may be transmitted
to the offspring will we become conscious of the _terrible
responsibility_ we assume when we reproduce offspring, and realize that
we may create more pain and suffering instead of eliminating it.

As Nature _demands_ that we reproduce ourselves or be punished for
disobeying her laws, what is to be done?

Study and follow the advice given in this book, and you will awake to
the fact that Nietsche's words were not "Utopian" when he commanded us
to "reproduce something better than we are."

Together with the predisposition to disease, the child also acquires the
hereditary tendency to regeneration; and thus rational hygienic-dietetic
treatment may be able to eliminate the diseases which were formerly
pronounced incurable. This can only be effected by the effort to remove
the cause and strengthen the weak points by means of Regeneration.

The reader will now plainly understand that in order to heal, according
to the hygienic-dietetic system, the blood must be supplied with the
chemical elements that are missing from the tissues.

There are three ways of accomplishing this; namely, by diet, by
nutritive preparations, and by physical treatment.

The first and most natural way is by means of proper diet.

Since the chemical elements are introduced into the body through the
food, the quantity and quality of the food must be regulated. The
patient must receive food that will help in regenerating his blood;
particularly such food as contains the elements that are lacking in the
affected tissues in his body.

The regular supply of food is however usually insufficient to overcome
the process of destruction, and it is therefore necessary to add the
missing elements in purer form and larger quantity. These nutritive
preparations contain only such chemical elements as exist in the human
body; they also contain them in the proper chemical proportion and are
entirely free from poisonous substances. They promote a general
regeneration of the blood that will eventually lead to a complete cure.

Physical treatment may be made to assist the proper circulation of the
blood, opening at the same time the pores of the skin for the withdrawal
from the body of disease elements and the introduction of desirable
material. Massage, gymnastics, ablutions, and various kinds of baths and
packs constitute the most of the healing measures of this description
resorted to.

This is indeed the legitimate field for Osteo-Chyropractice.

In order to understand the method of treatment which I apply, it is
necessary to understand one of the great laws of physiological
chemistry, acknowledged as such by the great masters of chemistry, such
as Liebig and Hensel.

This law demonstrates that _nature is a unit, its component parts a
given number of elements, each of which has distinct qualities, and the
combination of which produces the various manifestations of life_.

These elements are classified as combining to form minerals, plants and
animals. They are all closely interrelated. The plant draws the mineral
elements from the soil, and after certain processes of combination,
conveys them as food to the animal. The animal substances that man
consumes make up the balance of the elements that are required to build
up the human body.

It is a matter of comparatively new discovery that the minerals are just
as important a part of the human body and of its food as the other basic
chemical elements. The discovery showing of what minerals the necessary
ingredients of the different body tissues are composed and in what
combination and quantity, in order that they may become incorporated
into the organism, has made it possible to supply them to the diseased
body in the purest and most effective way through nutritive
preparations, while their existence in food also furnishes an indication
as to the regulation of diet.

I have already given, in the preceding pages, the frank expression of
favourable opinion upon this vital topic generally, as voiced with
unmistakable, conviction by no less an authority than Assistant
Surgeon-General, Dr. W.C. Rucker of the United States Public Health
Service. I will now cite, in further corroboration, the opinion of the
distinguished Editor of "The Fra," as addressed to myself personally, in
special relation to an advance section of the book "Dare to be Healthy,"
together with other similar matter, and which, coming as it does from
one who is himself a leader in the van of the advancing phalanx of the
followers of Truth and Enlightenment, may be safely held to constitute a
just criterion of the literary and technical value of the work. It is
expressed as follows:

     _From John T. Hoyle, Managing Editor of "The Fra."_

     "From my reading of your 'Lessons,' and especially from 'Dare to be
     Healthy,' I can see that you have evolved a new concept in
     medicine, or rather 'Nature Healing,' which promises great results.
     I trust you will be able to put the whole into a printed book that
     we may all have the benefit of your discoveries. Unlike most
     physicians, while you treat of the most profound and vital
     scientific subjects, your language is so well chosen and your
     method of presentation is so clear, that no intelligent person
     would have difficulty in following your thought. You have
     undertaken a monumental work, and that success may attend your
     efforts is our heartfelt wish."

     _From Elbert Hubbard._

     "What I have read of it is intensely interesting and shows that you
     have a keen insight into the philosophies of life."

There are other spontaneous and unexpected testimonials of an equally
encouraging and complimentary nature from men whose knowledge and
attainments entitle their opinions to the tribute of respect. These
might well be likewise added here, but for the necessary limitations of
space.

When Moses saved the hosts of Israel from starvation in the desert, by
obtaining the solid and liquid food requisite for their deliverance, he
called the name of that food "Manna." in like manner, both as a just
tribute to the success they have achieved in the past and as an earnest
of the deliverance they are destined to achieve in the future, I have
designated my preparations by a similar term and called them the
_"Dech-Manna" Nutritive Preparations_.

Although presented in so condensed a form, the preceding outline cannot
fail to inspire in the mind of the reader a vivid conception of the
simple grandeur of nature's handiwork, more especially as regards her
provisions in relation to health and disease--secrets revealed, through
microscope and alembic, to those who, in spite of organized
discouragement, have attempted to fathom the erstwhile mysteries of
human suffering and to carry hope and freedom into the hostile camps of
Fear, Disease and Death.

To bring these considerations within the comprehension of all, and to
win all, so far as possible, to the practical observance of the means
and precepts of Health and Safety is the object of the projected course
of study of which the following is the business proposition.




THE DARE TO BE HEALTHY CLUB

BUSINESS PROPOSITION


The course of study in connection with the above consists of

     A SERIES OF ONE HUNDRED LESSONS

to be issued in weekly instalments, the whole course to extend over a
period of two years.

Each lesson will consist, approximately, of some twenty-two to
twenty-five full-sized pages (i.e. 25/28 lines of 8/12 words each) which
will be mailed to every subscriber weekly prepaid.

It is necessary, in view of contingent expenses that a membership of
_One thousand subscribers_ should be obtained, as only when such an
amount of support is guaranteed would the printing of the hundred
lectures under the easy and advantageous terms offered be at all
justified.

If, however, it should be represented to me by those most immediately
interested, that it is their desire to Confine the Club to narrower
limits, I might, though with some reluctance, consider the advisability
of reducing the minimum membership to _One hundred students_ provided
that these should agree to contribute the sum total of the fees for the
two years course in advance.

With every twentieth lesson will be forwarded to the subscriber, gratis,
one of five well bound volumes of superior literary attraction and
interest.

These five volumes are as follows:

     ATLAS OF HUMAN ANATOMY (profusely illustrated with coloured plates
     and containing folding manikin) especially compiled for the
     student.

     MANUAL OF PHYSIOLOGY, especially compiled for the student.

     MANUAL OF PHYSIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY, especially compiled for the
     student.

     MANUAL OF BIOLOGICAL THERAPY, Dechmann's system, (500 pages).

     MEDICAL DICTIONARY (pocket edition in flexible leather with gilt
     edges, giving 30,000 definitions.)

At the end of the course each student in good standing, will receive
free of cost a Membership Diploma in the form of a beautifully artistic
colour plate, the facsimile of which will appear herewith.

"Within the Bud; the Procreation of a Healthy, Happy, and Beautiful
Child of the Desired Sex, by L. Dechmann, Biologist." This is a book of
302 pages, the paper bound edition retailing at $3.00, the edition de
luxe at $5.00, can be obtained at any book store or direct from the
author.

The above literature cannot be otherwise procured, and its cost actually
amounts to nearly one-half the subscription for the entire course of
lessons.

At the close of the course a beautiful engraved cover design for binding
the 100 lessons may be obtained at the price of $1.00.

Separate file binders and perforators for the lessons, each cover
holding some 300 pages, may be obtained at the nominal cost of about 50
cents each; one of these will be delivered free with the first lesson.


CELL-FOODS.

In addition to these advantages, all members of the Club will be
entitled to procure any supplies they may need of the Dech-Manna
Cell-Foods at special (wholesale) prices.

LOUIS DECHMANN.

_Biologist and Physiological Chemist._ 127 North 59th Street, Seattle,
Wash., U.S.A.




THE BASIS OF PROCEEDINGS _of_ THE DARE TO BE HEALTHY CLUB


In the ensuing pages I shall endeavour to give the reader a necessarily
brief and cursory, glance into the subjects which will form the
underlying motif of the vast and manifold deliberations which will
constitute the fundamental basis of the projected course of study which
will be brought under the consideration of the members of the proposed
association and will constitute the schedule, as it were, of the
periodical dissertations of these matters of world-wide and vital
individual significance to be comprised in the Series of One Hundred
Lessons.

I have been at some pains to avoid as far as possible the use of
technical and professional phrases and terminology, for the express
purpose of bringing within the scope of every faculty of understanding
these subjects which are equally _a matter of life and death importance_
to every man, woman and child, in all the wide and varied range of
nationalities and languages which constitute so large a part of our
great Republic and upon whose health and efficiency so much of our
national life depends.

The great and ominous unrest, so much in evidence of late, is ample
proof of a latent popular dissatisfaction with the conditions of life
and it is equally significant of the prevailing nervous tension--the
obvious result of malnutrition of the system--which is one of the most
prominent popular features of the worry-worn denizen of today.

Life, Health, Happiness--that vital interdependent triad--are surely a
preoccupation strong enough and precious enough to startle the minds of
the most complacent; and it is with the object of awakening all to their
possibilities--in health or in disease--of protection of the one, and
hope and regeneration under the other, that the course of study has been
inaugurated of which the following is but a bare outline.


MAN AS A UNIT.[A]

The human body is an accumulation of millions of separate cells, which
are the bearers of life, and which in various groups form the different
organs, the combined action of which constitutes our individual
existence.

This existence itself is the natural issue of the existence of our
predecessors, who generated the new life which will be transmitted by us
and reappear in our offspring.

In like manner all the functions of the body form an endless chain in
which not a single link must be faulty or missing, if healthy organic
life is to continue.

This accumulation of cells, however, is by no means inactive. On the
contrary, organic life is nothing but the constant dying of the old and
the reconstruction of new cells; it means that we are in a perpetual
condition of composition and consequently of decomposition throughout
our entire being, its different parts and organs.

As soon as we are able to recognize this accumulation of cells as one
individual whole and thus arrive at the idea of their absolute
interdependence, we shall get rid of the prevalent idea, that the mere
structural differences between the respective organs of the body make
them separate and independent things which may be treated irrespective
of one another in case of disease, or dealt with by different
specialists.

We arrive then at the one great question: _What is the cause of
disease?_ Not of one or other form of disease or class of diseases, but
of disease as a whole.

_There is, in fact, only one disease._

What appear to us as different disturbances of the normal condition of
our body, are only variations, in quantity or in quality, of the one
thing. It is the variation of the controlling element which performs the
necessary work of keeping the existing cells in proper condition and
replacing those which in the course of nature are destroyed. In a word,
the work of _perpetual regeneration, which is life_.


METABOLISM.

This continuous changing of the entire human body,--the removal of the
discarded cells, burned up by oxidation and expelled from the body in
the urine, the perspiration and other excretions, and their replacement
by new ones,--is called metabolism, that is, "change of matter."

This change is brought about by means of a vital fluid in the body,
which circulates from the moment in which the spermatozoon, or male
seed, touches the female egg in the womb of the mother, until the time
of our last breath. That fluid is _the blood_,--the carrier of nature's
supplies to all parts of the body for the rebuilding of cells; the exact
and equitable distributor in quantities of material which determines the
quality of the cells.

In its marvelous performance of this function, the blood is the bearer
of the sole existing condition of health; namely the necessary elements
of cell-building in the right proportions.

This is health, and the lack thereof is disease.

The demand of nature for upbuilding and rebuilding is the strongest
instinctive impulse of our being; and this being so, a wrong proportion
may cause the upbuilding of things which are different and disturbing to
the normal organism.

But, on the other hand, kindly nature exhibits an ever existent
inclination to counterbalance any disturbance in the right proportion,
and to bring back conditions to uniformity.

We may thus justly speak of _the overwhelming healing tendency of
nature_.

Metabolism is, therefore, the one great dominant function of the body
which, accordingly, must have our especial care.

It is the blood, consequently, to which alone we can resort if we desire
to assist nature in its process and tendency of balancing and healing.

This again indicates that, notwithstanding the apparent great variety of
_constitutional diseases, they are all practically one and the same
disease. They are all disturbances of proper metabolism, by some
irregularity of the quantitative or qualitative condition of the blood_.

This governing truth the great physiologist, Prof. Jacob Moleschott, has
formulated in the memorable words: "It is one of the chief questions
which humanity must always ask of the physician: how to attain good,
healthy and active blood. And, view the question as we may, all who give
it serious thought, are forced by experience to acknowledge explicitly,
or otherwise, that _our mental and physical capacity, and likewise the
power of reproduction, are directly dependent upon our blood, and our
blood on our nutrition_."


VARIETY OF ORGANS.

Why then, you may ask, if such unity exists, why this dissimilarity in
the tissues of the respective bodily organs? How is it that a bone in
its stonelike hardness is essentially the same as the infinitely tender
tissues of the eye? This difference is due to and accounted for by the
adaptation of certain portions of the immense accumulation of cells to
diverse functions, which has necessitated the variable conformity of the
supporting elements. But all of these elements are in the blood, which
carries them in the necessary quantities to the different organs to
which they belong and where they are utilized to replace used-up matter.

I do not overlook the difficulty of grasping this idea of unity.

The fact, that it is so difficult to realize, has led to the greatest
errors in present day medical science.

It seemed at first sight, so obviously necessary to study the different
organs as entirely different groups, to work out a careful system of
bones, of intestinal organs, of blood-vessels, of nerves, and so on; all
of which is of course very valuable, in its place, but only from a
descriptive standpoint.

Anatomy shows us what life has produced in the construction of a human
form, but it does not indicate the source of life, nor, consequently,
the source of health.

It is well to know the different forms of cell accumulations, which are
called organs, but if we desire to keep them in good order, we must
watch closely what is common to them all; for it is only from this point
of view, that we are able to determine the necessary, and possibly, the
lacking elements for purposes of healing.

Thus, as one of the greatest achievements of modern science, we come to
the one most vital thing, so sorely needed and yet so badly neglected
throughout the centuries: _The chemical analysis of the human body and
its different organs._

A new light has now dawned upon the subject most essential to the
inauguration of a new and effective system of healing.

The physiological chemist has at length discovered that the human body,
and every organ of that body consists of a certain number of chemical
elements, which appear in different parts in different aggregations.
These aggregations, however, repeat themselves in the various parts or
organs.

It was thus finally discovered that there are _twelve different main
aggregations of such elements_, which groups of equal elements we call
_tissues_.

Through this discovery we have arrived at the great truth that _it is
not to the purpose, in healing, to turn attention to the various organs,
but rather to the various tissues_.

The influence which can be exercised on these tissues is exercised
through the blood which nourishes all of them alike, and which has the
wonderful capacity of carrying to each of them their necessary building
and rebuilding, or regenerating materials,--_provided, of course, that
these are, as they should be, present in the blood_.


THE CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS.

Research in physiological chemistry, has so far determined that there
are sixteen definite and discernible elements--and a seventeenth is now
in course of determination--which, in their various combinations and
aggregations, form the different tissues of which the various organs of
the human body are constructed.

The preponderance of one or more of these elements in a certain tissue
forms the main or governing feature, or tissue of any organ. Thus the
prevalence of potassium phosphate forms the muscle tissue, the
prevalence of ammonium phosphate (lecithin) forms the nerve tissue.

For the purpose of general explanation it is sufficient to know that
each of the various tissues consist of some of these elements, and that
each of the tissues, at whatever part of the body it exists, is affected
by the lack of any one of these elements.

The greatest chemist of the age, Justus von Liebig, maintains that if
one of the necessary elements in a chemical composition is missing, the
rest cannot fulfil their duties, and the consequence of such deficiency
is that the cell in question must become diseased and degenerate.

This discovery, known as "the law of the minimum," has thrown an
additional reassuring light upon the practice of the new school of
medicine.

_To bring to the tissue the lacking constituent element or elements by
way of the blood is the only means of regenerating that tissue, that is,
of healing its diseased cells._


DYSAEMIA THE CAUSE OF ALL CONSTITUTIONAL DISEASES.

Within the limits of this abstract I do not propose to deal with the
disturbances in the system caused by traumatic influences, such as
wounds, etc. We are treating only of _constitutional_ diseases which,
whether of acute or of chronic character, are all caused by the lack of
such chemical elements as described.

It has been shown that the blood supplies all the chemical substances to
the different tissues, and that, consequently, it is the lack of these
elements in the blood, which causes the tissues to degenerate, or, in
other words, _the lack of certain chemical elements in the blood is
disease_.

It is, therefore, merely a question as to _which of the elements are
missing or which do not exist in correct proportion_, that determines
the different forms of disease.

When once this fact is established, the method of healing consists
mainly in supplying in the regular way, that is, _by certain additions
to the regular food_, the missing chemical elements in organic form; and
medical science has but _to determine which elements are wanting_, and
consequently, must be supplied.

_It goes without saying that in this system the old, pernicious drug
method of filling the body with various poisons to counteract the
effects or symptoms of disease, has no place whatever._ Certain
poisonous drugs may prove effective to suppress certain symptoms by
benumbing the nerves and preventing pain; they may, and do counteract
the natural process by which nature exercises her power in various ways
in the spontaneous effort to throw off disease, in the form of
inflammations, fevers or pains; _but they can never heal, or eradicate
disease_.

With the discovery of dysaemia as the governing cause of disease,
another idol of regular medicine has been cast down.

Since the discovery of the bacillus or microbe, which in varied form
accompanies nearly every variety of disease, it has become a dogma of
the at present dominant school of medicine that the various bacilli are
the actual causes of the different varieties of disease, and the
tendency has been to find some poison that would kill the bacilli in
order to heal the disease.

The truth is that the bacillus is not the cause, but the effect of
disease; in fact is nothing but another consequence or symptom of a
specific form of disease. Bacilli grow spontaneously in the ready soil
which the diseased and decomposing tissues provide, through lack of the
necessary chemical elements; but to attempt to exterminate them, while
the underlying conditions for their reproduction remain unchanged, can,
of course, never bring about healing.

And thus the high hopes and claims attached to the sero-therapy
inocculation process, the injection into the blood of anti-toxins
prepared with the serum of animals, have positively vanished.

Hundreds of thousands of human beings have perished in the course of
this delusion; but countless numbers will have cause, yet in our day,
to rejoice at the exposure of the stupid and unnatural theory, so long
legally enforced, that the introduction into the human system of such
poisonous substances could remove or overcome the natural consequences
of constitutional disease.


HEREDITY.

The discovery that a diseased condition of the blood leads to certain
bodily disturbances which we call disease, was soon followed by the
realization of the fact that one of the main conditions which bring
about such disturbances is predisposition, which in many cases is
hereditary.

"Hereditary disease" simply means that the improper chemical composition
of the blood of one or both parents has become duplicated in the
offspring, and that it has similar consequences in causing the
degeneration of certain tissues, and consequently of the organs composed
thereof, as may have been the case in the parents.

It is at least reassuring to know, however, _that to the modern
hygienic-dietetic system of healing, heredity, though perhaps more
tenacious, is by no means an invincible enemy_.

With a predisposition to disease the child acquires also the hereditary
tendency to self-protection, and thus rational hygienic-dietetic
treatment may be able to eliminate, in a comparatively short time, the
chain of diseases which in former years, generations have carried
hopelessly to the grave.


HEALING.

It has been already stated that healing, under the modern
hygienic-dietetic system, means supplying to the blood such chemical
elements as will replace what are missing in defective tissues of the
body.

I will now outline the methods of carrying it into effect.

In a general way there are three means of doing this:

No. 1. _Diet_: The first and most natural way is by proper diet.

As the normal chemical elements are introduced into the body as
constituents of the regular daily food, the task which, in the first
place, confronts the hygienic-dietetic physician is that of regulating
the quantity, quality and description of food.

Too little importance has heretofore been given to this question and,
beyond prohibiting certain dishes and obviously detrimental viands,
little attention was paid by the average physician to the matter of the
every-day nourishment of the patient.

The hygienic-dietetic physician on the other hand, employs the utmost
care in giving to the patient everything that will help to regenerate
his blood, laying particular stress on such foods as contain the largest
proportion of the chemical elements that are missing in the affected
tissues.

No. 2. _Nutritive compositions_: The process of destruction, however,
which has to be met, in more or less advanced stages, in nearly every
case requires supply, in quantity of the pure material to compensate the
deficiency of the missing elements, beyond that which could be derived
in the ordinary way of digestion from every-day food.

To meet this difficulty, certain condensed preparations have been
devised.

These nutritive compositions contain only such chemical elements in like
chemical proportions as exist in the human body. They are of the purest
material and contain no injurious elements whatsoever, while they foster
that general regeneration of the blood which will finally bring about a
complete cure.

No. 3. _Physical treatments_: It is the object of these treatments to
assist the proper circulation of the blood; to automatically open the
pores of the skin for the external treatment of certain diseases; to
withdraw elements of disease from the body, and to introduce certain
material influences, through the pores.

Massage, gymnastics, ablutions, various kinds of baths and "packs,"
constitute the chief features of the healing methods in this department.

Following this general explanation of the system, I may now go a little
deeper into the question of the constituent elements, the tissues formed
therefrom, the degeneration of these tissues, and the species of
degeneration which constitutes the various forms of disease commonly
known to us.

After this I will give a concise and simple general idea as to how my
methods should be applied.


THE UNITY OF NATURE.

To fully understand the method of healing which I apply, it is necessary
to understand one of the great natural laws, the discovery of which by
the great chemists, Justus von Liebig and Julius Hensel, has shown us
the path along which to proceed.

This law demonstrates that, in the last analysis, _nature is a unit, a
composition of a number of elements, each one possessing distinct
qualities, the combination of which produces the various manifestations
of life_.

These are classified, for convenience, according to their main
qualities, as minerals, plants or animals.

All of them are closely interrelated and one transmits the basic
elements to the other. It is the plant which draws the mineral elements
from the soil, and after certain processes of composition conveys them
as food to the animal, including the human being, while such animal
substances as are used for human food, contribute the balance of the
elements for the upbuilding of the human body.

It is a matter of comparatively new discovery that minerals are thus
just as important as a component part of the body and of its food as are
other basic chemical elements.

The discovery as to the mineral constituents of the body, their nature,
proportion and in which composition and in which quantity as necessary
ingredients of the different body tissues, in order that they may become
a part of the organism, has made it possible to administer them to the
diseased body in the purest condensed and most effective way in
_nutritive compositions_, while their proportionate existence in food is
also a criterion of diet, not only for the sick, but also as a
preventative of disease.


THE CHEMICAL PROCESS OF DISEASE.

In this, my scrutiny of nature's deep designs, I did not rest content when
only the composition of all the tissues of the body had been laid bare; but
I delved deeper and discovered that certain electric currents and reactions
of these elements were the causes of accelerating or retarding the natural
processes of metamorphosis and metabolism,--provoking disturbances of the
normal, which express themselves as disease.

Excessive growth, and lack of growth, are thus explained, together with
other phenomena which in this short chapter it is impossible to give in
scientific detail. It is my object now merely to show that in their
apparent simplicity the manifestations of life require special technical
knowledge such as cannot be expected of the layman in any adequate
degree.

Notwithstanding this free and open statement of cause and cure available
to the patient and to the world at large, the hygienic-dietetic
physician himself can by no means be dispensed with in case of the
appearance of disease, for only by his knowledge, experience, and
skilled advice can the aforesaid natural system of healing be applied
with effect in each individual case. And here it must always be borne in
mind that, of the countless individual organisms that this world
contains, no two, even, are exactly alike; and that consequently only
the skilled and accustomed practitioner =will be able to regulate such
hidden, internal processes as cause the visible disturbance, and thus
bring about healing and regeneration, which simply means a return to the
normal=.

=His methods will prevent the use of the surgeon's knife, which only
removes the symptom, leaving the cause untouched and inflicting useless
and irreparable harm. The specialist, with his poisonous specific
remedies for forms of disease, which after all are only degrees of
chemical exhaustion, will also disappear, together with all similar
treatment which enervates the body making it an easy prey to new attacks
of the same chemical anomalies which must and will most certainly return
so long as they are not rectified according to the principles of
biology.=


THE TWELVE TISSUES.

Bearing the above principle of unity in mind, we may now proceed one
step further, and study the most important details upon which the method
of healing, as applied by the hygienic-dietetic physician, is based.

As previously mentioned, the cells of the human body are organized into
twelve distinct tissues, some of which are the component parts of the
various organs as discernible by form and function.

These twelve tissues are the following:

  1. The plasmo tissue (blood plasma).
  2. The lymphoid tissue.
  3. The nerve tissue.
  4. The bone tissue.
  5. The muscular tissue.
  6. The mucous membrane tissue.
  7. The tooth and eye tissue.
  8. The hair tissue.
  9. The skin tissue.
  10. The gelatigenous tissue.
  11. The cartilage tissue.
  12. The body tissue in general.

1. _The plasmo tissue_: This tissue is a liquid, the blood plasma, which
is one of the important component parts of the life-giving substance,
blood. It is the blood serum--blood-water and fibrogen--which harbours
the white and the red corpuscles. The red corpuscles are the carriers of
oxygen to the various tissues, which the body draws from the atmosphere,
and of the other nutriments. They exchange it for the carbonic acid
which is forming in the body, and while the blood in flowing through the
system of arteries, brings the oxygen, it carries away, through the
veins, the poisonous carbonic acid which is exhaled into the atmosphere.

The red corpuscles, after having performed their duties, enter the liver
and are used to build the gall.

The proper quality of the plasma alone regulates the speed of blood
circulation and ensures its entrance into the finest capillaries--the
ultimate branches of the blood-vessels--hence, its capacity to carry
supplies of nutriment to the tissues. The disturbance of this proper
quality is among the main factors of constitutional disease.

2. _The lymphoid tissue_: The lymph is another of the life-giving
liquids of the body, which through a vascular system of its own, draws
certain nutritive substances from the food and carries them to certain
organs which it feeds, especially the nerves.

After this slow task is completed, the rest of the lymph enters the
blood and is carried by it to other parts of the body where only smaller
quantities of lymph are needed for nourishing purposes.

The proper quality and chemical composition of the lymph, which is
different from that of the blood, is of no less importance than that of
the plasma for the preservation and regeneration of the organism.

What the plasma is to the blood, the lymph is to the nerves.

3. _The nerve tissue_: A particular aggregation of cells forms the
nerves, which, emanating from their center in the brain and spine, run
as another separate system all through the body.

This system, however, is not one of vessels; but the nerves may best be
compared to the wires of a telephone system, establishing connection
between the remotest parts of the body and its central point, from which
the directions for both voluntary and involuntary movement are given and
transmitted through the nerves.

They are of a peculiar chemical composition in which the nerve fat
(lecithin) plays a very important part, since its frequent presence in
insufficient quantity is among the most common causes of a great number
of nervous and other diseases.

4. _The bone tissue_: The bones consist of a special and very distinct
tissue in which lime predominates. This gives them the strength and
solidity which enables them to act as support to all the other organs.

The bones too are fed by the blood, and it is through the blood that the
necessary constituent parts for the regeneration of their tissue is
conveyed to them.

While naturally their power of resistance is greater than that of any
other organ, they are nevertheless subject to a number of structural
disturbances, other than traumatic, the causes of which are sometimes
hereditary, sometimes acquired through deficient properties of the
nourishing blood.

Certain tissues which form the connection between the bones and the rest
of the organs, and the gradual transition into other tissues, are
subjects separate and distinct and will be treated separately.

5. _The muscular tissue_: As to quantity, the muscular tissue represents
the maximum of any in the human body.

The muscles do not only consist solely of this one tissue, but of
several others, as do most of the other organs; but here, as in all
other cases, the principal component element is called after the organ
in which it is chiefly found.

The structure of the muscular tissue varies according to its function,
so that we distinguish between the striated and the unstriated or smooth
muscles. This, however, has no influence on their chemical composition,
a distinctive element of which is muscular fibrin, which has the
particular property of contractibility.

6. _The mucous membrane tissue_: The mucous membrane forms the covering
of many of the organs, and its chemical and structural composition is
identical in all parts of the body.

It is characterized by a viscid watery secretion from the mucous glands,
which are always found in the mucous membrane.

Its extremely delicate nature renders it subject to all sorts of
irregularities in chemical composition.

This is the cause of numerous diseases, most of which are due either to
overproduction or underproduction of the secretion which regulates
numerous functions of the body.

7. _The tooth and eye tissue_: While very different in external
appearance, functions and physical qualities, the teeth and the eyes
have nevertheless, the most important part of their chemical composition
in common; namely, _the fluoric acid_, which distinguishes them from all
other tissues.

In the process of natural healing the replacing of any element lacking
through destructive causes in either tissue will practically be the
same.

8. _The hair tissue_: Certain chemical component elements are only
found in the tissue which is called the hair, and which receives its
nourishment like all other tissues, through the blood.

While the hair may seem to be in apparently slight connection with the
rest of the body, it is in reality, none the less an organic portion of
the same, and dependent, like the rest upon the same central system of
supply.

9. _The skin tissue_: With reference to this tissue, much the same
remarks apply as already mentioned in regard to the mucous membrane. It,
however, has certain chemical elements, which are characteristic to its
various layers.

Since the skin forms the most important intermediary between the
external elements and the chemical and structural elements of the
interior of the human body, it is of the greatest importance that its
chemical composition should always be correct, and that it should not be
subject to decomposition such as improper nourishment engenders.

It should be borne in mind that the skin, like all other organs of the
body, grows from the inside outward, so that any ailment concerning the
skin, which is not of a traumatic nature, must be based upon wrong or
insufficient nourishment, and cannot be cured in any other way than by
internal regenerative means.

10. _The gelatigenous tissue_: This tissue, chemically and otherwise
peculiar as it is, forms the chief component part of many of the human
organs, and it may be truly said that the lack of attention which its
peculiarities have received in the past is responsible for more disease
and its fatal issue than almost anything else.

The gelatigenous tissue contains a number of special component elements,
which require special nourishment through proper diet; and in view of
the fact that the gelatigenous tissue pervades so many of the various
organs, its effect upon the functional abilities of a great number of
them is obvious.

The elasticity of most organs which work by contraction and expansion,
depends entirely upon the gelatigenous, rubber-like tissue of which they
are so largely composed.

11. _The cartilage tissue_: Practically the same applies to the
cartilage tissue; but it is only recently that it has been found to what
extent this is the case.

Although entirely different in nature and chemical composition, the
cartilage tissue serves to maintain certain outlines of form and feature
in the human body, which are not based on the still stronger forms of
supporting material, such as the bone tissue and the gelatigenous
tissue.

12. _The body tissue in general_: This comprises the red blood
corpuscles and all tissues which are in any way different from the
distinct tissues just described, but which nevertheless cannot be
classified as separately and distinctly independent.

It may be justly presumed that all elements of the other tissues are to
be found in these final tissues which share the unity of the organism.

       *       *       *       *       *

By devising a specially nourishing dietary system for the body tissue in
general, all component elements profit, in like degree, and such
disturbances as attack practically all the tissues and organs of the
body severally and conjointly; will be effectively prevented or cured in
the regular course of nature, in strict accordance with biological
principles.


DEGENERATION OF TISSUES.

Speaking biologically, if through some disturbance in the normal
chemical composition of the tissues, degeneration sets in, we speak of
it as disease.

Such degeneration may attack one tissue or several at the same time.

_To reduce the elements to their proper proportions, to force them
thereby to reassume their normal functions, means to restore health, or,
to heal._

As previously explained, it has been the great achievement of
hygienic-dietetic science, based on the natural laws of biology, to
discover that so many diseases which for centuries were considered as
entirely different from each other in cause and treatment, were
essentially the same. It was found that they were nothing but the
natural consequence of impure or imperfect blood, the result of
malnutrition of the vital fluid, the malign effect of which increases in
degree and manifestation the longer the impurity passes, by process of
heredity, from one generation to another.

Instead of following the natural tendency to return to the normal, the
blood becomes the fertile soil in which all manner of irregularities may
germinate in abundance, and combine in strong attacks on the normal
healthy organs, which will fast relax their natural power of resistance.

The system of natural healing, while adhering closely to the principle
of the unity of the body as well as of the unity of disease, has by no
means ignored that such differences are due to the differences in the
twelve tissues and _according to the said differences, the
constitutional diseases are grouped under the accustomed titles, as
follows_:

     1. Degeneration of the plasmo tissue: Anaemia, Chlorosis,
     Pernicious Anaemia, etc.
       (A.) Scrofulosis.
       (B.) Tuberculosis.
       (C.) Syphilis.
       (D.) Cancer.

     2. Degeneration of lymphoid tissue: (See I.--A. B. C. D.)

     3. Degeneration of the nerve tissue: Neuralgia, Neuritis,
     Neurasthenia, Asthma, Epilepsy, St. Vitus's Dance, etc., etc.

     4. Degeneration of the bone tissue: Rickets, Osteomalacia and
     similar diseases.

     5. Degeneration of the muscular tissue: Muscular Rheumatism,
     Sciatica or Nerve Rheumatism, Atrophia, Amyloid heart, kidney and
     liver.

     6. Degeneration of the mucous membrane tissue.
       (A.) Catarrh in all its forms: Bronchitis, Pleurisy, Pneumonia,
            Inflammation of nose, throat, bowels, stomach, bladder, etc.
       (B.) Hemorrhoids, Polyps, Adenoids.

     7. Degeneration of the tooth and eye tissue: All tooth and eye
     diseases.

     8. Degeneration of the hair tissue: All hair diseases.

     9. Degeneration of the skin tissue: All skin diseases.

     10. Degeneration of the gelatigenous tissue.
       (A.) Stomach and Intestinal diseases--acute forms.
       (B.) Stomach and Intestinal diseases--chronic form.

     11. Degeneration of the cartilage tissue: Ankylosis, Gout,
     Arthritis deformans.

     12. Degeneration of the body tissue in general.
       (A.) Locomotor ataxia.
       (B.) Basedow's disease. (Graves disease.)
       (C.) Diabetes mellitus.
       (D.) Obesity.
       (E.) Bright's disease.
       (F.) Arterio-sclerosis.


THE A.B.C. OF MY SYSTEM OF HEALING.

Setting aside for the time being the special groups of more complicated
diseases, such as are characterized by the degeneration of several of
the tissues at the same time, I will now give a short and comprehensive
description of the several distinct groups of disease. In each case, as
already shown, there must be a joint co-operation of these three
factors:

(A.) _Diet_, or the natural means of providing both healthy and
degenerating tissues alike with such substances as will support and
strengthen the healthy tissues, enabling them to resist the danger of
disease and consequent decomposition, and will also arrest degeneration
and prepare the way for the regeneration of the tissue which is already
affected.

(B.) _Nutritive compositions._ Such as will in each case introduce into
the system in a pure and proportionate combination, the necessary
quantities of the sixteen nutritive elements, the lack of which is the
characteristic factor of all disease and which diet unaided could not
adequately produce with the needful speed and proportion, unless
supplemented in this simple and effective manner.

(C.) _Physical treatment_, for the purpose of assisting the proper
distribution and assimilation of these nutritive factors--(A. and
B.)--and promoting the proper circulation of the blood.


DIET.

This is a subject of vast and vital importance. It comprises the science
of alimentation, which forms one of the indispensable functions of life;
it is thus, of necessity, a serious preoccupation under all conditions.

I have treated this important subject in my greater work with the minute
detail, which it deserves; thus, in following the advice given, therein,
in chapter XVIII, the reader will be able to ascertain the foods that
are best suited to various conditions, and how to prepare them in the
most sensible way.

At present, I can treat it only in a short and general way, giving the
principal groups of diet prescribed, with more or less variation, in
each case of disease as a part of the general treatment.

A few words may show _why_ diet plays so important a part in this system
of healing.

In the body there is a laboratory which produces spontaneously
everything necessary to maintain life.

This laboratory has various branches which are busy day and night
without interruption.

Here the life blood is created.

Prominent amongst these branches are:

  The stomach with its prolonged intestines;
  The liver;
  The kidneys;
  The lungs, and
  The skin.

Each one of these branches has a distinct part, or function to perform.

The stomach serves as the sorting house. Here the food is mixed with the
gastric juice which aids digestion and dissolves those ingredients
necessary to produce blood, flesh, fat, bones, etc.

Each of the other branches receives that portion of the ingredients
needed to perform its share of the work.

A structure cannot be constructed without a frame upon which every part
depends. In order to stand erect, the body must possess such a
framework. The skeleton is the same to the body as the frame is to the
building. This frame, then, or skeleton, together with the flesh, blood,
etc. are all formed from the material furnished by the food.

A residue of the digested food is removed from the body as useless;
everything else is utilized.

The portion of the food used, therefore, must contain all those
ingredients which go to make up and maintain the body in perfect working
order.

Experience has suggested certain groups of suitable diet which for the
sake of convenience I shall enumerate under the title of _Forms No. I to
No. VI_.

These food forms contain everything of which patients may safely
partake, and from these selection, in each case, must be made.

They are as follows:


_Form I. Complete elimination of the stomach in the nourishing
process._

To allay thirst, moisten the mouth with pure or carbonized water,
melting small pieces of ice on the tongue. Small sips of water either
lukewarm or cold, according to the condition of the stomach. Otherwise,
only introduce water by clyster--i.e.--injection, and if the stomach
cannot be disturbed for more than one or two days, introduce nourishing
substances by way of the rectum.


_Form II. Purely liquid nourishment, "soup diet."_

Consommé of pigeon, chicken, veal, mutton, beef, beef tea, meat jelly
(which becomes liquid under the influence of the heat of the body,)
strained soups or such as are prepared of the finest flour with water or
bouillon, of barley, oats, rice (thick soup), green corn, rye flour,
malted milk. All of these soups, with or without any additions, such as
raw eggs, either whole or the yolk only, if well mixed and not
coagulated, are easily digested.


_Form III. Nourishment which is not purely liquid, but partly
glutinous._

Milk and milk preparations (belonging to this group on account of their
coagulation in the stomach):

(a) Cow's milk, diluted and without cream, dilution with 1-2 to 2-3
barley water, rice water, lime water, vichy water, weak tea, or pure
water.

(b) Milk without cream, not diluted.

(c) Unskimmed milk.

(d) Cream, either diluted or undiluted.

(e) All of these milk combinations with an addition of yolk of egg,
well-mixed, whole egg, cocoa, also a combination of egg and cocoa.

Milk mush made of flour for children, arrowroot, mondanin, cereal flour
of every kind, especially oats, groat soups with tapioca or sago and
potato soup.

Egg,-raw, stirred, or sucked from the shell; or slightly warmed in a
cup; any of these, either with or without the addition of a little sugar
or salt.

Biscuit and crackers, softened or well masticated and salivated, taken
with milk, mush, etc.


_Form IV. Diet of the lightest kind, containing meat, but still mainly
glutinous._

Noodle soup, rice soup.

Mashed boiled brains or sweetbread, or puree of white or red roasted
meat, in soup.

Brains and sweetbread boiled.

Raw scraped meat (beef, ham, etc.)

Lean veal sausages, boiled.

Mashed potatoes prepared with milk.

Rice with bouillon or with milk.

Toasted rolls and toast.


_Form V. Light diet, containing meat in more solid form_:

Pigeon, Chicken boiled.

Small fish with little fat, such as brook or lake trout, boiled.

Scraped beefsteak, raw ham, boiled tongue.

As delicacies: Small quantities of caviar, frogs' legs, oysters,
sardelles softened in milk.

Salted potatoes crushed, spinach, young peas mashed, cauliflower,
asparagus-tips, mashed chestnuts, mashed turnips, fruit sauces.

Groat or sago puddings.

Rolls, white bread.


_Form VI. Somewhat heavier meat diet. (Gradually returning to ordinary
food)._

Pigeon, chicken, young deer, hare, everything roasted.

Beef tenderloin, tender roast beef, roast veal.

Boiled pike or carp.

Young turnips.

All dishes to be prepared with very little fat, butter to be used
exclusively. All strong spices to be avoided.


=NOTE=:--For special dietary in all diseases, see under each separate
tissue degeneration in the succeeding Chapter on Therapy.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] In the following chapter, several important paragraphs given in the
foregoing had to be repeated as the readers who were not interested in
the "Club" proposition, would miss these points.




NUTRITIVE COMPOSITIONS


In order to convey a better understanding of these nutritive
compositions, I deem it necessary to outline and explain more
emphatically and in greater detail their wonderful scope and
possibilities, in perhaps a more impressive manner, by giving the reader
the benefit of an article entitled:

  "The functions of minerals in our food
  How they may be greatly increased"

Of these I have sent some 560 copies to all our Senators and
Congressmen, as well as to our chief Government Physicians, for their
information and disposition, with the intention of placing my knowledge
and equipment freely at the disposal of the United States Government. I
have made this purely disinterested proposal at this critical and trying
juncture, in the interest, first, of our war-worn soldiers; next, of our
women, enervated by unaccustomed labour and restricted means; and
lastly, of the children, born, and yet to be born of them--the future
Citizens of the Republic--all, in short, who, under stress of injury,
strain and hardship abroad, or the sometimes equally strenuous
privations of war conditions at home, may, in their respective degrees,
be suffering from nervous breakdown or depleted vitality and the various
disorders which my proffered remedial measures are so admirably fitted
to successfully overcome, bearing, as they must untold relief, comfort
and renewed health to thousands.

I have not spared expense in putting this matter fairly and fully before
the Authorities--and indeed the initial cost of so doing has already
absorbed some $300 or more. That is merely a detail. But the main point
is this: That I have offered this valuable knowledge--(practically the
work of a lifetime)--to the Nation, together with the prescriptions of
my compositions, free of cost, as an earnest of my sympathy and
goodwill; and had the Government, seen fit to accept my proposal, the
immediate effect would have been that these compounds, which at present,
through reduced manufacture and the consequent great scarcity of
chemicals (necessarily of the finest description and purity) are very
costly, would have been brought by extensive and organized production
within the reach of every citizen, removing at once that paramount
difficulty of my system, so far as the general public is concerned;
namely, the expense.

I append hereto a copy of the article referred to, together with copy of
an accompanying letter.

     My dear Senator:

     The disarrangement of the habits of life of our civilian
     population, and the physical needs of our boys who will return from
     Europe wounded and crippled, prompts me to offer my services to the
     Government for the development of specially enriched foodstuffs to
     maintain the health of our people under the strain of the war, but
     particularly to aid in the speedy recovery of our boys who return
     shattered from the trenches. I have spent more than thirty years in
     the study of physiological chemistry and biology, and this study
     has been devoted to the application of scientific principles in the
     treatment of various diseases.

     Hitherto our food experts and medical men have been satisfied with
     a ration properly balanced as regards protein, carbohydrates and
     fat, but the mineral salts in our food have been given little if
     any serious consideration. Indeed, they have usually been dismissed
     as "ash." As a matter of fact, however, as the statement I am
     sending you under separate cover will show clearly, even to a
     layman, mineral salts perform an important function in keeping the
     body strong and healthy.

     I am prepared to demonstrate that the quantity of essential
     minerals in vegetables, small fruit and eggs can be multiplied
     several times by scientific fertilization and nutrition. If I can
     do this (and I am prepared to prove that I can) the Government
     should be willing to arrange for the production of such foods in
     connection with every military hospital and convalescent camp, both
     here at home and behind the lines in Europe. Moreover, given a
     central experimental station with proper equipment, it would be an
     easy matter to train men to teach this knowledge to soldiers at
     every reconstruction camp.

     The statement is made by Dr. Mae H. Cardwell, of Portland, Oregon,
     one of the investigators for the Federal Children's Bureau that
     millions of children are suffering from lack of sufficient food and
     from improper feeding, and she adds that not only the parents but
     the doctors, in many cases, need education with respect to what
     constitutes proper feeding for children. I think that when you have
     read and digested my statement of the function of the mineral salts
     in the human economy, you will agree with me that the need for just
     what I am asking the government to give me an opportunity of doing
     is very great indeed.

     I trust that I may count upon your co-operation, not only in
     getting this matter before the proper officials, but also in seeing
     that an opportunity for a fair demonstration is accorded me.

     The dissemination of this knowledge and the production of such
     foods would make America the ALMA MATER of the world in scientific
     nutrition, thanks to the application of physiological chemistry. As
     things are now done in agriculture and in aviculture, however, very
     little can be expected along this line.

     I will give you two concrete illustrations of what can be done in
     the way of augmenting the mineral content of food, and then I will
     point out the significance of that fact. We will consider eggs:
     ordinarily 100 grams of egg yolk contains from 10 to 20 milligrams
     of iron, but eggs laid by hens fed by my method yield from 30 to 80
     milligrams of iron per 100 grams of dried yolk. This is an
     increase, as you see, of between 300 and 400 per cent. Such eggs
     might be justly classed as haemoglobin eggs, and they would be a
     godsend to our boys suffering from anaemia due to wounds or
     operations. At the same time, my method of handling chickens
     greatly enriches the lecithin, or nerve substance, in the eggs, and
     they are, therefore, of special value in dealing with cases of
     shell shock and nerve exhaustion.

     What is true in the case of iron and lecithin content of eggs
     produced by my method, is equally true with respect to their
     content of all the other essential mineral elements; they are all
     multiplied several times.

     This is made possible of accomplishment by the application of the
     principles of physiological chemistry to the breeding and feeding
     of the poultry.

     Needless to say, I am prepared to submit to the test of scientific
     examination of my claims. No, not merely a theoretical examination
     of myself, but, rather, to submit the claim I make for eggs
     produced under my direction to the test of chemical analysis. It is
     a very easy matter to determine thereby whether my claims are well
     founded.

     I cannot state my desire to serve the government in this way too
     strongly; as I have spent more than thirty years of my life in the
     study of biology and physiological chemistry, I feel that it is my
     duty to offer to the Government the benefits of my knowledge and
     experience. All that I can ask in this connection is to be given an
     opportunity to prove that my claims are sound and practical.

     I believe that you will realize the full value of such a course of
     action as outlined, if it can be proven practicable. The
     opportunity of offering proof under direction of the proper branch
     of government is, I repeat, all that I ask at the moment, as the
     results will tell their own story far more eloquently than mere
     words.

     Thanking you for giving this matter your attention, and trusting
     that my hope of serving in the ranks of those seeking to rebuild
     our boys will not prove vain, I am, Sir,

     Yours truly,

     L. DECHMANN.





THE FUNCTION OF MINERALS IN OUR FOOD:

HOW THEY MAY BE GREATLY INCREASED.

By LOUIS DECHMANN.

1918.


When physiological chemistry has isolated and classified the component
elements of the various organs, tissues and fluids of the body, it must
analyze and classify the vegetables, fruits and meats on which man feeds
in order that we may not only know how to arrange a perfectly balanced
ration for the healthy, but shall be able to add lacking elements to the
diet of the diseased. This classification of foods naturally leads, if
there be a deficiency of any essential element, to the analysis of the
soil on which this food was raised.

In the course of my studies in physiological chemistry and biology,
which have extended over a period of more than thirty years, I have been
led to grappel with problems in agriculture, in horticulture, and in
aviculture, for the purpose of finding solutions to problems in human
nutrition. Very early in my studies I learned the value of the mineral
elements in our foodstuffs. I was led to attempt to augment the quantity
of mineral salts in various foods, and my efforts were crowned with
success. But this is not the point, however, to enter into a detailed
discussion of that aspect of the subject.

It may be wise for the sake of clearness to divide this statement into
two parts, as follows:

1. A brief summary of the function of minerals in the human economy.

2. A short argument showing how we can and why it is imperative that we
should augment the mineral content of our vegetables, small fruits and
eggs.

In the case of eggs, for example, I am able to increase their iron
content 300 or 400 per cent. More than that, I can multiply every item
in their mineral content several times, thus producing specific eggs for
those suffering for lack of any mineral. In other words I am able to
produce special eggs for a given tissue degeneration as, for instance,
haemoglobin eggs for degenerate blood; lecithin eggs for the nerves;
calcareous eggs for the bones, and kaliated eggs for the muscle.

So much by way of preface.


I.

The following explanations are made for the purpose of showing you that
I have made extensive studies along these lines, and are not, naturally,
intended to be taken as a lesson to you personally.

There are sixteen chemical elements absolutely essential to healthy
human life, which are classified by physiological chemistry as the
elements of organic life. In the composition of vital tissues we
constantly find these basal elements: Carbon, oxygen, hydrogen,
nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, chlorine, potassium, sodium, magnesium,
calcium, iron, manganese, fluorine, silicon, and iodine. The function of
these elements will be discussed in a moment.

I would here lay stress upon the fact that the absence of the tiniest
ingredient necessary to the growth and functioning of an organ will,
according to the Law of the Minimum as laid down by Justus von Liebig,
result in disease, improper functioning and degeneration of that organ
or tissue.

Although the chemical salts constitute but a small part in the
composition of our bodies, and are a very small item in our daily diet,
their importance cannot be too strongly emphasized. They are the main
sources for the development of electro-magnetic energy in the blood and
nerves, and perform other services. I am of the opinion that "vitamines"
are neither more or less than these chemicals in proper proportion and
relation, but whether you agree or disagree with this conclusion, you
will instantly agree that the elements named above are indispensible to
perfect metabolism.

It goes without saying, of course, that no action in the world occurs of
itself, that is without impulse, hence the body must be given impulse to
growth. A series of chemical and physical facts indicate that phosphorus
plays this vital part. The property of phosphoric acid of uniting with
carburetted hydrogen to form carbonic acid and phosphureted hydrogen
certainly is of fundamental importance, as phosphureted hydrogen readily
ignites on coming into contact with oxygen. Since cerebrin consists of a
combination of phosphoric acid with gelatine which contains ammonium and
with oleine, it is easy to infer that the light of the soul may be due
to the phosphoric acid in the nerves, and still further the potassium
phosphate forming the mineral basis of the muscles. Thus we come to the
conclusion that the phosphates, combinations of phosphoric acid with
basic substances, possess in general the property of imparting the true
impulse to growth, that is to accumulation of organic matter.

Like every other structure, however, the body requires supports and
props and, above all, a firm foundation on which to rest. Iron and lime,
whose union is secured by their opposition to one another, bring into
conjunction materials of contrary disposition for the creating of
organic forms of the nature of plant and animal bodies.

The sulphuric compounds are related and yet opposed to the growth
determinating phosphoric compounds. All organic building material
(protein) contains phosphorus and sulphur, in varying proportions, and
all indications are that sulphur plays the part of a regulator in
organic growth. Just as an engine requires a governor to regulate its
pace, so the human body requires a controlling factor to ensure definite
stability. It is interesting to observe that normal blood contains about
twice as many sulphates as phosphates. When there is great scarcity of
sodium sulphate in the blood, abnormal growths develop from the
phosphatic nerve tissues, and they continue to develop so long as the
blood and lymph are deficient in sulphur, particularly the sulphates.
This is, I believe, the genesis of polyps, tumors and cancers.

In the same manner that sulphuric acid controls and regulates the
phosphoric acid of ammonium phosphate, so lime and magnesia act on the
ammonia of this same ammonium phosphate.

Phosphatic ammonium carbonate lodges in the gelatinous cartilage and
stretches it, when there is a deficiency of lime and magnesia in the
food, resulting in rickets. Such a growth of cartilaginous tissues is
controlled by lime and magnesia, as they change the pliant cartilage
into bony barriers in which small particles of magnesia combine to
produce phosphate of ammonium and magnesium which checks the further
deposit of cartilage.

Lime and magnesia are indubitably quite as effective agents in the
control of ammonia as sulphur is in the control of phosphorus. If we
consider the minerals as the foundation and mortar which give stability
to the vital machine, leaving out chlorine and fluorine, we find that
iron, manganese, potash, soda, and silicic acid play this role. Sulphur,
because it possesses the property of becoming gaseous, is able to take
part directly in the formation of albumen, that variable basis of body
material, whereas all of the other mineral substances except silicic
acid can only be assimiliated in so-called binary compounds in the form
of salts.

I will give a brief review of them, beginning with iron, as thus the
significance of augmentation of the mineral content of vegetables and
small fruits and eggs will be made much clearer.

Normal blood albumen is essentially a compound of calcium and sodium
into which iron and sulphur both enter. A deficiency of calcium commonly
makes itself known by dental defects, just as lack of sulphur reveals
itself by the falling out and poor growth of hair. Insufficiency of
iron in the blood is evidenced, apart from lack of spirit, by paleness
of face and blue lips; insufficient sodium by glandular tumors and
abnormal cartilaginous growths.

The entire amount of iron in the blood of an adult person is, on the
average under normal conditions, four grams, as much as a nickel weighs.
We may well judge that this amount is not sufficient to set the motive
power of our bodies in action, if we overlook that complex factor the
circulation of blood. The left side of the heart has the capacity of
containing about six ounces of blood, and every heart beat drives this
amount through the aorta. With seventy beats to the minute, twenty-five
pounds of blood is pumped from the heart every minute. What is the
result? That the four grams of iron keep up such an incessant movement
that they pass from the heart into the aorta sixty times an hour or 1440
times in 24 hours. It may be asserted, therefore, that in 24 hours 13
pounds of iron (that is 1440x4 grams) pass from the heart into the
aorta. Can it be doubted, in view of this, that the iron serves to
produce an electro-dynamic force?

In respect to the generation of electricity, it matters not whether
there be an entirely new supply of iron passing a given point, or
whether the same iron pass that point anew each minute. Two factors work
together in the circulation of the blood, namely, the active attraction
of nerve tissue and the passive susceptibility of the blood contents to
that attraction. Faraday has conclusively shown that blood is magnetic
in character because of the iron it contains. If four grams of iron is
the normal quantity in the blood, it is clear that the reduction of this
amount, say by two grams, will lessen its susceptibility and slacken its
circulation. The electrical nerve ends will then strain in vain for the
electricity which the blood current should yield, and the result will be
neuralgia.

It is the magnetic iron in haemoglobin which makes every sort of
nervous function possible, in the cerebral (brain) and in the
sympathetic (intestinal) tracts, and since it is thus made clear that
intellectual activity on the one hand and breathing and digestion and
excretion on the other are dependent on the iron content of the blood,
we must also recognize that, as iron attends every nerve action, the
secretion of urine too takes place under the influence of haemoglobin.
Insofar as haemoglobin hastens the departure of the excrementitious
matter in urine out of the system, there is a daily loss of iron in the
urine. This loss in the form of urohaematin may total four centigrams,
or a hundredth part of our supply.

This loss of iron if not replaced by eating suitable food will soon make
itself felt. In the course of a day the reduction by four centigrams
will diminish the energy of nervous activity about 1440 times the
apparent loss, so that even a four weeks-tropical fever, during which no
meat is eaten, may completely exhaust the strength of an individual.
Moreover, iron conditions bodily warmth as it combines with oxygen in a
higher and a lower degree. In the lungs it is highly oxidized by the
respired oxygen, but in contact with the nerve ends it gives itself only
to a part of the oxygen present, and burns a certain portion of the
lecithin to water, carbonic acid and phosphates, thus creating body
warmth to a considerable extent.

In response to the chemical consumption of lecithin a new oil flows down
the axis cylinders of the nerve fibrils, which are arranged like lamp
wicks. The duration of the flow of this oil is, on the average, about
eighteen hours. When the cerebro-spinal nerves refuse longer to perform
their function, fatigue and sleep ensue, and the current of blood leaves
the brain and seeks the intestines. While the cerebro-spinal system
rests, the sympathetic system takes up its task of directing the renewal
of tissue and supplying the nerve sheaths through the lymph vessels,
which draw their material from the digestive canal, with a new supply of
phosphatic oil. Thus the brain and spinal nervous system are prepared
for another day's work. For the fulfillment of these processes, the
magnetic blood current forms the intermediary.

The presence of formic and acetic acid supplies the blood with fresh
electricity to stimulate the nerves. "Under normal conditions," says
Julius Hensel, "this function is assigned to the spleen. This organ
takes the part of a rejuvenating influence in the body in the manner of
a relay station, and does so by virtue of an invisible but significant
device. In every other region of the body the hairlike terminals of the
arteries which branch out from the heart merge directly in the tiny
tubes (capillaries) of the veins, which lead back to the heart again: in
the spleen this is not the case. Here rather the arteries end suddenly
when they have diminished to a diameter of one one-hundred-and-fortieth
of an inch and end in a bulb (the Malpighian bodies). Under such
circumstances the sudden stoppage, particularly the impact of the
magnetic blood stream against the membrane of a Malpighian body,
exemplifies the physical law of the induction of electricity, in
accordance with which the blood that enters the spleen is changed into
plasma and exudes through the membrane of the Malpighian bodies. The
event indicates some fluidity of the red blood cells, which is a change
effected in the body by the impact of electric sparks, and one which
electrical therapy also brings about locally to prevent increase in the
solid constituents of the blood."

The numerous Malpighian bodies in the spleen act as so many electrical
conductors, and the product of their electrical activity is found in the
formic and acetic acid of the fluid plasma which filters through the
Malpighian corpuscles and supplies the acid tissue of the spleen (pulpa
splenica). These acids are the electrolytic division products of
lecithin. In the splenic pulp arise the capillaries of the splenic
veins whose acid blood is carried directly to the liver, where certain
cells formed like galvanic elements possess the property, through the
electrical action of formic and acetic acid, of extracting from blood
albumen the opposite of acids, namely, alkaline bile. The normal
functioning of the liver, therefore, is dependent upon that of the
spleen, and since the bile produced by the liver goes to aid the
digestive activity of the duodenum, disturbance of digestion must result
when the quality of the bile is inferior.

One of the substances contained in bile, lecithin, is of wide
importance. When it was referred to a moment ago, I spoke only of its
individual chemical nature as a fat in combination with ammonium
phosphate, as by so doing I avoided error in connection with its
apparently complicated formula, which includes glycerophosphoric acid,
trimethylamin, palmitic and stearic acids. As it is a fatty substance,
the only question that arises, is, what does it contain besides fat?
This may be answered by a process of substraction:

2 (C_{21} H_{42} O_{4}) C_{42} H_{84} O_{8} which represents tallow or
stearate of glycerine. Lecithin, C_{42} H_{84} O_{9} NP, differs from
this only by a larger amount of NP. The significance of this difference
becomes clear when two atoms of water are added. Then ammonium
phosphate, PO_{3} H_{4}, N is formed. The two atoms of water needed for
the condensation of the ammonium phosphate from the stearate are
obtained by separating them away from two of glycerine.

The bile contains lecithin in a partially oxidized form. The chemical
"remainders" are biliverdin and cholesterin. The latter when normal has,
as you know, the power to neutralize snake venoms and other poisons, and
thus acts as a natural anti-toxin. In addition, the bile contains
combinations of stearine with gelatine and with carbonate and sulphate
of sodium, which theoretical chemists believe are twin compounds of
glycocholate and taurocholate. These fatty compounds depend upon
stearine partly oxidized, that is deprived of a certain number of atoms
of hydrogen.

As the compounds of fatty acids with ammoniacal blood gelatine and
sodium carbonate, the ingredients of the bile also, develop into a
peculiar soap. In the economy of the body the bile acts as a soap. When
it is discharged into the duodenum, it changes the fats into so fine an
emulsion (chyle) that the microscopically fine drops of fat may be drawn
into the orifices of the lymph canals and conveyed to the circulatory
system, and the cleavage products of albumen produced by gastric
digestion, the peptones (leucin and tyrosin) are carried along with them
for the renewal of tissue cells consumed in respiration.

If a soda soap is requisite for the purpose just stated, it follows that
soda in the food is essential, as otherwise the supply of soda in the
blood albumen cannot be renewed, and the bile cannot get its necessary
supply of soda from blood albumen devoid of soda. Consequently, the
entire nutritive process is dependent upon bile, and the bile cannot
properly perform its function if denied soda.

In addition to carbonates of sodium, especially the hydrocarbonate known
as glycolate, the bile apparently contains ammonium sulphate combined
with hydrocarbon (taurin); but this results from the transposition of
sodium sulphate and gelatine. Gelatine contains six atoms of hydrocarbon
joined with two of ammonium carbonate, a group which is separable by
chemical action into five of carburetted hydrogen with ammonium
carbonate (leucin or gelatine milk), C_{5} H_{10}, CO_{2}, NH_{3}, and
into one of carburetted hydrogen with ammonium carbonate (glycin or
gelatine sugar), CH_{2}, CO_{2}, NH_{3}. This latter substance, gelatine
sugar, is not produced in the liver, as it exists already in the blood
gelatine. In an isolated condition it has the property, in virtue of its
ammoniacal acids and its carbonic acid bases and, therefore, of both
combined, its salts, of producing chemical fixation. This property is
conveyed to the undivided blood gelatine in which the gelatine sugar is
contained intramolecularly.

Since normal blood albumen is inconceivable without sulphur it is
absolutely essential, in accordance with our knowledge of the
constituents of the bile and their origin, that our nutriment should
contain a sufficiency of sodium sulphate, if normal blood serum is to be
produced. The use of pepsin for this purpose cannot serve nature's
purpose, as it contains neither sodium carbonate nor sodium sulphate.
Our blood must be given a fresh and sufficient supply of sodium
carbonate and sodium sulphate via our food, if it is to produce normal
bile and supply the requisites of normal nutrition.

It is erroneously held that sodium sulphate is simply a laxative, even
Borner's "Royal Medical Calendar" so classifies it. Often it discharges
this function, it is true, in concentrated solution (one to five). But
it is an important ingredient of healthy blood albumen (one to one
thousand), and in this proportion assists in the formation of normal
bile.

The blood of the Caucasian race is found to contain about ten parts of
salt to the thousand, and this proportion of salt denotes firm tissue
material. If the quantity of salt in the blood is diminished, the
bi-concave red blood cells swell to a spherical form from access of
water and lose their ability to unite for the production of connective
tissue. Moreover, to the extent salt in the blood cells is decreased the
connective tissue and muscle and tendon substance absorb water and the
tissues become spongy, especially in the kidneys, so that the thinned
blood albumen seeps through (urea albumen).

Phosphate of potassium is the mineral basis of muscle tissue, phosphate
of lime with a small amount of magnesium phosphate the basis of bones,
and phosphate of ammonium the bases of nervous tissue. There is a
sufficient quantity of phosphate in all healthy foods. When the milk fed
to nurslings, however, is greatly thinned with water instead of firm
muscle fibers and solid lymph glands we find loose and spongy tissues.
This is a scrofulous condition.

In the formation of healthy bones and teeth, calcium fluoride is
essential. It is insoluble in plain water, but is made soluble by the
aid of the glycocoll in blood gelatine and changed into ammonium
fluoride. It appears in this form in the cartilaginous matter of the eye
lenses, and lack of calcium fluoride in the food results in the clouding
of these lenses.

Silicic acid is not only indispensible to the growth of hair, but it
forms a direct connection between blood and nerve tissues. It is found
in birds eggs, both in the white and the yolk. It is a conservator of
heat and electricity as it is a good insulator. It also possesses
eminent antiseptic qualities. Its mere presence in the intestinal canal,
even its simple passage through the canal; conserves the electrical
activity of the intestinal nerves and thus influences the whole
sympathetic nervous system.

This brief review, cursory as it is, of the function of the minerals in
the renewal of substances undergoing tissue change, makes it clear that
our daily food must contain a sufficient quantity of them if healthy
metabolism is to be maintained.

Chemically considered the human body is one individual whole, its
characteristic chemical basis being gelatine. Lieut. C.E. McDonald,
U.S.A. Medical Corps, recognized this when he recently wrote: "The
similarity of chemical compositions explains why, when any particular
region falls a prey to chemical decomposition, others quickly become
affected."

Oxygen gas is the medium through which chemical combustion is carried on
in the body for the purpose of preparing materials to enter into its
composition. The mineral salts already named not only form the solid
basis of the various tissue but also serve as conductors or insulators
of electricity in the body. The absence of one of them for a protracted
period is sufficient to explain widespread degeneration in the system.

In view of the fact that these various minerals play an indispensable
part in healthy metabolism it is imperative that a sufficiency of them
should be supplied in proper proportion in our daily food. It is
imperative, if we desire to retain or to restore health to the body.

These mineral elements are to be found in the first instance in the
earth, but they are of no use to the body in that form. We cannot digest
and assimilate inorganic matter no matter how finely it may be
pulverized. But plants can assimilate them from the earth and organize
them in such form as to make them easily assimilable by animals and man.

If the soil on which our food is produced is itself deficient in some of
these elements, our food must also lack them. If, moreover, we cannot
for any reason add the missing elements to the soil, we must supply them
to the human system in the shape of prepared nutritive salts. It is
preferable, of course, that our food should contain all of the elements
necessary for the proper nourishment of the body.

Thus we are forced to return to consideration of the soil. It is an
established fact that our fields were originally formed from decayed
rock, and analysis shows that this primitive rock contains the same
minerals as healthy blood. But if our agriculturists are taught that
stable manure and three or four other things are all that is necessary
for the fertilization of their fields, where shall the other minerals
essential to human metabolism come from?

What a man is, largely depends upon what he eats. Hence man is very
largely a product of the fields. When the soil is denuded of any of the
elements essential to plant and animal life, it must be properly
fertilized. Incomplete or improper fertilization can have but one
result, to-wit, it will produce sickly vegetation, and this in turn must
produce unhealthy cattle, and since man is dependent upon plant and
animal life for his food a sickly race of human beings is the ultimate
result.

Is not barrenness of the soil responsible for disease in potatoes, for
San Jose scale, Phylloxera, and other similar phenomena. The fields are
manured profusely, it is true, but the very chemical elements which are
not only essential to the development of wholesome plant tissue but
which would also enable the plant to protect itself against parasites,
are not used. Every farmer has observed, for instance, that grass grown
upon cow dung in pastures is not eaten by cows, oxen or sheep. The
instinct of the animals is correct.

In using the term incomplete fertilization, I mean supplying only
potash, phosphoric acid and nitrogen, and possibly lime and sulphur,
when the soil is denuded of several other elements. No matter how rich a
field may be made in these things if it lacks other elements healthy
vegetation cannot be grown in it.

Improper fertilization is another matter. It may consist in dressing a
field with nothing but stable manure, or of applying crude sulphur or
brimestone instead of using calcium sulphate--plus the other lacking
elements. The advocate of crude sulphur certainly does not know how
truly criminal his advice is. It is not to be denied that at the outset
sulphur will increase the crop yield. But in the end--what? The sulphur
will dissolve all of the essential minerals in the soil, and in the
course of four or five years they will all be leached out and it will be
so barren that not even wild grass can be grown upon it. Improper
fertilization may also consist of a dressing of carbonate of lime
applied at the wrong time or in excessive quantity. The effect of this
course will be equally as harmful, namely, the transformation of the
nitrogenous material into free nitrogen which will ascend to heaven.
Without nitrogen albumen cannot be formed, and without albumen the
formation of vegetable and animal tissue is impossible.

Wholesome soil may, then, be defined thus: It is such ground as contains
a sufficient supply of humus and nitrogen and all of the essential
mineral components of organic tissue. The problem of fertilization,
therefore, consists of supplying any or all of these elements in which
the soil is deficient. The aim of fertilization, as a rule, is merely to
increase crop production. But this may prove to be not merely
shortsighted, it may turn out to be a social crime. It is criminal,
indeed, as a great many diseases are directly traceable to incomplete
and improper fertilization.

Let us face the effect of attempting to fertilize our fields with
nothing more than stable manure, which, it is true, supplies phosphoric
acid, potash and nitrogen. We know that phosphorus forms the foundation
of nerves, and too much of it provokes nerve irritation in exact ratio
to the deficiency of sulphur. There should be twice as many sulphuric
salts as phosphoric salts in the blood, if it is to be normal and the
nerves are to be steady. Foodstuffs from fields that have been
fertilized in this manner must, of course, contain a superabundance of
phosphoric salts and be deficient in sulphuric salts. Is it strange,
then, that the present age presents a picture of restless, irritated
nervous activity and thoughtless action?

We must return to the primitive rock and humbly learn the lesson it has
for us, and upon this rock we must rear our science of fertilization and
nutrition. This rock consisted of granite, porphyry, gneiss and basalt,
and these are still found upon the earth in immense quantities in
practically the same condition they were thousands of years ago. Both
Justus von Liebig and Julius Hensel, as a matter of fact, advocated that
this rock should be finely pulverized and used as a compost to assist in
restoring and maintaining the original fertility of the soil and thus
aid the development of healthy plant and animal life.

Indeed the instincts of both animals and human beings lead them under
certain conditions right back to the rock and its lesson. Note the
avidity with which hens confined in arid runs devoid of vegetation,
worms, insects and small stones devour a compound of lime and ground
bones and oyster shells. Observe a child whose ration is deficient in
mineral elements eating egg shells, wall plaster, chalk and other earthy
substances. What do these things mean? Nothing more than this: both
chicken and child express a natural craving for the essential elements
to build bone and form the basis for the tissue.

I have discussed the important part the minerals play in both the
vegetable and animal kingdoms for the purpose of laying stress upon our
great need of more of them in our daily diet, and I may add that this is
equally as true in the case of those we call healthy as of those who are
diseased. No matter how carefully the diet may be regulated as regards
the quantity of protein and carbohydrates and fats and the ratio between
them, healthy metabolism is impossible without a sufficiency of the
essential minerals.


II.

How can we perform this imperative duty to mankind?

The solution of the problem of supplying these essential minerals
demands that our soil shall be properly fertilized for the growing of
wholesome vegetables and fruits and our cattle properly fed with a
ration rich in mineral content. Thus the food which we eat will contain
all of the elements necessary to the growth and maintenance of our
bodies in a state of health.

In the course of my effort to show why it is imperative that we pay
greater heed to the mineral content of our foodstuffs, and why it is
imperative that we enrich that content, I have shown basically how that
end is to be attained.

In conclusion I will cite the result of a series of experiments in
applying the principles of physiological chemistry to poultry, and I may
say that it took me twelve years to find the breed which would most
readily lend itself to my purpose. I experimented with 250 varieties of
hens before I found the one most amenable to my method of feeding and
breeding.

While living at Needham, Massachusetts, I made a thorough test of my
principles with the selected variety of hens. They were not only fed a
ration properly balanced for protein, carbohydrates and fat, but I gave
them a liberal supply of properly prepared mineral salts. I used three
different mixtures of feed, made up in 100 pound lots, in which the
proportion of albumen ranged from 13.50 to 18.00 pounds; of fat from
4.00 to 5.00 pounds; of carbohydrates from 41 to 44 pounds; and actual
nutritive salts from 4.50 to 5.00 pounds. The respective ratios being:
1:4, 1:3.5 and 1:3

It is not necessary to enter into discussion of the details of the
feeding method and the variation in the daily handling of the hens. The
result of this experiment, however, was completely satisfactory, as the
eggs produced by those hens not only contained a startling increase in
the quantity of mineral salts, but their fertility was far greater than
that of hens handled in the usual manner. The increase of fertility in
itself is, it seems to me, the best proof of the soundness of my
theoretical premises.

Some of the results of this experiment were published in the Reliable
Poultry Journal in 1905, and Dr. Woods offered confirmatory evidence of
the soundness of my conclusions two years later, after he had himself
experimented along the same line.

I will cite just one fact revealed by that experiment, namely, that
whereas 100 grams of dried egg yolk ordinarily contains only from 10 to
20 milligram of iron the eggs of those hens yielded from 30 to 80
milligrams. And all of the minerals were increased from 10 to 25 per
cent or more.

The method of applying the principles of physiological chemistry to the
enriching of the mineral content of our foodstuffs evolved by me is,
with due recognition of the difference between the vegetable and animal
kingdoms, equally applicable in the raising of all our foodstuffs with
an augmented mineral content. I will adduce just one result of my work
in the handling of small fruit: on the average, 100 grams of dried
strawberries will yield 8.6 to 9.3 milligrams of iron, but strawberries
raised by me yield from 30 to 40 milligrams per 100 grams.

In view of the facts with regard to the function of these minerals, it
is indisputably true that a ration is physiologically inefficient if it
does not contain a sufficiency of them in proper proportion. Moreover,
this is trebly true in the case of those whose constitution has been
weakened by loss of blood from rounds, by shell shock and trench fever,
and of those here at home whose nerve tissue has been degenerated and
whose blood has been weakened by anxiety and the strain of unwonted
manual labor. The last consideration applies with especial force to the
multitudes of women who have entered industry as manual laborers. What
kind of offspring can we expect from these people whose plasma is thus
degenerated? The children are the citizens of the future, and even
before they are born we must plan for their health.

What could be more effective in treating the anaemic condition of
wounded and crippled boys, and in treating the same condition in women
industrial workers, than haemoglobin eggs?

What could be more efficacious in treating conditions arising from shell
shock, from bad wounds and operations thereon, and neurasthenia in
general, than an abundance of lecithin (which, as you know, dear doctor,
is made from the yolk of the egg)?

What could be more successfully used in treating conditions arising from
shattered bones and from operations for the removal of bone tissue than
calcareous eggs in connection with a ration perfectly balanced as
regards all of the other essential elements.

For the regeneration of the blood and bone and nerve tissue of these
victims of war, something more than a sufficiency of nutritive food, as
that term is commonly used, is needed, and something more than medicine
is needed!

I am the last person in the world to deny that wonderful progress is
made in surgery every day, and the last to fail to applaud its
successful efforts, but you know quite as well as I do that in 90 out
of 100 cases recovery involves exhaustion of the patient's reserve
energy. Moreover, when the reserve energy has already been drawn upon
almost to the point of exhaustion, no matter how successful the
operation may be the recovery of the patient is a very doubtful
quantity. The first requisite in all surgical cases, as also in all
anaemic and neurasthenic cases, is to restore metabolism to its normal
condition and thus help the patient to regain his reserve energy in
order to prevent the collapse of the whole fabric.

It is indubitably true that healthy metabolism and the restoration of
reserve energy depends upon the organism being given the requisite
quantity of the sixteen essential elements of organic life in easily
digestible and assimilable form, and I am asking for the opportunity to
demonstrate how foods extremely rich in these elements may be produced
and used to aid nature. I have not entered into a full discussion of the
various aspects of my method of accomplishing that, but have confined
myself to consideration of the basic principles underlying it. Neither
have I attempted to show how these different minerals will serve as
regenerative agents in different dysaemic conditions. I am prepared to
discuss the matter from both of these viewpoints, however, and, more
than that, I am ready to practically demonstrate the soundness of my
theories, when given an opportunity under proper conditions to do so.

--Sapienti sat--

FINIS.




NUTRITIVE COMPOSITIONS.


The sixteen substances,--nutritive cell foods,--of which all of the
tissues of the body are composed are: carbon, oxygen, hydrogen,
nitrogen, potassium, soda, lime, magnesia, iron, manganese, phosphor,
sulphur, silica, chlorine, fluorine and iodine.

My nutritive compositions consist of these same sixteen nutritive salts,
each composition mixed in the same proportion as they are found in the
healthy tissue for the regeneration of which they are prescribed.

Since in various diseases not only one but several tissues are affected,
it must be decided individually in each case whether only one, or
several, of the nutritive compositions will require to be taken, and in
what proportion.

In accordance with the system of the twelve tissues of the body, the
twelve nutritive compositions, commonly known as "DECH-MANNA"
Compositions, are the following:

  No.  1. Plasmogen         Bloodplasma-Producer.
  No.  2. Lymphogen         Lymph-Cell-Producer.
  No.  3. Neurogen          Nerve-cell-Producer.
  No.  4. Osseogen          Bone-cell-Producer.
  No.  5. Muscogen          Muscle-cell-Producer.
  No.  6. Mucogen           Mucous membrane-cell-Producer.
  No.  7. Dento-Ophthogen   Tooth and Eye-cell-Producer.
  No.  8. Capillogen        Hair-cell-Producer.
  No.  9. Dermogen          Skin-cell-Producer.
  No. 10. Gelatinogen       Gelatigenous-cell-Producer.
  No. 11. Cartilogen        Cartilage-cell-Producer.
  No. 12. Eubiogen          Healthy body-cell-Producer.

In addition to these I use only a few specialities in certain cases of
disease, viz.:

  A. Oxygenator        A radium emanation for the bath.
  B. Eubiogen Liquid   Same as No. 12, but liquid form.
  C. Tonogen           A stimulating tonic.
  D. Tea. Diabetic, Dechmann
  E. Tea. Laxagen, after Kneipp
  F. Salve. Lenicet, after Dr. Reiss
  G. Massage Emulsion, Dechmann
  H. Propionic acid for steam atomizer
  I. Oxygen Powder, after Hensel
  J. Anti-Phosphate, Dechmann

(These specialities are used only in certain individual cases, according
to prescription).


NUTRITIVE COMPOSITIONS.

In discussing the various preparations of Dech-Manna-Diet, I refrain
from detailed prescription and analysis. My intention is to explain them
in such a way that it may become apparent to everyone that they are
rational remedies for every properly diagnosed constitutional disease.
If I should do more than this, it would be simply placing a premium upon
unscrupulous imitations. For the present therefore, I prefer to have the
remedies prepared exclusively by accredited and absolutely reliable
chemists of first class local standing, in order that I may myself
assume the entire responsibility. In cases of illness, however, it is
always necessary to consult a biological-hygienic physician. The
Dech-Manna-Diet remedies, for the time being, will always be obtainable
on application to myself, to be administered in accordance with such
medical directions. I trust that very shortly when official and general
recognition will permit, I shall be enabled to entrust the detailed
prescriptions to a wider circle of practising physicians and chemists.

In order to illustrate how necessary it is to abstain from more detailed
description of my remedies, I will cite but one of several incidents
which happened to me in course of practice.

In the year 1905, I wrote a number of articles for the "Reliable Poultry
Journal" on the scientific feeding of chickens, and gave, amongst other
tables, two food-formulas of the mineral contents of _chicken food
rations_. (Both formulas were copyrighted). I gave the same gratis, for
private personal use. A certain "Chicken Specialist" from the Orange
River Colony, South Africa, first wrote a glowing article upon the
wonderful success he had secured with my prescriptions. Not satisfied
with this, however, he conceived a brilliant idea of great possibilities
of future income to be derived therefrom. He left South Africa and came
to America, the country of unlimited possibilities, and settled in Los
Angeles, California, where he floated a company, which sells my
copyrighted prescriptions for poultry feeding, to all and sundry as
specifics for all possible and impossible ailments. This ambitious
gentleman even went so far as to offer my labouriously earned
discoveries to the United States Government.--But further comment is
unnecessary!

This is but one of numerous instances of the kind some of which are
embodied in a little treatise I have published, free to my friends,
entitled "A Message to the Thinker."

Patients sometimes ask me what my methods have in common with
"Schuessler's Tissue Remedies."

I answer: Nothing--absolutely nothing, as the explanation will show.

Schuessler's therapy claims that the minerals are needful to build up
the system; but he only uses one trillionth part of a gram and
_imagines_ that the remainder is to be found in the food. Now anybody
with a fair understanding can easily figure that if a patient of middle
age eventually loses through disease about 200 grams of lime, it is
simply a farce to claim that the above dose of 1/100,000,000,000 of a
gram (which is the homeopathic dose of Schuessler), will cure or replace
the lime which was lost.

There are other equally erroneous pretentions in Schuessler's therapy
which are really too silly to go into in detail. Time and space are too
valuable to squander on any such puerile hypothesis.




DECH-MANNA-DIET. MENTOR TO PRESCRIPTIONS.


It may be well to preface this summary of prescriptions with the
following explanatory remarks; namely,

(1) That while my compositions are usually taken in the form of powders,
they may be taken in the form of capsules or tablets, in which case the
dose given is always exact.

They may also be mixed with Eubiogen or various kinds of food, except
where this is strictly forbidden by the physician.

Such mixtures cannot be harmful, since they consist of components from
which our body-cells are constructed. They may be taken either singly,
or as compounds.

(2) As regards the matter of quantities:--

Whenever one-fourth teaspoonful is mentioned, the meaning is that
one-fourth of a _heaping_ teaspoonful be taken.

Whenever a _level_ one-fourth teaspoonful is meant, as in the case of
plasmogen, it is because the basic remedy is heavier and, therefore, the
smaller quantity renders an equal amount in weight.

Every dose mentioned herein contains the exact amount of the necessary
constituents, and the harmonious system of dosage which I have worked
out, consists of reducing every compound dosage to one gram, which
weight is equal to about one quarter teaspoonful of the regular
preparation, made lighter and fluffier through trituration with
milk-sugar.

This trituration is a manual process and requires some three hours
steady and continuous rubbing of the ingredients with pestle and mortar,
for each separate composition.

All my compositions should be kept in a dry and cool place. It is best
to put them into wide-mouthed bottles with glass stoppers, as they are
all hygroscopic, that is, sensitive to moisture.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. 1.
PLASMOGEN (PLASMA PRODUCER.)

Plasmogen--Blood-plasma producer. (The red and white blood-corpuscles
are produced by using Eubiogen, XII).

(a). Blood-plasma, is the habitat of the red and white blood-corpuscles.

It can be readily understood that the more sanitary a place, the better
will be the condition of those who live in it. Therefore, the plasma,
(blood-plasma), must first be made as perfect as possible in accordance
with the teachings of science and especially of biology,--a theory which
my own experience has proved to be correct.

No matter how perfect the red or white corpuscles may be, if they live
in diseased blood-plasma, they cannot perform their functions properly
and, as a consequence, the resistant power of the system is crippled.

(b). Plasmogen contains all the constituents in the proportions in which
they should be contained in perfect plasma.

The Law of the Minimum teaches that if one of the ingredients is lacking
in the food, the cells _must_ become diseased. This the great Justus v.
Liebig emphasized when he said: "If the most minute component is
lacking, the rest cannot perform their functions." Taken as directed,
the plasmogen is also in its natural dosage.

It was only after years of ardent study that I was enabled to produce
this composition in the perfect form in which it is furnished today.

Since the plasmogen contains all the salts necessary to keep the blood
in perfect harmony, the circulation as well as the resistant power will
be maintained, the heart relieved, the fighting capacity of the white
corpuscles strengthened, and therefore the power of disease very greatly
reduced.

(c). In all cases of constitutional disease, plasmogen is used to bring
about a proper regeneration and preservation of the blood-cells. In all
cases of acute, febrile diseases its purpose is to bring about a proper
circulation and fluid condition of the blood-cells.

The most wonderful results will accrue through the use of plasmogen in
_all acute_ febrile cases, particularly in the case of children; also by
using the same as directed in individual cases of constitutional
diseases. It is indispensable in producing bactericide blood, which is
necessary to regenerate the body-cells. Therefore, I recommend It in
_all_ Regenerative Treatments.

How many thousands of children may be saved by this single remedy alone
only the biologist who has studied life according to the teachings of
nature's laws, is able to appreciate today. It will take some time
before the general medical practitioner will realize the truth of this
statement, because the old-school medicine does not teach these facts.

Therefore it is the duty of every thoughtful mother to prevent harm to
her children resulting from the drugs they favour. All anti-febrile
chemicals are rank poisons and contrary to nature's way. _Only by
producing a higher temperature is nature able to throw off impurities_;
but in many cases this becomes dangerous, because so very few know how
to avoid an over-taxation of nature's strength. Instead of assisting
nature by keeping the head cool, the feet warm and the bowels and pores
open, the anxious mothers will wrap their babies up nicely, give them
some patent or other obnoxious medicine, and really kill nature's
efforts by means of narcotics and other poisons. Results are always
fatal. The mother must learn to use correct, harmless remedies and to
follow the instructions given nearly 3000 years ago by the wise
Hippocrates, the "Father of Medicine," who warned every medical
practitioner with these words: "Nil nocere." (Never do harm).

(d). _Dose_: In acute cases, that is to say, in emergency cases where
the patient, for instance a child, has developed a high temperature, and
the doctor has not as yet diagnosed any special form of disease, or has
been unable to do so because the time of incubation of the germ has not
passed, give the patient a dose of plasmogen, that is, one gram, or as
much as will lie on a ten-cent piece, or one-fourth of a level
teaspoonful. Dissolve it in one-half tumbler of water, (or milk if
prescribed), and let the patient drink it slowly at intervals, as seems
necessary.

In ordinary cases individual directions should be followed.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. II.
LYMPHOGEN (LYMPH CELL PRODUCER.)

(a). In nearly every tissue and organ of the body there is a marvelous
network of vessels, called the lymphatics. These are busily at work
taking up and making over waste fluids or surplus materials derived from
the blood and tissues generally. The lymphatics seem to spring from the
parts in which they are found, like the rootlets of a plant in the soil.
They carry a turbid, slightly yellowish fluid, called lymph, very much
like blood without the red corpuscles. The lymph is carried to the
lymphatic glands where it undergoes certain changes to fit it for
entering the blood.

It is a fact that very few doctors know, that the whole nervous system
can only be fed by the lymph, whose central station is the so-called
ductus thoracicus (thoracic duct), in the upper region of the chest. As
there is no pulsation or magnetism connected with the same, the body
must lie down and rest at night. Then and only then is the system
enabled to feed all the nerve centers, especially through the influence
of the sympathetic nerve system, which may be said to work in the form
of a relay station, through its inherent power from the very beginning.
Therefore, it becomes quite a task to regenerate a broken-down nervous
system, for those practitioners who are not familiar with physiological
chemistry--that is, life chemistry, which teaches the composition of the
tissues. The law of chemotaxis will explain it. The lymphatic system
also plays a great part in constitutional diseases of the blood. Every
degeneration of the blood cells, or dysaemia, is influenced more or less
by the perfect condition of the lymphatic fluid. All cachectic or
morbid nutrition conditions are due to imperfect lymph.

(b). Lymphogen contains all the organic minerals in the same proportion
in which they are contained in perfect lymph, and if taken as directed,
will always restore the lymphatic system and allow it to perform its
important function.

(c). The great importance of perfect lymph will be understood from the
previous remarks, especially those pertaining to the feeding of the
whole nervous system. If the lymphatic system is impeded by underfeeding
or inanition of the nerve-cells, how can any one with common sense
expect such a system to be in perfect working order and harmony? This
applies particularly to those constitutional diseases where the
lymphatic system and the lymph itself are degenerating through causes
due to heredity, predisposition or acquisition of such conditions.

(d). _Dose_: Twice daily I gram or one-fourth heaping teaspoonful or, if
in tablet form, I tablet, dry or with a little water or in foodstuffs;
to be taken at 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. or as specially directed.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. III.
NEUROGEN (NERVE CELL PRODUCER).

(a). The nerves are the cord-like structures which convey impulses from
one part of the body to another.

The tremendous importance of their absolute health is obvious, since the
co-operation of all parts of the human body depends upon it, while, on
the other hand, their very delicate structure exposes them to numerous
and easily acquired forms of disease.

(b). This composition contains all the constituents required to generate
nerve tissue. The most important and expensive is lecithin. Pure
lecithin, the kind I use, is made from the yolks of fresh eggs. In this
composition I supply nutritive cell-food for generating lecithin in
exactly the same form in which it is found in a healthy, perfect
nerve-cell. It is absolutely digestible and assimilable, and is
triturated with the finest milk sugar.

(c). All morbid conditions caused by imperfect nerve-cells can be
regenerated through this composition as long as there is some foundation
left on which to work.

Under an endless variety of names--as a matter of fact, a big book
would not be sufficient to describe all so-called "nervous diseases"--it
can be readily seen in what a brainless way some "nerve specialists"
classify patients of this kind. Not knowing the constituents of the
nerve-cells, they still attempt to prescribe for neurasthenic patients.
The results are in accordance with such travesty of treatment. The
increase in the number of Insane Asylums gives, or should give, a true
picture of existing conditions. What is needed is a little more
knowledge of physiological chemistry, but as it is too much to expect of
the ordinary so-called "nerve specialist" to be familiar with this
science, we must per force be content with the prevailing condition,
that is, a condition characterized by ignorance of the most vital laws
of being.

But what reasonable ground of complaint, let me ask, have the people,
themselves, in this matter?

Of the appalling results of the prevailing medical system, recognized as
it is by the law of the land and supported and virtually endorsed by
the people's own will and prejudices, they themselves, though well
aware, are yet complacent. But, mark it well, not until independent
medicine shall be accorded reasonable recognition, a fair field and
general fair play, and the chance afforded to science outside the
"orthodox" medical clique to inaugurate some drastic measures of
urgently needed reform, not until then will it be possible to alter this
disastrous state of affairs--not until then will matters become less
unbearable to the individual and less discreditable to every one
concerned. _We can cure disease only by removing its cause; this is my
maxim and it is true for all time._

Much of neurasthenia is due to the degenerate times in which we are now
living. Causes must be removed in every line of life, political, social,
and economical, before normal physical and mental conditions can be
restored. Then neurasthenia, in all its forms, will be a disease of the
past, but not before--not withstanding the frequent alleged discoveries
of serums and antidotes of wonder-working properties so triumphantly
heralded from the "Halls of Science."

(d). _Dose_: Twice daily, 1 gram or one-fourth heaping teaspoonful or,
it in tablet form, 1 tablet, dry or with a little water or in
foodstuffs; to be taken at 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. or as specially directed.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. IV.
OSSEOGEN (BONE CELL PRODUCER).

(a). If I tell you that it takes seven different compositions of organic
lime to make perfect bones, some people, even very learned ones, may
doubt my word. But biology and physiological chemistry teach that this
is so--and prove it. If this composition were lacking in a certain
quantity of organic magnesia, the bones would grow hard and brittle. It
is the magnesia that turns the tissue into perfect, elastic form.

(b). Osseogen is the composition the constituents of which are necessary
to generate perfect bone tissue. How many troubles could easily be
prevented by using this cell-food in time!

(c). This composition becomes an absolute essential in all cases of
imperfect bone structure, such as rachitis, or rickets, constitutional
disease of children, osteomalacia, tuberculosis of the bones, deformity
of bone structure, such as curvature of the spine, etc.

Softening of the bones, known as osteomalacia, curvature of the spine,
rachitis and many other terrible conditions of disease would not be
known to humanity if proper precaution were taken in time.

Hundreds of patients are today cured by my method of supplying this
lacking constituent in a form assimilable to even the smallest infant.

Lime-water and such imaginary substitutes are pure nonsense, as must
surely be apparent to even the simplest layman when they consider for a
moment that it takes seven different lime compositions in order to
supply the necessary lime for generating bone tissue. Is it necessary to
say more to convince even a dogmatist? How indispensable osseogen
becomes may be realized when people begin to know enough about
themselves to realize that our bone structure must be "fireproof" in
order to last for the normal span of human life!

(d). _Dose_: Once or twice daily, according to the individual case. 1
gram will be sufficient for a proper dose. As stated before, one-fourth
of a heaping teaspoonful is equal to a gram.

It may be that in a short while I shall be able to supply all these
compositions in tablet form in their respective doses. Then medication
will become still more simple. This composition may also be taken in
food or a little water.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. V.
MUSCOGEN (MUSCLE CELL PRODUCER).

(a). The term muscle signifies every organ of the human body which, by
contraction, produces the movements of the organism. Muscles are of the
greatest variety and strength, but all consist of the same chemical
elements, and can be regenerated in case of disease, like every other
organ, by feeding the patient with the chemical substances which the
muscle cells require.

(b). Into this composition I have introduced the components necessary
for muscle tissue.

The basis of this form of cell-food is potassium phosphate. It will
regenerate all muscular tissue when used as directed. All minerals
contained therein are organized and in a perfectly digestible and
assimilable form. Even an infant can easily digest it. It will prevent
all decompositions of the muscular system and regenerate the cells as
long as any basis for life is left.

(c). As it is impossible for even the healthiest system to build up new
tissue without the necessary proportion of albumen, it becomes very
important to use the right proportion and form of this component.
Therefore, all patients who are in need of this special tissue builder,
must at the same time take the main composition, Eubiogen (life
producer). Under No. XII, I will endeavor to give the reader some little
idea of its properties, and describe its marvelous regenerating powers.

(d). _Dose_: 1 gram, or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful once or
twice daily will be sufficient. It may have to be taken for 3, 6, 9 or
12 months, and even longer. Everything depends upon the cause of the
degeneration of the muscle tissue.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. VI.
MUCOGEN (MUCOUS MEMBRANE CELL PRODUCER).

(a). The entire intestines, the stomach, all cavities, organs, openings
of the body, the genital and urinary tracts, etc., are lined with mucous
membrane, which must always be kept in a normal and healthy condition,
otherwise the functions of metabolism and procreation of the organism
cannot be carried on in safety and health.

(b). Mucogen consists of all the constituents necessary for the building
up of the peculiarly tender tissue called mucous membrane. These
constituents are absolutely indispensible, and nature must be supplied
with them if disease of the mucous membrane is to be healed by removing
its cause.

(c). The tenderness of this tissue is obvious, and experience has shown
how much it is exposed to changes in its normal condition, how easily an
increase or decrease in its main functions is brought about. While this
increase or decrease in many instances is a natural fight of nature
against the intrusion of opposing elements into the body, it frequently
assumes dimensions that are most unpleasant and seriously impair the
health, such as catarrhal conditions, all of which are due to poor or
degenerated cells of this tissue.

The frequent occurence of this form of disease shows the importance of
always supplying the cells of this tissue with the substances that keep
them in health, or if need be, will regenerate them.

(d). _Dose_: 1 gram or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful once or twice
daily will be found sufficient to supply the requirements.

In some instances this composition, as well as others, may be mixed with
the main composition Eubiogen, in order that the patient may digest it
more readily, especially in the case of a child.

Special directions must always be followed closely.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. VII.
DENTO AND OPHTHOGEN (TOOTH AND EYE CELL PRODUCER).

This refers to the enamel of the teeth and the crystalline lens of the
eye.

(a). Two special tissues of the human body, the close connection
between which has been observed and recognized but very little, contain
a predominant quantity of fluoride of lime, and consequently may be
placed under one heading in this system, although the basis for the
fluorate of the teeth is calcium, while the basis of the crystalline
lens of the eye is gelatine.

(b). I have composed this cell-food, containing the necessary fluoride
of lime, in this particular way in order to avoid too much
specialization. From long years of practical experience I have found
that the special cells of each tissue will take up only those
constituents which they need for the construction of their respective
tissue, as taught by the law of chemotaxis.

(c). Composition No. VII will be prescribed in case of tooth and eye
troubles. Any observant student of human nature will have noticed that
in severe cases of degeneration (as for instance, diabetes) not only one
of these two tissues mentioned above is affected, (as the decaying and
falling out of the teeth), but in most cases also the other (as cataract
of the eye). Some doctors of course may ask what in the world the tooth
has to do with the eye. But, alas! they have yet much to learn. The two
are not so distinct from each other when one understands. I fear that
later on, when this method, which is the only true and natural one,
comes into practice, everything will be specialized to such an extent
that the real science of it will become so complicated that the
proverb--"Veritatis simplex oratio est"--(The language of truth is
simple)--will become entirely obsolete.

It is my endeavor to state the pure unvarnished truth, and in terms as
simple as possible; that is my mission.

(d). _Dose_: One gram or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful, or one
tablet in a little water or milk, once a day will be sufficient except
in very severe cases of degenerated tissue.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. VIII.
CAPILLOGEN (HAIR CELL PRODUCER).

(a). The hair is built of a number of elements not contained in other
tissues of the body, and which must be supplied in order to keep the
hair in good health and prevent it from falling out.

(b). Capillogen contains all the necessary constituents in proper
proportion required by perfect hair tissue.

(c). The main disease of the hair, responsible for this falling out, may
be due, to two different causes. It may be due to the quality of the
hair, or to the condition of the nutritive soil of that part of the skin
where hair is wont to grow. If the loss of hair is due to the first
cause, its regeneration, through Dech-Manna Composition No. VIII,
naturally gives rise to the hope that the lost hair may be replaced, if
the process of regeneration is not begun too late, as is usually the
case.

My composition, however, is not a "hair restorer."

As a great many of my readers may know, and some of them to their sorrow,
all so-called hair restorers on the market are failures--although
perhaps not so to the manufacturer or clever salesman.

My composition will prevent the hair tissues from degeneration. Thus
baldness, which might otherwise have occurred in a larger or smaller
degree, may be prevented.

In the case of the disability of the skin to retain the hair, which may
occur after forms of febrile disease, such as typhoid fever, or if
children show little promise of growing nice hair, the composition will
prove very useful in combination with Dech-Manna Composition No. XII,
Eubiogen, which restores the original strength of the whole body, while
hair regenerated by the blood through capillogen has a better chance of
growing and remaining in the regenerated soil.

(d). _Dose_: One gram or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful, or one
tablet in a little water or milk, once a day. It is imperative to follow
directions implicitly.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. IX.
DERMOGEN (SKIN CELL PRODUCER).

(a). The skin, like all other tissues of the body, is made up of
different constituent elements. While its disease appears on the
outside, it is built up, like all other parts of the human organism,
from within and through the blood only. The elements necessary for
regenerating the skin and keeping it in a healthy condition must,
therefore, also be supplied to the body from within, in the form of
nutriment, as otherwise, though we might suppress and eliminate the
symptoms, the disease would still remain.

(b). Dermogen, skin producer, contains all the constituent elements
which a healthy skin tissue requires.

(c). The skin, being exposed to all external influences, discloses the
symptoms of all forms of skin disease, the names of which are legion.

The skin specialist termed "dermatologist" is another production which
flourishes--more or less--upon the ignorance of the public. The patient,
alas, is less fortunate. He tries one after another until disgusted he
sometimes resorts to special diet. Sometimes this may help, if he choose
a certain kind of vegetable diet, and especially if the vegetables are
such as contain a great deal of silica; for silica is the mineral basis
of skin tissue. Full details of this are to be found in my analysis of
foodstuffs given in the chart at the end of volume No. I of my work,
"Regeneration."

(d). _Dose_: One gram or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful of
dermogen in a little water or milk once a day until regeneration of the
skin is fairly started. Reduce the dose gradually until complete
recovery has been accomplished.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. X.
GELATINOGEN (GELATIGENOUS TISSUE PRODUCER).

(a). All blood and lymphatic vessels, the alveoli of the lungs, all
tendons and cords in the entire system, the bowel tract, including the
stomach, the bladder, and in fact every organ or tissue which has the
function of expanding and contracting, must be of healthy gelatigenous
(rubber-like) tissue; otherwise it cannot perform its functions in the
system and must degenerate.

(b). Gelatinogen contains the constituent elements of gelatine, which it
carries, through the blood, to the parts of the body where it is needed
to rebuild degenerated gelatigenous tissue.

(c). While there are not many special forms of disease of the
gelatigenous tissues, many diseased conditions are more or less
connected with its degeneration. In fact, every layman should be able
to judge the importance of perfect gelatigenous tissue. But how many
human beings ever think of such things. Yet they know very well that a
poor rubber tire on an automobile will not last very long or stand much
strain; for the fact appeals to the pocket book--and that degenerates.

It is well to learn the truth before too late and give, to the rising
generation at least, the chance to which they are surely entitled:--A
good healthy body.

(d). _Dose_: Twice daily, 1 gram or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful,
or one tablet, at 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., or as individually prescribed, in
a little water, milk or other foodstuffs, to be taken for a certain
length of time.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. XI
CARTILOGEN (CARTILAGE PRODUCER).

(a). Every bone in the human system must be covered with cartilage at
its ends so as to prevent self-destruction through friction, especially
in the joints.

(b). Cartilogen consists of all the necessary constituents of this
important material, and under certain circumstances it must be
introduced in this concentrated form, as for instance when the general
diet is unable to counteract the influences of disease which tends to
degenerate the cartilage and subjects the body to the great suffering
which the absence of cartilage invariably produces.

(c). Cartilage keeps all the joints in working order and must be
regenerated constantly.

As soon as the blood and lymph no longer contain the proper, necessary
constituents for the rebuilding of cartilage tissue, the consequence is
degeneration of this tissue.

It is obvious then that the presence of proper cartilage constituents in
the blood is of the greatest importance to the regenerating forces in
the human body. Our foodstuffs, therefore, must contain the material in
a digestible, assimilable form, thus to prevent inanition of the cells,
otherwise degeneration of the cartilage tissue must follow.

(d). _Dose_: One gram or one-fourth of a heaping teaspoonful twice a day
for a certain period, depending on the condition of the patient. This
may be taken in the same manner as previously described.


DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION No. XII.
EUBIOGEN (HEALTHY LIFE PRODUCER). (ALSO TERMED "POSITIVE COMPOSITION").

(a). While all other compositions contain _special_ elements for the
rebuilding of _special_ tissues through regeneration of _special_ cells,
Eubiogen contains a combination of all the important elements in the
most concentrated form. I was fortunate enough, after years of
experimenting with plants and animal life, to concentrate the solid
constituents of the human body _ten_ fold. The full import of this
achievement few can realize, but those who know what it means in time
and study. The effect of this composition is felt simultaneously in all
the vital tissues of the body, and since the co-operation of all these
tissues is what we call "life," I feel there is no name more fitting for
this product than the one I have selected, namely, "Eubiogen," or
"Healthy Life Producer." I maintain that it is the most scientific
composition discovered since the time of Hippocrates and the following
is its analysis:

It has at all times been an ideal aim of mankind to produce a species of
food that would combine a minimum of quantity with a maximum of quality,
and philosophers and scientists have dreamed of a time when the day's
portion of foodstuffs would be concentrated in one small pill. The
biologist cannot accept this theory.

While Greek mythology seemed to symbolize a similar idea; namely, of one
concentrated food-substance combining all nutritive elements, as
represented in their "Ambrosia," the food of the Gods.

Yet the gods and goddesses were permitted to partake of it only at
solemn assemblies when all sat at the table of Zeus and enjoyed their
food and drank its liquid counterpart, termed "nectar."

This symbolism represented Ambrosia and Nectar as the highest climax of
food; just as the Greek gods stood for the climax of various human
qualities, in each case attributed to one single personality.

The Greeks knew well that the human body requires a variety of food in
order to remain healthy. It is an echo of the same thought expressed in
the Bible when the Jews are given the "Manna" only in the utmost
emergency. The Bible also advocates a considerable variety of food,
regarding which the Old Testament lays down the most careful and
explicit regulations.

In praising "Ambrosia" as the climax of food-substances, Greek mythology
attributed to it the power not only of regeneration, but of procreation.
For the reproduction of healthy human life in its offspring, was to them
just as sacred and important a preoccupation as it was natural, to
ensure the survival of the race; and to secure to all the food that
would assist in this, their highest and most worthy aim, seemed to them
a manifest duty which, at the present day, prudish "morality" either
practically ignores or modestly pretends to neglect. Healthy food,
generally speaking, will do much towards ensuring healthy offspring.

But the times of extreme leisure, as enjoyed by the ancient Greeks, are
long past and a more exacting age makes its more strenuous demands upon
the human tissues, and in innumerable cases causes them to deteriorate
more rapidly than they can be regenerated and restored to their original
vigor by even the healthiest food.

Hence I have felt justified, in considering the best interests of the
race--present and future--in devoting the crowning effort of my long
scientific career to the production of modern biological remedies such
as would be felt in the reproductive powers of the people--a
consideration concerning which the old-time, prudish reticence is a
foolish figment rapidly passing away.

Now, as regards myself and my great work. Surely to boast a little is
but human. The man who puts his very best efforts into an ideal, and
having achieved it, has not striven to reap the fruits thereof for
selfish gain, but year by year, has perfected that work until the tests
have finally permitted him to cry: "Eureka"--it is accomplished beyond
dispute,--that man has the right to overstep the conventional rule which
forbids self-praise. While in other work accomplished I see but the
links of an uncompleted chain, the synthesis of Eubiogen, I feel to be
one of those so rare occasions in human life, when a tested
accomplishment allows and even demands a somewhat different treatment.
And so I have the courage to speak as follows in eulogy of my own
production:

This product is my masterpiece. I am proud of it. Nothing like it in
efficiency has ever before been given to the world. In the fullest sense
of the word, it is in food value the most perfect concentration that
science and research have ever evolved. It is the result of the quest of
30 years and should make its finder famous. Hundreds of men of mark have
each one given to mankind some noble token of their genius; but of such
gifts not one possessed the concentrated virtues, the materialized
knowledge of "Eubiogen." This, to unsympathetic ears, may sound like
vain, exaggerated vapouring;--but it is not so. _It is the truth_. It is
impossible to describe the real value of its properties within a limited
space. Sufferers in their thousands will yet live to be grateful for the
benefits derived from it, and the full and positive knowledge of its
excellence makes it the more difficult to describe in a few weak words.
An abler pen than mine would fail to do it justice.

In sentimental somnolence I sometimes dream how, perhaps, in the days
to come, another hand may write in glowing terms the faithful history of
"Eubiogen" and say kind feeling words and fair of the hard worked lone
scientist who gave its healing virtues to mankind, terming it--he too
perhaps--the stereotyped "Ambrosia," the diet of the Olympian gods; but
for myself, it is all I ask to know that it has served the appointed end
to which my energy has aimed,--that it has proved a food instinct with
healing and comfort to my kind--a staunch support and refuge for the
overwrought sinews of humanity. May such be my guerdon of reward for the
long years of thought and toil and--I shall rest content.

(b). Eubiogen contains the best and purest ingredients science and
experience can produce today. It is the most delicate and at the same
time the most digestible and assimilable cell-food obtainable.

Many great names since the time of Hippocrates have figured in the list
of those who shared with me the ambitious hope to give mankind some
wonder-working remedy--Metschnikoff, Voit, Koenig, Biedert, Rubner,
Gruber, Kussmaul, Bischoff, Teschemacher, Hirschfeld, Boemer, Wintgen,
Virchow, Hammarsten, Gilbert, Fournier, Heim, Lahmann, von Noorden,
Epstein, Wair Mitchel, Salkowski, Kornauth and the rest, but not one of
them ever dreamed of a perfect regenerator of the cells of the human
body such as this composition, Eubiogen, affords.

The analysis of my product, shows that it is practically impossible to
improve upon in life-giving, cell-generating qualities. This fact should
satisfy the student. Still I will describe the ingredients a little more
minutely, so that all who use it may be convinced that they are doing
the best that can be done, as known to the science of today, to improve
conditions of health for themselves and for their offspring.

As a basis, then, I use for the necessary trituration, the finest
radio-active milk sugar produced, flavored with _pure_ vanilla extract.
The high percentage of albumen contained in it is due to the use of the
most highly perfected hygienic product of albumen known to chemistry. It
is chemically pure and manufactured from eggs, milk and vegetables and,
therefore, absolutely free from microscopical germs, harmful to the
human system.

The organic iron contained in it is obtained from the red-coloring
matter of healthy ox blood, called haemin, examined and tested. For the
nerve material, pure lecithin or nerve fat is used, obtained from the
yolks of fresh eggs.

These two products are enormously expensive. All the organic minerals
are in the form of glycerophosphates, and the milk sugar necessary for
making a perfect trituration is radio-active, as explained before.

To make the whole product as digestible and assimilable as possible, I
use the best material known, that is, Taka and Malt diastase. It is made
palatable through the use of genuine van Houten's cocoa in chocolate
form. It will remain in good condition an unlimited length of time when
kept in a dry, cool place. No drugs of any kind are used. This I
guarantee in the fullest sense of the word. The manufacturer is a
renowned chemist of the highest type, and all the products are of the
highest quality obtainable. This is capable of verification by any
really capable authority on the chemistry of food.

In order to bring this product within the reach of all classes, the same
has been compounded in three different forms:

Form aaa. contains radio-activity, haemin, lecithin, glycerophosphates
and all other constituents of the highest purity.

Form aa. contains haemin, lecithin, glycerophosphates and all other
constituents of the highest purity.

Form a. contains haemoglobin, glycerophosphates and all other
constituents (chemically pure.)

For the use of babies and very feeble invalids, special composition B
(see appendix) may take the place of Eubiogen, since it contains nearly
all of its constituent elements in a form that can be assimilated by
either. It will regenerate the invalid as fast as his condition will
allow, and is the salvation of weak children.

(c). As to when Eubiogen should be administered, the rule is simple.

Whenever any of the Dech-Manna Compositions are given, Eubiogen should
be given in smaller or larger doses, as the case may require,
remembering that its most important task is to rebuild and regenerate
the body so that it may readily perform its fullest functions and
transmit the power unimpared to posterity.

(d). _Dose_: The dose may vary considerably, from 1 to 3 times a day.
Generally a dose consists of 1 gram or one-fourth of a heaping
teaspoonful.

The composition may be combined with any kind of food, or may be given
in separate form with chocolate in equal parts.

There are endless ways in which my remedies may be administered, since
they are merely concentrated cell-food.

_It must be definitely understood at the outset that these remedies must
be absolutely and entirely dissociated with the idea of so-called
"medicine,"_ prescribed by the old-school doctor, which has nothing
whatsoever in common with my "remedies," since these contain the real
constituents of our body-cells and _not_ poisonous chemical concoctions,
known as medicines, which _may_ in some cases suppress symptoms, _but
never will and never can remove the constitutional cause or condition of
disease_.


  =COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS.=

  =The Human Body= consists of:

   83.0% Water         \
    0.9% Minerals      |
    3.8% Albumen       |  Solid constituents
    2.5% Fat           |     only 17%
    9.8% Carbohydrates |
  ------               |
  100.0%               /

  =Eubiogen= consists of:

    9.0% Minerals. (Chiefly Glycerophosphates,
         Haemin or Blood-Iron and organized
         minerals)                    10 times concentrated.

   33.5% Albumen. (Egg, Milk and
         Vegetable-Albumen)            9   "        "

   15.0% Fats. (Chiefly Cacao,
         Glycerin fats, Lecithin)      6   "        "
         (Note.--Lecithin is
         made from fresh yolks
         of egg.)

   42.5% Carbohydrates (Chiefly
         Malt Extract, Milk,
         Sugar etc.)                    5   "        "
  ------                                   Of the original amount
  100.0% Solid Constituents.               in the human body.


  =Note.=

  1 Pound of Powdered Egg-Albumen represents the total egg-albumen contents
                      of 116 Eggs.

  1 Pound of Powdered Milk-Albumen represents the total milk-albumen of 25
                      pints of Milk.

  1 Pound of Blood-Iron represents 250 pounds of Haemoglobin.

                        (The cost of Haemoglobin is $4.50 per pound,
                        the value, therefore, of 1 pound of Haemin or
                        Blood-Iron is $1,125--)




APPENDIX

LIFE PRESERVERS AND ELIXIRS.


In addition to the twelve Dech-Manna Compositions mentioned before, I
have composed three others that are most important and are to be used
practically and in various doses; the first and the third should be used
in nearly every treatment of patients suffering from constitutional
diseases, while the second is the remedy which takes the place of
Eubiogen when the patients are babies or very weak.


SPECIAL DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION. (A)

OXYGENATOR.

This consists of radium emanation tablets or powders and the necessary
bath salts for the decarbonization of the system in all cases of what is
called auto-intoxication. They have a wonderful effect on the
metabolism of the human organism, and increase the oxidation of all
diseased cells that poison the system. The radium tablets are officially
guaranteed and the bath salts are the result of many years study in
balneotherapy and hydrotherapy, and have demonstrated their
effectiveness by the wonderful results that have been obtained during
the last thirty years. Rheumatism, gout, arterio-sclerosis, etc., cannot
exist in the system when these baths have been taken for a certain
length of time. I rarely undertake a treatment for disease of this kind
without them.


HOW TO APPLY OXYGENATOR.

For a half or partial bath fill the bath two-thirds full of water at 90°
to 98°. Use one pound of bath salts. Mix and dissolve them completely in
the water. As soon as dissolved, put two of the oxygenator radium
tablets into the water, one at the head and one at the foot of the bath,
allowing one-half to one minute for dissolving. Mix very slowly and
quietly in order not to release too much of the radium emanation.

Lie in the bath very quietly for 20 to 25 minutes, with cold compresses
on the head. Then open the cold water faucet, begin to move about in the
bath, sit up and wash face and chest with cold water. Let the cold water
run into the bath until you notice some signs of "goose-flesh," then get
out and rub down well with a good Turkish towel.

Never remain alone while taking this kind of a bath. Stop the bath
immediately if any feeling of faintness is experienced. Drink a glass of
Tonogen, or other refreshment.


SPECIAL DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION. (B)
EUBIOGEN LIQUID.

This composition is in liquid form and intended for babies and very
feeble invalids. It contains nearly all the constituents of No. XII,
Eubiogen, but in such a form that even the infant can safely partake of
it, with rapid regenerative results. Thus the degeneration of inherited
or predisposed conditions or weak tissues will be prevented.

_Dose_: From one-half to three teaspoonfuls a day, pure or diluted in
milk, according to the individual directions given. As a fermentative
agent I know of nothing better, and through the formation of gases,
acidity of the stomach will be prevented, perfect digestion assured and
consequently health and normal conditions restored.


SPECIAL DECH-MANNA COMPOSITION. (C)

TONOGEN.

As a beverage Tonogen scientifically speaking, stands at the head of all
chemical achievements in drinks. Therapeutically, there is nothing that
could be more beneficial to the human system. It contains the
fundamental constituents of normal blood and nerve cells in such form
that even the weakest and most sensitive digestion will readily respond
to its influence. This compound is absolutely free from all deleterious
chemicals; as a tonic it is stimulating and strengthening and as a
beverage it is so palatable that few will hesitate to pronounce its
taste delicious.

In all cases of acute febrile diseases, also in chronic forms of these
diseases, as well as in climatic fevers, it is wonderfully effective in
supporting the healing process of nature.

From a physiologico-chemical standpoint, it has been thus described:

Tonogen is the acme of chemical perfection, both as a tonic and as a
beverage. It is the captured and crystalized outcome of years of
scientific observation focussed upon the true ingredients of healthy
blood cells as viewed from both the theoretical and practical biological
standpoint. It represents, in fact, a life study of the science of life,
in a concrete form of body-cell invigorator suitable to all mankind,
from earliest infancy to advancing age, and this of a nature equally
digestible and assimilable to both. After but a brief experience of this
seductive beverage, it may speedily be felt how, once digested and
assimilated, it courses through the lymph channels and lacteal vessels
and, by the familiar route of the Chyle passes into the heart, where
joined with the blood of that organ, it produces a sensation of
liquifaction. In its course, by way of the arteries, it gradually
reaches the external glands, warms the limbs and, in a manner
electrifies them. In the body, it suffuses the pancreas and other glands
and the intestines, mingles with the fluids existing in the glands and
with the oily salts of the bile; and whatever impurities (autotoxins),
may be there it drives in the form of excrement and urine completely out
of the body. Thus in its free and ample scope is all the ground of all
the intricate vital processes of physiology covered in its course and
the active principles of the excretions of skin, kidneys and intestines
are made visible at a glance.

In combination with Plasmogen, taken alternately, it is really
indespensable in all the diseases mentioned above. Many a life has been
saved through the use of this combination. It is one of my standard home
remedies, and my own family would not think of allowing themselves to be
without it for a single day, for, as they say, one never knows when it
may be required.

_Dose_: One teaspoonful tonogen with three teaspoonfuls of granulated
sugar in a tumbler of water, to be taken slowly, once or twice daily. In
cases of diabetes and arterio-sclerosis the dose should be 20 to 25
drops tonogen in a teaspoonful of milk sugar 1 to 3 times daily.
Pregnancy is a contra-indication to the use of tonogen.




APPENDIX II.


The following compositions are also used especially in specific cases.


=(D). Tea. Diabetic. _Dechmann._=

Description: Compound of many herbs (powdered) found beneficial to the
diabetic system.


=(E). Tea. Laxagen. _Kneipp._=

Description: Compound of several herbs (powdered) approved by the
celebrated Kneipp in cases of chronic constipation.


=(F). Salve. Lenicet. _Reiss._=

Description: The most beneficial salve in case of inflamed wounds, boils
or exanthematous eruptions.


=(G). Massage Emulsion. _Dechmann._=

Description: Consists of the finest ethereal oils and other ingredients
useful and valuable, yet absolutely harmless, in case of nerve or
muscular pains, applied as a liniment.


=(H). Propionic acid.=

Description: The product of various herbs known for their high
percentage of propionic acid; applied in case of catarrh in the form of
atomized steam.


=(I). Oxygen Powder. _Hensel._=

Description: A composition of sugar, gum tragacanth (traganth) and
citric acid, used in the form of lemonade in case of high carbonic acid
poisoning.


=(J). Anti-Phosphate. _Dechmann._=

(Otherwise termed "Negative Compound.")

Description: Contains all basic salts as sulphates, thus acting as the
governor of a machine; that is it prevents the accumulation of too much
phosphate in the blood, which would promote the formation of all fungus
growths. (See paragraph in the article, "Importance of the Mineral
Constituents in our food").

       *       *       *       *       *

A copy of my wholesale price list as given in 1915--before we entered
the war--may give you a fair idea of the price of my compositions. Since
that time, most of the ingredients of these remedies have increased from
four to ten times in value. The reader can easily judge therefrom of the
fairness of the present values. I may say that most of the compositions
are listed at only one-fourth to one-third advance, notwithstanding the
high cost of chemicals. This fact will absolve me, I think, of any
tendency to profiteering.


PRICE-LIST DECH-MANNA COMPOSITIONS.

  No.                          Per oz.   Per lb.

  I.    Plasmogen               $0.75    $ 8.00
  II.   Lymphogen                1.00     10.67
  III.  Neurogen                 1.50     16.00
  IV.   Osseogen                 1.00     10.67
  V.    Muscogen                 1.00     10.67
  VI.   Mucogen                  1.00     10.67
  VII.  Dento & Ophthogen        1.50     16.00
  VIII. Capillogen               1.50     16.00
  IX.   Dermogen                 1.50     16.00
  X.    Gelatinogen              1.50     16.00
  XI.   Cartilogen               1.50     16.00
  XII.  Eubiogen                 2.00     21.35
  Same with sacch. lact. radio   2.50     26.67

A reduction of 33-1/3% on the prices per pound will be allowed on all
the above products as quoted in the second column.

  A. Radio emanation tablet (5,000 volts);
     Per tablet                               $ 1.50
     Bath salts, original composition,  lb.     1.00
  B. Eubiogen Liquid  (a) oz. 0.75  (b) oz.     1.00
                          pt. 8.00      pt.    10.67
  C. Tonogen          (a) oz. 0.50  (b) oz.     0.75
                          pt. 5.33      pt.     8.00
  J. Anti-Phosphate   (a) oz. 0.50  (b) oz.     0.75
                          lb. 5.33      lb.     8.00

Copies of the Handbook "Dare To Be Healthy" Second Edition, may be
procured at 75c for the paper-bound edition and $1.50 for the
leather-bound edition.


PHYSICAL TREATMENT.

As I have already stated, it is necessary in disease to assist the
process of regulating the circulation and opening the body to the full
benefit of the dietetic and nutritive salts treatment by applying a
number of physical treatments, in each case, which, for convenience
sake, I have divided into ten different groups, some of which may need
to be applied simultaneously in certain cases.

They are as follows:

  23. Ablutions with vinegar and water,    1 part vinegar, 2 parts water.

  24. Abdominal packs, vinegar and water,          dito

  25. Partial packs:
      (a) Vinegar and water,                       dito
      (b) Radium and salts.

  26. Partial packs:
      (a) Arms.
      (b) Legs.
      (c) Neck.
      (d) Shoulder.

  27. Three-quarter packs, vinegar and water,       dito

  28. Gymnastics.

  29. Massage.

  30. Breathing Exercises.

  31. Oxygenator Baths.

  32. Radium and Salt Baths.
      (a) Half.
      (b) Whole.

    NOTE--=The Vinegar= indicated to be used for these treatments, and
    in all similar treatments, packs, or ablutions, prescribed, is the
    natural, or what is known as "Apple Cider Vinegar." The manufactured
    or ordinary table vinegar, as made from chemicals, is not suitable
    for the purpose.

From these groups a treatment is usually prescribed in each and every
case of disease.

The importance of ablutions especially packs is so great that it is
necessary to give further explanations concerning them:

In a general way, it is necessary to apply a bath or an ablution (See
Form 23) when the test with the thermometer, usually applied under the
tongue, in arm-pit or in the rectum, shows that the temperature of the
patient exceeds 100 degrees. The patient grows restless, his skin feels
dry and the pulse, which regularly is 70 to 80 with adults, 90 to 100
with children, and about 130 with infants, shows an increased speed. As
soon as these symptoms appear, they indicate that the immediate cooling
off of the body by means of a bath, an ablution or a pack is necessary.
Adults will always show the desire for such instinctively.

In extreme cases baths or ablutions should be administered several times
every day.

Healthy people perspire as soon as they become too hot. This means that
they cool off through the evaporation of the perspiration. This is
supplemented by the bath and its cooling effect; balancing the higher
temperature of the body with the lower temperature of the water, brings
this about. The blood which flows towards the skin during the bath is
cooled off, and returns in this condition to the interior of the body,
and is immediately followed by other quantities of blood.

Since the blood circulates through the body about twice every minute,
the cooling takes place from 20 to 24 times during a bath, lasting from
10 to 12 minutes. This explains the soothing and cooling effect of the
bath on the waves of blood and the nerves, which are irritated by the
increased temperature.

At the same time the bath opens the pores which assist in the excretion
of degenerated matter produced by the disease, and fosters the reception
of oxygen.

It is a natural function of the body that an increased flow of the
warming blood flies always to any region of the body which is assailed
by external cold, so that such parts may not become too cold or, in
common parlance, may not "catch" cold.

This explains why the hands get red and hot after throwing snow-balls,
the feet burn after a cold foot bath.

As soon as the body, which is hot with fever, is put into the cool bath,
the first effect is that the blood-vessels of the skin contract under
the cooling influence. The blood recedes. Soon, however, it streams with
renewed energy to the skin to defeat the cold. The first action,--the
recession of the blood,--is followed by reaction or increased activity
of circulation towards the skin. This removes the pressure of the blood
upon the overburdened internal organs, such as the brain, the lungs and
the heart. The blood is diverted.

For ablutions the water should be cool or lukewarm, the exact
temperature to be determined by the strength of the patient. Some
vinegar should be added to the water, taking two parts water and one
part vinegar.

To accustom children to the use of water and ablutions is one of the
important duties of motherhood.

A healthy child should be washed once every day with water at 59 degrees
to 64 degrees. The best way to wash the child is to put two chairs in
front of its bed. On one of them place the vessel with the necessary
water, on the other place the child, after it has been disrobed in bed,
in a standing position, so that it can be supported with the back of the
chair. The ablution is performed by means of strong application with the
hands, dipped into the water, and is repeated several times. Then the
shirt is put on again, and the child is allowed to stay well covered in
bed for another 15 minutes.

Children must become accustomed to gargling as early as possible, and to
draw water up through the nose, or to remove it from the mouth through
the nose. This is very valuable and facilitates the treatment of
children in case of disease.


VINEGAR PACKS.

It appears opportune at this juncture, and before entering upon the
detailed description of the modern healing system of Vinegar Packs,
included in the prescribed course of Physical Treatments which follow,
to make a few rational remarks illustrative of the physical significance
and scientific basis of a branch of therapy which largely amongst the
laity, through ignorance, and more so amongst the regular medical
fraternity, for reasons of their own, is too frequently lightly regarded
by the one and diplomatically depreciated by the other.

In this manner one of the most potent and logical modern factors in the
healing of disease would be conveniently consigned to the back ground in
company with other simple _but unremunerative_ truths, but for the
timely intervention of the new and enlightened school of independent
medicine of which the Biological or Hygienic Dietetic Method of Healing
is the outcome.

The wonderful efficacy of natural Vinegar upon the organism and its
employment in the form of Vinegar Packs and compresses dates back
probably to the early traditions of the healing art, but scientific
analysis of its subtle operation upon the system through the vital fluid
has been left for the scientific research of today to determine.

To those of the public--or the profession--therefore, who are not
conversant with the subject the following notes may be valuable as
descriptive of the why and wherefore of the use of Vinegar.

It will be admitted, I think, that one of the most prolific sources of
disease, in innumerable forms, is that of congestion of blood. The
greatest danger of such congestion is inflammation. Should inflammation
occur in or near a vital organ and fail to be promptly reduced and its
cause (coagulation) removed, the result is decomposition--and
decomposition, if not arrested means death.

The most valuable--I might almost say infallible--remedy known, even to
the greatest accepted authorities of physiology, for the prevention of
inflammation is acetic acid in diluted form, or, in a word, Vinegar, as
a restorer of the fluidity of the blood.

Inflammation is the result of coagulation of the blood-albumen;
congestion is its sequal, inflammation and decomposition of the tissues
its climax. The last is nearly always fatal.

_The manifest object therefore to be achieved in all such cases is to
restore the normal fluidity and circulation of the blood_ without unduly
taxing any vital organ. Thus, for instance, hot packs on the feet draw
the blood towards the feet, where no vital organs exist. Hot packs act
as an absorbent, by suction; cold packs, on the affected place, act in
inverse ratio as an expelling force. The two operating conjointly
promote full circulation and extend the absorbing tendency to the whole
system.

Ice, on the other hand, though not infrequently prescribed, is too
strong a force. It contracts the blood vessels, arrests normal
circulation, and in many cases is the direct cause of death. This is
attested by the teaching of physiological law which maintains that any
part of the human system which is not fed by fresh oxygenous blood
_must decompose_.

Packs, of course, must be regulated in accordance with the vital
strength of the patient, as indicated by the physician; for in the
course of the excretion of morbid matter through the pores, under the
influence of the packs, a certain proportion of accompanying healthy
substance is necessarily exuded simultaneously, with a slightly
weakening tendency. This however can be promptly and effectively
replaced by proper alimentation, or food selection in accordance with
the Dech-Manna Diet System already particularized.

One other matter it is advisable to deal with in advance and that is the
_Nature of the Vinegar to be employed for Packs_.

It must be borne in mind that for this purpose an absolutely pure
natural product should be obtained.

I recommend, in the first place a genuine _Apple Cider Vinegar_; for
apples not alone contain the pure acetic acid but also some five or six
other fruit acids which are so beneficial for the purpose of keeping the
blood at normal temperature and normal fluidity, and contain also a
considerable amount of the essentials known under the head of
vitamines.

As a secondary alternative I would recommend _Wine Vinegar_ for the same
purpose.

The manufacturers vinegar product--_Acetic acid, should never the used_
as it contains, very frequently, harmful ingredients.

It should never be forgotten that the substances used for the purpose of
packs, and thus absorbed into the system, become a part of the blood and
therefore cannot be too pure.

The reader will doubtless observe from the foregoing demonstration that
the Dechmann System of Therapy differs materially from the science of
the Old-School of Medicine in that it is not based upon evanescent
theories of hairsplitting philosophy but upon the solid basis of
cold-blooded fact.

Why then, the reader will inquire, should so wonderful and at the same
time _simple, inexpensive and easily applied remedy_ be treated by "the
faculty" with an affectation of indulgent toleration, ridicule or
"damning with faint praise."

To this riddle there are two solutions--neither of them very creditable
to those concerned.

On the one hand, only crass ignorance of some of the most important
facts of physiology and physiological chemistry could account for it.
And, it must be borne in mind that in the course of the prolific
verbosity of pontificated dogma which has graced the scroll of medical
science, whole libraries have been written--and ably written, too--by
skillful pens for the sole purpose of covering the simple nudity of the
agnostic position of science--the dreaded, confidence-shattering
admission: "I don't know."

Failing this solution there is, unfortunately, but one alternative and
that a singularly distasteful one to entertain; namely, to attribute the
unpopularity of this splendid gift of Nature to unprofessional
considerations on the part of an apothecary-loving profession.

The employment of vinegar is, as I have said, a royal remedy, ready to
the hand of any man and at little or no expense, and it needs no
"learned" interpretation.

It is consequently beyond the omnivorous talons of "the trade."

Would it be unkind to say: "Hinc illae lachrymae"?


THE PACKS.

The packs mentioned as physical treatment, under Nos. 24, 25, 26 and 27,
are of the greatest importance, and in fact I never undertake the
treatment of any disease whatsoever without applying them as the most
effective means of restoring proper circulation of the blood and
removing diseased matter from the body, which is the only way to bring
about a real and definite cure.

The effect of the pack is the cooling of the blood.

The temperature of the pack is 50 degrees and more below the temperature
of the blood.

In the first place this brings about quiet after unrest.

Through the action of the body, which sends a large quantity of blood to
the places which are touched by the cool compresses, a certain surplus
of heat is created which is transferred to the compresses and retained
by them as moist warmth.

Under this influence the blood-vessels of the skin extend and absorb
blood more freely, which is thus diverted from the important internal
organs to the skin. In all cases of fever the diseased matter is
dissolved in the hot feverish blood and circulates in and with it. The
evaporation of the skin is increased, and with it the diseased matter is
absorbed by the compresses, which consequently diffuse an unpleasant
odor when removed, and when cleansed, give to the water a muddy
appearance. Thus it may be observed to what extent the pack removes
diseased matter from the body.

Packs must be changed as soon as they cease to give comfort to the
patient, and make him too warm. Highly flushed cheeks, increasing
temperature and unrest are sure signs that the pack requires to be
changed, and in case of high fever this may happen after 20 to 30
minutes.

For short packs, such as are prescribed in all inflammatory and feverish
diseases, water at from 59 degrees to 64 degrees is used.

A piece of linen cloth is folded from 4 to 8 times, wrung out, but not
too much, and then covered with moderately thick folds of woollen cloth.
The stronger the patient and the higher the fever, the thicker should be
the pack.

For infants a double linen strip is sufficient.

The faster the fever and inflammation recede, the longer may the pack
last, up to three hours. The convalescent will enjoy the moist warmth,
under the influence of which still existing diseased material is
thoroughly dissolved and completely excreted. The dissolving effect of
packs of long duration is most noticeable in chronic diseases.

Through the penetrating effect of the moist warmth on the body or parts
thereof, deposited diseased matter is dissolved, and dislodged, existing
excoriations are disintegrated, and withdrawn into the circulating
blood, and thus excreted.

The dissolving packs of long duration must be applied somewhat thinner
than the cooling ones (from 1 to 3 folds); they must be wrung out more
vigorously, and covered more closely.

If a pack should be applied for the sake of prevention of disease, it
may be put on in the evening and remain all night. In the beginning of
fever, while it remains moderate, the patient can endure the pack for
from 2 to 2-1/2 hours.

Biological hygienic therapy rejects the external application of ice, for
it causes severe congestion of the blood. Extensive application of the
ice pouch causes more or less paralysis of the nerves, which in many
cases prevents recovery and even causes chronic disease or fatal
results. The biological hygienic treatment desires _to moderate
inflammation only_, to the degree that it should lose its dangerous
character, but it leaves to the body its power _to remove, through the
process of inflammation, alien and diseased matter, and to absorb and
gradually carry away the products of inflammation through the blood
current_.

Paralysis of the vocal cords, of the muscles of the eye, of the nerves
of hearing, the exudations from the nose and eyes after diphteria,
meningitis and scarlet fever, adhesions, suppurations after pneumonia
and other forms of inflammatory disease, are often the _consequences of
the use of ice_, because the products of inflammation are not absorbed,
and the ice paralyzes the neighbouring nerves.

Inflammations, which are suppressed by medicine or ice, must renew
themselves; since the causes, the alien matter (auto toxins), as well as
the products of inflammation remain in the body and are not thoroughly
excreted.

To apply water, on the contrary, quickly removes not only the
inflammation, but its causes and eventual consequences. The organs which
have been inflamed do not show any further inclination to renewed
inflammation.

In no case will a chronic ailment be the consequence of an acute
disease, provided the same is dealt with in a natural way, according to
the principles of biological hygienic treatment.

In order to bring about the complete excretion of all autotoxins and, in
case of inflammation, the complete absorption of all products thereof,
it is necessary to continue the lengthy packs even during the period of
convalescence, and not to stop immediately the fever and inflammation
have somewhat disappeared. This is a mistake which is frequently
committed, and the fault is then laid at the door of the biological
hygienic system. Any relapse, or succeeding illness, will be avoided by
continuing the packs for four to six weeks after the disease has been
cured, applying them during the night and at first also during the
day-time, from two to three hours.

While most people understand the cooling effect of a pack, _the
important diverting, dissolving and excreting effect is rarely
understood_. Few people understand why ablutions, abdominal and leg
packs are prescribed in case of inflammation of the eyes; why, in case
of ulcers, besides compresses on the part affected, nightly abdominal
packs and ablutions in the morning, are considered indispensable; and
why, in case of inflammation of _one_ leg, the healthy leg is also
subjected to a pack.

And yet the explanation is very simple, rational and logical.

In limiting packs, in case of inflammation, to the inflamed part only,
the blood current would be directed mainly to the one place, and the
excretion of autotoxins from the body would only occur in the inflamed
place. The blood would carry all diseased matter principally to the
diseased spot and deposit it there. The inflamed organ would thus be
burdened with work which it simply would not be able to perform. The
effect is far otherwise when the pressure of blood into the diseased
part is moderated, if the dissolution and excretion of the matter that
causes the disease, takes place, not in one spot only, but is
distributed over the entire body. If the entire skin comes into action,
the entire body participates in the healing process. In biological
hygienic-dietetic practice it is, consequently, not sufficient to treat
the one diseased organ only. In all diseases _the co-operation of the
entire body in a general treatment, remains the main issue of the
biological, hygienic therapy_. It regards the human body, as so often
stated, purely as a unit, and knows neither specialist nor special
cures. This is the key to its success.


IMPORTANT GENERAL ADVICE.

For use in packs take coarse, previously used and loosely woven linen,
which readily absorbs water and clings closely to the body.

After each pack the linen must be rinsed well and boiled and the woollen
material or blanket must be thoroughly aired. From time to time the
woollen covering must be washed, or chemically cleaned, if possible.

Raw silk is an excellent substitute for linen. It clings well to the
body, does not cause any discomfort, and has an excellent absorbing
quality for water and other substances.

The proper application of the pack is of course of great importance.
Adults can easily apply many of the packs without assistance, but
generally speaking a third person is necessary, whether in the case of
children or patients. It is consequently advisable for every mother to
become thoroughly familiar with the methods of applying packs, and she
should always have the necessary material on hand. It should be cut to
the proper size, and there should be duplicates of each piece for the
necessary changes. The approximate measurements for adults are:

                             =Width=          =Length=
  Neck pack                    5"            40" to  60"
  Shoulder pack               10"                    40"
  Abdominal pack              28"            40" to  60"
  Breast or stomach pack      16"            52" to  60"
  "T" pack                    16"            52" to  60"
  Cross piece alone            5"                    24"
  The shawl                   32" to 40"     32" to  40"
  Scotch pack (undivided)     16"            80" to 100"
  Same for children           10" to 16"     60" to  80"
  Calf pack                   24"                    26"
  Leg pack                    24"                    30"
  Three-quarter pack          56"            52" to  60"
  Whole pack                  68"                    80"

  The measurements for children are accordingly shorter and narrower.

As to the application of packs, a mother can learn a great deal by
experimenting on her own body. Packs at night are by no means
detrimental to adults, and the application of a regular abdominal pack,
a three-quarter pack, and a whole pack once a week or once every two
weeks is decidedly advantageous. Three-quarter and whole packs should
be occasionally tried on the body of children with dry linen so that in
case of disease the mother will be a well trained nurse, at least in
this respect.

To go about the application of the pack quietly and without much talking
is very comforting to the patient, who usually grows excited during the
procedure.

In case of acute feverish disease the packs and the changes must be
applied very quickly, so that the patient will not catch cold. While, as
a rule, the patient should not be disturbed in a quiet sleep,
unconsciousness or delirium must not prevent change of the pack.

Packs should be applied so as not to cause any creases which may hurt
the patient.

The temperature of the water used for packs should be as follows:

For the cooling packs, 59 degrees to 64 degrees.

For dissolving packs, 64 degrees to 71 degrees.

The higher temperature is used in the treatment of infants, nervous and
anaemic persons.

In chronic diseases a gradual return to a lower temperature by about
2-1/2 degrees per week is advisable.

No packs or compresses should be put on when parts of the body are cold.
In such cases the parts in question must first be warmed.

The linen should be wrung out less for short cooling compresses than for
dissolving packs of longer duration.

Cooling compresses must be changed as soon as the patient indicates that
he feels oppressed or irritated by the heat.

As a general rule, packs on the legs may be left on feverish patients
twice as long as packs on the upper parts of the body.

No fever being apparent, the abdominal pack may be changed after about
2-1/2 hours, the leg pack after 5 hours, and even not at all during the
night. Packs should be renewed according to requirements of the
individual patient, not in accordance with fixed rules.

Great care must be exercised to fasten the packs well and tightly. This
is usually done with good strong safety pins; these should be fastened
perpendicularly, or at right angles to the length of the material.

When changing the pack on feverish patients who are to receive an
ablution or a bath two or three times a day, all pins must be loosened
under the bedcovers so that the pack may be removed quickly.

If ablutions only are to be given, the pack is removed gradually as the
respective parts of the body are to be washed.

When the fever is moderate, there should be ablutions morning and
evening, or a bath in the morning and an ablution in the evening.

When packs are applied only at night, patients require only an ablution
in the morning.

If the packs are not renewed, an ablution must follow the removal. This
refreshes and strengthens the skin, closes the wide open pores and
prevents taking cold.

Dissolving packs, if annoying at night, may be removed under the
bedcovers without an ablution.

If the pack is changed without intervening ablution, the new pack must
be ready to be applied before the old, hot one, is taken off.

While in a pack, the patient should not leave his bed, not even for the
purpose of urinating or for stool.


GENERAL RULES.

The following general rules must be applied in connection with the
directions given anon for packs during different diseases.

In case of inflammation, the inflamed spot is cooled off by local
compresses, and diverting packs of longer duration are applied on other
parts of the body.

For instance, in case of inflammation of the brain or tonsils.

The first step is to cool off the blood which flows to the neck and head
by short-time compresses on the neck and on the cervix. At the same time
an attempt must be made to divert it through lengthier packs on the
abdomen, the legs and the wrists, thereby to prevent a further delivery
of diseased matter to the centre of inflammation. The solution and
excretion of diseased matter from other points than the inflamed spots
will thereby be effected, and these will be unburdened and calmed
accordingly.

In case of inflammation of the organs of the breast (lungs, heart), the
blood is diverted to the abdomen, legs and lower arms through long-time
packs, and the upper parts of the breast are cooled with short
compresses.

If the inflammation has its seat in the abdomen, this must be cooled
off, while the diversion with longer-time packs is made to the legs and
arms.

Ulcers are treated by applying extremely hot compresses, which are
frequently changed, and the surrounding parts are cooled off and
diversion is effected through nightly packs on the abdomen and on the
legs. The hot compresses dissolve the diseased matter, so that the ulcer
opens. Thereupon cool compresses of 71 degrees to 64 degrees are applied
and allowed to remain for 2-1/2 to 3 hours, which will effect quick
healing without the necessity of an operation.

_The main rule is never to divert towards a vital organ_ of the body,
such as the lungs or heart; thus, in case of inflammation of the head,
diversion must be attempted, not to the breast, but to the arms and
legs.


ABDOMINAL PACK (24)

The abdominal pack should be applied on infants and children whenever
they show signs of illness in any way, and naturally, in cases of summer
complaints, measles, scarlet fever, diphtheria, whooping cough,
pneumonia, typhoid fever, in which cases a pack should be applied
during the entire course of the illness with slight intermissions only.

As in acute diseases, it is also applied in chronic ones. (See
descriptions to follow). Its early application will often serve to
prevent serious sickness.

The abdominal pack reaches from the level of the base of the breast bone
to the hips. It is made from a piece of linen crash about 12 inches in
width which must cover the space from 6 inches below the arm-pits to the
hips, while its length must be such that it can encircle the body,
overlap upon the abdomen and be secured with tapes at the left side. A
further piece of soft linen is needed to pass between the legs, to be
fastened to the former, back and front, with safety-pins. The next
requirement is a piece of woollen cloth, or blanket, folded double or
treble as required, in breadth, about 6 inches wider than the linen
crash and of equal length, with a shorter woollen strip for between the
thighs, attached like the linen, back and front. For children a linen
towel etc. with the accompanying woollen coverings, will be found, as a
rule, sufficient; for infants, a properly folded piece of old linen.
The linen as well as the woollen material must be properly folded before
the pack is made, and measured, so that the patient need not be kept
waiting while the pack is being placed on the body.

[Illustration: No. 1]

The above cut shows how to apply the abdominal pack on an adult patient.

The linen is saturated in two parts of water with one part of vinegar,
at 64 to 75 degrees Fahrenheit, well wrung out, and is placed on the
woollen material in such a way that the latter extend about 2 to 3
inches on the upper and lower edge. The pack is now placed around the
back of the patient, who sits in bed or is held in position by another.
The patient's shirt is lifted and he is laid down on the moist linen,
which is then quickly raised on both sides and folded over the abdomen.
The same is done with the woollen material, which is then fastened
tightly in the middle, the upper and lower corners with three safety
pins. Then the shirt is pulled down and the patient is warmly covered.

In individual cases it is advisable sometimes to divide the pack into a
back and front compress of greater proportions.

In such cases the woollen cloth, which is used for the abdominal pack is
placed underneath the patient as before. A towel is folded 6 to 8 times,
so that it will grow warm slowly and thus may remain on the body for a
longer time. This is placed under the back of the patient. Then two
properly folded towels, which are not wrung out very thoroughly, are put
on the abdomen, and tucked down a little on both sides. The woollen
cloth is thereupon fastened so as to keep the compresses in place, the
arrangement being otherwise exactly as before. In such cases the back
compress only needs to be changed every 2 to 3 hours, even in case of
severe fever. The front towels may be changed several times in the
meantime.

Since this system permits the application of the pack without disturbing
the patient and making him sit up too often, it is very desirable in
cases of severe illness.

The undivided pack is often very uncomfortable for patients suffering
from respiratory complaints.

It is better to treat very excitable patients with front compresses
only.

When the stomach pack only is prescribed, as in catarrhal and nervous,
stomach or liver complaints, which pack may be worn during the night as
well as the day, a long, wide mesh shawl, with a bandage, 7 to 8 inches
in width at each end, is most servicable, as it will reach around the
body 4 or 5 times. In order to exclude the air as much as possible, the
moist compress is first applied, and then the shawl is placed around the
body in such a way that each succeeding turn covers the previous one to
about one-half, in bandage form.


THE CROSS PACK (25)

This is applied in case of men's diseases and women's diseases of the
sexual organs. To the woollen material and the linen crash of the
abdominal pack, another piece, about half as long and about 7 inches
wide, is sewed or pinned before application, in the form of a T.

[Illustration: No. 2]

Before the two ends of the abdominal pack are folded over on the front
of the abdomen, the narrower piece is drawn up between the legs from
behind, so that the end of it can be fastened to the two sides of the
abdominal part of the pack that are folded over in front.

As shown above, the abdominal pack must reach down as far as possible,
and if a patient is unable to stand both packs, the moist part of the
abdominal pack may be omitted, and only the regular pack over the sexual
organs and the woollen part over the abdomen applied.

In case the cross piece is for the purpose of cooling and contracting,
it must be frequently renewed.

Women should accompany the ablutions mornings and evenings with
injections of lukewarm water at 71 degrees to 82 degrees, and men should
make ablutions of the sexual parts 5 to 6 times a day with water at 64
degrees to 71 degrees.

The cross pack has the advantage of gradually putting back into normal
position, the female organs, if they are in any way displaced.

These packs will help to cure cases of leukorrhoea and gonorrhoea,
locally too, without operations or the application of poisons,
especially if applied at an early stage.


LEG PACKS (26)

These are applied in a similar way to the abdominal pack.

A towel or linen is doubled, moistened, and placed upon the woollen
cloth, so that the woollen material extends about two inches beyond the
upper and lower edges of the towel. These are laid together under one of
the patient's legs, covering it from the middle of the thigh to the
ankle, turned up from both sides and fastened with three safety pins.
The other leg is packed in the same way, each one separately.

[Illustration: No. 3]

In like manner partial packs of the calves or the feet are applied. In
all of these cases it is more expedient and comfortable to use "knit"
packs. Cotton stockings of suitable length from which the foot has been
removed, should take the place of the linen or towel in the packs
previously described. They are moistened and covered with woollen
stockings of corresponding length. The foot parts are to be used only
for foot packs in a similar way. The woollen stocking should be as loose
and comfortable as possible. In case of bent legs (through gout or
otherwise) the moistened linen is wrapped around the leg like a
bandage, and then a woollen bandage is wound over it.

In cases of severe fever the wrists are also packed, no woollen cover,
however, being necessary in this case.

The leg pack has, in the first place, a diverting and consequently a
calming effect. It is, therefore, of the highest value, next to the
abdominal, cross, neck and shoulder packs, in all feverish and
especially all chronic cases of disease where congestion in the head and
breast, with consequent dizziness, headache, insomnia, pains in the
lungs and heart, must be removed; moreover, in chronic cases, they
assist in the effects of the abdominal pack.

Foot packs, that is, wet stockings, have a very favorable action upon
headache, toothache and earache, and are best applied during the night.
If they excite the patient too much, they may easily be taken off during
the night; otherwise they should be followed by a cold ablution of the
feet in the morning. Nervous patients are usually unable to stand the
wet stockings, which only work well if the feet become warm quickly,
which, as a rule, is not the case in feverish illnesses.

Patients who suffer from cold feet should take a steam foot bath before
applying cold foot packs.

Since the legs and the feet develop less heat than the abdomen, leg and
foot packs do not require as thick material as abdominal packs, and are
changed less frequently. They are best applied when the fever is at its
height, in the late afternoon and at night. In case leg packs are
continued for a long while, the legs show decreasing inclination to grow
sufficiently warm. Whenever this occurs, leg packs must be discontinued,
or the packed legs must be warmed in an artificial manner.

The diverting wrist packs are of special value, especially in all acute
diseases of the lungs (inflammations, bleedings, hemorrhages) and the
heart.


NECK PACK (26)

This is made by folding a piece of linen fourfold, long enough to reach
twice around the neck. It is dipped in the vinegar-water at from 59
degrees to 64 degrees, placed around the neck and some woollen material
wound over it, covering well the moist linen.

The neck pack has its effect on the inside of the neck in case of
tonsilitis, croup, etc.

If stiffness of the neck, headache or similar pains are felt after its
use, the moist linen should not be extended to the back part of the neck
but only the front and sides.

Where the effect is to be extended to the trachea and its branches, the
bronchia and the tips of the lungs, especially in the case of cough, it
is still better to apply the following:


SHOULDER PACK (26)

For this purpose a short towel is folded into a strip of about a hand's
width, extending from one of the nipples across the opposite shoulder,
around the neck, to the other nipple.

[Illustration: No. 4]

A woollen shawl or fabric, fastened together with a safety pin, must
cover the moist towel completely. The shoulder pack is always applied
together with the abdominal pack. It is put on first, and the two ends
are pulled under the abdominal pack, and then fastened.

[Illustration: No. 5]


THE SCOTCH PACK (26)

The Scotch pack is of the greatest advantage in all diseases of the
trachea and the lungs, also in case of whooping cough.

Two towels are sewn together lengthwise and, as a moist pack, are placed
over the breast of the patient so that the seam will be in the center.
The ends are crossed over the back, one end is brought forward over the
left and one over the right shoulder; then the ends are crossed once
more and tucked under. A woollen shawl or covering is placed over the
moist towels as usual, so that it completely covers the moist pack. The
ends are tucked under the pack in front. The pack is fastened with
safety pins where the ends cross.


THE DIVIDED SCOTCH PACK (26)

This pack is, in some respects better than the last, since it is less
liable to form creases, and the upper portion may be changed more
frequently for the purposes of cooling, than the undivided pack. It is
used together with the abdominal pack.

[Illustration: No. 6]

[Illustration: No. 7]

Instead of using one strip 4 to 6 inches wide, folded 4 to 6 times, as
for the shoulder pack, two strips are taken. One strip is passed across
each shoulder, and crossed on the breast as well as on the back. The
woollen strips used for covering are of course wider and of double
thickness. The ends of the two strips are drawn underneath the abdominal
pack, and held by it, and the two shoulder packs may be changed as often
as necessary for cooling purposes without necessitating a simultaneous
change of the abdominal pack.


THE SHAWL (26)

(This is an application similar to "Kneipp's Shawl")

A large square piece of linen crash from 35 to 40 inches in width is
folded into a triangle, dipped in the vinegar-water at 59 to 64 degrees,
and after being wrung out, is applied diagonally round the neck. The
upper part of the back, the cervix, the neck, the shoulders and the
upper parts of the breast are thus covered. A woollen wrap, the ends of
which are pinned together on the back, will cover the whole pack
tightly.

This pack must be changed if the patient becomes too hot (after 1/2 to 2
hours), otherwise it may stay on all night. In case of feverish catarrh
it is used together with the three-quarter pack.

Among other things the "shawl pack" causes the cooling of the blood
which streams to the head. Thus its effect in case of congestion and
brain trouble is explained.

_Neck and shoulder packs, Scotch packs and shawl packs must always be
used in connection with a diverting leg, calf or foot pack._


THE THREE-QUARTER PACK (27)

Next to the abdominal pack the three-quarter pack is one of the best
applications, especially for children.

A piece of woollen cloth, or a single blanket, as long as the patient
and sufficiently wide to reach all around him, is placed on the bed in
such a way as to be level with the arm-pits of the patient. A bedspread
of about the same size as the blanket is then dipped into cool
vinegar-water, wrung out well, and placed on the blanket so that the
upper edge of the latter protrudes. The patient is now laid on the
bedspread so that it reaches to the arm-pits. The moist spread is then
turned up on both sides, part of it is tucked between the legs, and the
protruding lower end is laid on or between the feet. Thus the body,
from the arms down, is completely wrapped in the wet spread, and the
woollen blanket is covered over it as usual and fastened with safety
pins. The patient's shirt is then adjusted. The head, the neck, the
uppermost part of the breast and back are not packed. Another blanket is
placed over the patient and well fastened on all sides. A pillow must be
placed between the feet and the lower edge of the bed. To avoid cold
feet the wet spread should reach only to the ankles, and the feet be
covered with the woollen blanket, or a hot bottle placed near them.

[Illustration: No. 8]

The three-quarter pack is very valuable in feverish diseases, since it
takes effect on so large an area of the skin. It is also very helpful in
case of meningitis and other inflammations. It should, however, not be
applied by a layman, except with the greatest caution.

The inflamed parts must be covered with compresses, as in case of
pneumonia and inflammation of the heart.

If three-quarter packs excite children too much, they must be replaced
by abdominal and leg packs.

The patient should remain in the pack as long as he does not become too
hot or restless. This may occur after 20 to 30 minutes, in case of
severe fever; otherwise, the pack may last an hour or longer. The pack
is very useful with children when indications of disease appear. In many
cases it will develop and cure disease, such as measles, if it is
properly applied for 2 to 2-1/2 hours, and followed by a bath at 77
degrees or an ablution at 64 degrees.

When fever and inflamation begin to slacken, and also during
convalescence, three-quarter or whole packs applied daily or every
second day, followed by an ablution, are very useful for the purpose of
solution and excretion.

In such cases the moist heat should be conserved by applying additional
blankets or comforters to the limit of endurance.


THE HALF PACK (25)

The half pack is applied like the three-quarter pack, with the exception
that it reaches only from the arm-pits to the knees.

It is especially necessary to close it carefully around the legs. The
half pack allowing the body more freedom, it may be kept on all night.

It is most effective on the thighs in cases of sciatica. It is, however,
also applied in case of febrile disease.


THE WHOLE PACK

This is applied in nearly the same way as the three-quarter pack, but
includes also the arms, breast and neck.

[Illustration: No. 9]

In this case the blanket must reach to above the ears. On top of the
moist spread a towel is laid, which is first drawn around the abdomen.
The patient's arms must be somewhat bent, so that they will not oppress
the breast when packed with it. Otherwise the arms may be treated just
like the legs, so that the moist spread touches them everywhere. When it
is impossible to fasten the blanket at the neck with safety pins, it can
be tucked firmly under both shoulders. The blanket must be drawn tightly
over the shoulders and the ends tucked under the opposite shoulder. It
must exceed the length of the patient by 18 inches. In case one blanket
is not large enough, two must be used, one of which may be drawn down 6
inches below the other.

[Illustration: No. 10]

Additional blankets, pillows and comforters may be used in case of high
fever.

The advice already given in regard to the differences in packs,
depending on their various purposes of cooling, diverting, calming or
dissolving, must also determine in this case as to the extra amount of
covering. The access of cold air at the neck and legs, however, must
always be carefully guarded against.

An ablution or bath must follow each whole pack.

If properly applied, the "whole pack" will be of the greatest benefit in
all febrile and chronic cases.

Inflammations require partial packs, while at the same time dissolving
or diverting packs of longer duration are applied to the parts of the
body which are not affected.


SMALL COMPRESSES

Small compresses may be applied to any part of the body.

They reduce ulcers and slight inflammations; they dissolve coagulation
in cases of rheumatism or gout, even of long standing.

A medium sized piece of linen folded six to eight times, is useful in
case of toothache or earache. The compress must be covered with a
woollen cloth and fastened as securely as possible. Dissolving
compresses must be covered more thickly than cooling ones.

Special compresses are sometimes needed on the head, on the heart and
around the neck to prevent congestions. They are covered only slightly,
and like all cooling compresses, are changed as soon as they become hot.


GYMNASTICS, MASSAGE AND BREATHING EXERCISES (28, 29, 30)

The three items under "Physical Treatment": 28. _Gymnastics_, 29.
_Massage_ and 30. _Breathing_, require only a few explanatory remarks.

Their common object is, by means of external mechanical aid, to
stimulate the circulation of the blood which is undergoing the process
of regeneration. They remove obstacles to circulation and produce
movements and reactions. While, in the case of massage, this external
aid must, as a rule, be given by a third person in order to be
effective, gymnastics and breathing exercises depend upon the patient
himself. All of them, however, have the common attribute that, in order
to be useful, they must be strictly individual. The old proverb: "No one
thing is good for everybody," is fittingly applied in this case.

There are few things that are so much abused as this rule in regard to
gymnastics. I cannot urge too strongly the importance of caution in
advising such exercises. While much of what is claimed for them may be
good and true, the governing question as to _what is suitable in an
individual case_, can obviously not be determined by any such impersonal
advice. It is the exclusive right and the duty of the attending
physician to prescribe whether, and to what extent, these exercises
should be applied in each case.

This is true of gymnastics even when practised by reputedly healthy
people. By executing certain movements, they may develop disease and
weaken certain organs, through ignorance of their abnormal condition.

In case gymnastics or breathing exercises are prescribed as part of a
treatment they should be executed in strict accordance with the order
of the attending hygienic-dietetic physician.

One of the great principles never to be overlooked in gymnastics is,
that in order to have the desired effect they must be carried out with
the greatest regularity.

As to massage, this requires knowledge of anatomy in general, and of the
anatomy of the individual to be treated, in particular. Only in this way
can the desired effect be produced on certain muscles and nerves, with
the further consequence that their movements promote the correct and
health-giving circulation of the blood. Here again the governing factor
must be the prescription of the hygienic-dietetic physician who has
studied the individual case and knows the effect he wishes to produce by
means of massage, and how to procure the same.

Books on massage and its general practice without knowledge of the
particular case, will really accomplish nothing.


ELECTRIC VIBRATORS

In certain cases, and where it is not a question of general massage, the
patient will be able to apply massage for himself according to the
physician's prescription.

In this connection he will find an electric vibrator of valuable
assistance. It will allow him to extend the area of the self-applied
massage, but again, it will be useful only to the extent that it is
carried out in strict accordance with instructions.


OXYGENATOR, RADIUM AND SALT BATHS (31, 32)

Since the discovery of radio-activity and the many effects which the
presence of radium in certain waters and minerals produces on the human
body, it has been the special task of research to find means of giving
humanity in general the benefit of this important discovery.

The radium preparation, called "Oxygenator," possesses the quality of
oxidizing about five times as quickly as any other known substance, and
thus removing the degenerated and diseased cells of the human body
accordingly.

This material itself, as well as other combinations of radio products
and salts I use and prescribe for half or whole baths, as the case may
require.

They are of the greatest assistance in carrying out the course of
treatment in each individual case. What in former times could be
effected only through expensive trips to the few famous healing springs
of the world, can now be accomplished in the comfort of the home or the
sanatorium. But these measures, too, should be followed only in strict
accordance with the physician's orders, bearing in mind that there is
such a thing as "too much" even of so valuable an energizer as this.


THE DISEASES TO BE TREATED AND THE APPLICATION OF THE METHOD.

Having given, in the foregoing paragraphs, a brief description of the
course of healing which I advocate, I am now about to give a short
explanation of the different methods to be applied in treating various
forms of disease, all of which have been already explained as
degenerations of the twelve tissues of the body. This will enable
patients to apply the prescriptions given to their individual cases.

..._Once more, however, I warn every one not to commit the mistake of
believing that a layman can cure his own disease by even the most
careful study of a book such as this is._

To the patient, who has been led into the path of health, it will, as is
its purpose, give such instructions as will enable him to see his
condition plainly. _He will then be able the more effectively to follow
the instructions of the physician, and--what is of equal importance--to
inform him correctly in regard to his own observations of his condition
and the changes brought about by the treatment._

There is another point that I wish to mention here at the outset.

Disease, although reduced to its last analysis under this system, is
never so simple that it can be determined as the degeneration of one
tissue exclusively. The unity of the body, the close connection of the
various tissues, and the gradual transition from one into another, make
it impossible to draw the lines as sharply and distinctly as between
chemical elements. For the sake of classification we make the
degeneration of a certain tissue the distinguishing element between
various forms of disease. Let us not forget, however, that this does not
mean more than the _degeneration of the main tissue_ which is affected
by this particular complaint, while the same is also characterized by
simultaneous degeneration of one or more of the other tissues, only to a
lesser degree. It is, therefore, not inconsistent if, in giving the more
detailed description thereof, several tissues are mentioned as being
degenerated, and not only the one particular tissue from which the class
derives its name.


I. DEGENERATION OF THE PLASMO TISSUE.

_Anaemia, Chlorosis, Pernicious Anaemia. A. Scrofulosis. B.
Tuberculosis. C. Syphilis. D. Cancer._

To many who are unfamiliar with the results of modern research, and even
to many physicians of the old school of medicine, the family of disease
forms, as enumerated above, will look somewhat formidable. It comprises
the most disastrous plagues of mankind,--plagues for which cures have
been so frantically sought with such an ominous lack of results. It thus
constitutes one of the most practical revelations of the biological
method of research to positively proclaim that the common cause of these
manifestly so different constitutional diseases is one and the same.

That this fact was not recognized long ago is the reason they have been
pronounced incurable by so many physicians who, by poisoning symptoms,
established only a semblance of cure, until biological study led to the
recognition of the truth. It discovered that all of these constitutional
diseases are essentially blood defects and degenerations, resulting in
the destruction of the body tissue in general,--the necessary and
logical consequence of an imperfect condition of the blood.

So there is a ray of hope for humanity breaking through the night of
despair; that is, that its worst foes can be made to disappear in due
time by attack directed at their common root.

Not the knife of the surgeon, not the poison of the physician of the old
school, but simply harmonizing the individual life with the laws of
nature, will eradicate the cause.

The tremendous importance of the subject, the wide field to be covered,
makes it wellnigh impossible to treat the matter within the present
limits as extensively as it should be treated. A large part of my book,
"Dare To Be Healthy," of which this is but an abstract, deals
exhaustively with this topic. There the reader will find the most
interesting details in regard to the connection between these widely
divergent forms of disease. Their nature as blood-diseases carries with
it the fact that they are preeminently persistent through many
generations, so that today there is but a minority of human beings in
whom all tendency towards them is missing. So predisposition advances
with the continuity of environment, the one point at which, at least in
the case of the so-called white plague, or tuberculosis, an effort
against it has been made.

_The development towards the eradication of these evils has been
neutralised by the overwhelming importance science has given to the
theory of the bacillus as the incentive element of disease, while it is
only a product of the same.

The serum and anti-toxin therapy, which in its fight against the
bacillus, lost sight of the first task of medicine, that of fighting the
disease, was the logical consequence thereof._

The blood liquid which consists of the plasma and red and white blood
corpuscles, and is the carrier of the lymph to such parts of the body as
are not fed directly by the lymphatic vessels, such as the nerves, must
have a well defined chemical composition in order to fulfil its task.
What we call deficiency of blood is, with the exception of traumatically
inflicted losses, normal in quantity, to a great extent, but deficient
in quality. This consists in the chemical composition and the proportion
of nutritive salts in the serum, or in the relation and quality of the
oxygen carriers, that is, the red and white corpuscles, whose task it is
to remove foreign and disturbing elements from the blood.

It is obvious that deficiency in these elements may be of infinite
variety and of the most far reaching consequence for the various
tissues of the body, which receive their nourishment therefrom.

According to the nature of the effects which this variety in blood
deficiency (dysaemia) produces, we distinguish certain groups of
degenerations in the body, for which names were established at a time
when the unity of these forms of disease had not yet been recognized.
Thus, where dysaemia produces only general debility, we call it anaemia,
which may gradually become destructive and develop into "pernicious"
anaemia. When it affects girls with all kinds of disturbances in
menstruation, perverting their appetite and causing a greenish color of
the skin, it is called "chlorosis." If the symptoms are the destruction
of the lymphatic glands, so often noticed in children said to be
hereditarily affected, we speak of "Scrofulosis." When erroneous
composition of the blood, produced by poor living and unsanitary
environment, causes destruction of the lungs or of certain bones or
tissues, the name "tuberculosis" indicates that the decaying condition
of the affected tissues results in producing numerous tubercle bacilli.
In the many cases in which the destruction is even more widespread,
attacking the skin, bones, brain and other tissues or organs, and where
the decomposing poison, if not hereditary, has entered the blood by way
of sexual intercourse, the ominous word "syphilis" indicates the
resulting blood disease. When the weakened tissues, which are not
sufficiently fed with the elements they need for their normal existence,
cannot resist the developing power of the phosphates prevalent in the
blood, the much dreaded malign "cancer growths" appear.

The destructions wrought by dysaemia in these various forms, cannot be
fully described in this brief abstract. They can all be reduced,
arrested and forced to give place to healthy regeneration by the
hygienic-dietetic healing system. In each case, however, the possibility
of cure will depend entirely on the degree of decomposition which has
been reached. If the trouble is from hereditary tendency it is obviously
harder to fight, and a long regenerative treatment may be anticipated.
If attacked at an early stage, complete restoration to health is
possible in a comparatively short period.

The most careful and thorough investigation by the physician must
precede any treatment. It is his task to prescribe accordingly, with the
development of the disease and its gradual disappearance.

The simultaneous direct and indirect affection of various tissues,
especially of the lymphatics, will necessitate more complicated
application of the various nutritive compositions.


THERAPY.

_Diet: I. For the Anaemic._

All that grows in the sunshine makes blood. Therefore, the food of an
anaemic person should consist mainly of articles of diet which grow
above the surface, such as green vegetables, fresh greens, fruit,
berries. Since the blood has already grown very thin, as little fluid as
possible should be taken, and for this reason the boasted milk cures are
far from advisable. If all hot reasoning is avoided and little salt and
sugar are used, no thirst will be felt. Coffee, tea, beer, wine and
other alcoholic drinks are to be avoided because they consume oxygen,
such as also do thin soups, lemonade, malt coffee, and other beverages
of slight food value.

_Breakfast_: In summer, a glass of cold milk, sweet or sour, and with
it strawberries, huckleberries, cherries, or other fruit in season; in
winter milk or cocoa, oatmeal porridge with bread (whole wheat, whole
rye), or something similar. When the bowels are sluggish, take a little
fruit on rising in the morning and at bedtime.

_Dinner_: Cereals, rice, macaroni, dumplings and eggs, with fresh
greens, spinach, fresh peas, fresh beans, cauliflower, all varieties of
cabbage, cucumbers, pumpkins and squashes. Root vegetables are not
excluded. Celery and parsnips alone interfere with the renewal of blood.
They ought not to be eaten frequently.

_Afternoon Lunch_: Fruit, milk or one cup only of weak cocoa. If the
appetite is good, omit this meal.

_Supper_: Every day, if possible, some fresh greens seasoned with lemon
juice, particularly cresses, lettuce, endive, spinach and red cabbage,
with puddings of meal or eggs. Sour milk with fruit and mild cheese, may
be taken for a change. In winter, thick soup or porridge with fruit,
preferably apples and huckleberries. Also an apple at bedtime.

Anaemic people commonly have no wish for meat. They force themselves to
eat it in the belief that only on a meat diet is it possible for them to
become strong. They would do better to follow their inclination and
refrain from it altogether. They regain health faster on a purely
vegetable diet, one special reason being that the digestion is less
burdened.

Fattening, combined with rest and rational remedies, like
Dech-Manna-Diet, are the best means of curing anaemia.

The deficient appetite must be stimulated through tastefully prepared
dishes and much variety. The patient will thus unconsciously be induced
to take more food. Delicacies and dainty dishes foster pleasure in
eating, and a little food between the principal meals will help to make
up the necessary amount. Spinach, also egg omelettes filled with
spinach, puddings, groat, oatmeal, light dishes prepared with plenty of
eggs, sugar, butter and milk, also roasted meat if desired are the best
articles of food for anaemic patients. Drinks that are recommended are:
strong malt extracts, buttermilk, sour milk, Dech-Manna chocolate, fruit
coffees, fruits, berries, honey and Dech-Manna-Diet.


_I. and II. A. For Scrofulous Patients._

Two affections, rachitis and scrofula, frequently co-exist, and the same
dietary is appropriate for both. Scrofulous patients often have a great
longing for sulphur and for irritating compounds. Frequently they
consume salt greedily, eat charcoal, onions, and other piquant
substances. This indicates their need of vegetables and fresh greens
full of nutritious salts and of pungent taste and smell because of the
amount of sulphur they contain.

Various kinds of cabbage are appropriate for the principal dinner dish,
cooked or raw in the form of a salad, with horseradish to give them
relish. For seasoning of vegetables and salads, onions and leeks may be
used unsparingly; onion soups will be found palatable and will improve
the lymph.

At supper water-cress, lettuce, radishes, and sandwiches made of chives
are preferable to sausage and rich cheese. Fresh, mild cheese makes a
good side-dish.

Meat should be eaten sparingly, because it rapidly changes into products
of decomposition in the lymph, and so the harmful rather than the useful
fluids of the body are increased.

In connection with rachitis and scrofula a ravenous appetite is often
manifested. This is a morbid symptom. It arises from exhaustion of the
stomach and intestines, for no increase of bodily weight accompanies it.
The greater part of the nourishment taken passes out of the system
without being digested. Such persons, whether adults or children, should
have their meals at regular, short intervals, for they are unable to
restrain their morbid eagerness for food. After a few days of strict
diet they lose their appetite, a condition that must be accepted until a
natural hunger takes its place and results in a normal increase in
bodily weight.

It is well known that many people suffer from hives and eczema after
having eaten certain dishes, such as crawfish, strawberries, oysters,
honey, tomatoes or cheese. For such people to refrain from partaking of
this kind of food is no protection against eczema. Only regeneration of
the blood will lead to a cure.

As a rule such patients should avoid sharp and spicy dishes; especially
desirable is a diet of fresh, good meat, not in very large quantity,
alternating with days on which no meat at all is taken. It is imperative
to avoid sharp cheese, such as Roquefort, mustard, sardelles, mixed
pickles and similar spicy dishes. Form VI is best for patients suffering
from scrofulosis.


_I. and II. B. For Tuberculosis Patients._

Patients who suffer from diseases of the lungs or other tubercular
tissues do not require food of different composition than is generally
recommended, provided their digestive organs are healthy. They must have
albumen (medium fat beef, veal lean pork, haddie, pickled herring, eggs,
brick cheese, peas) and fat in sufficient, even abundant quantity.
Warmed milk is recommended especially. Variety in food should prevail.
This will be the best means of overcoming the dangerous lack of
appetite, which must be stimulated by delicacies and cleverly prepared
dishes given between meals, sandwiches, cold fowl, jellies, piquant cold
meats. The single portions should be small but frequent. Good beer rich
in malt, sherry, malaga and other sweet wines, are all able to promote
the appetite, unless the physician orders strict abstinence from
alcohol.

In case of haemorrhage of the lungs, the physician will generally
prescribe liquid food exclusively, and his orders must be observed
strictly. In such cases it is very advisable to take gelatine, which can
be prepared in a variety of ways, or meat jellies.

Care should be taken in all forms of tubercular patients, that the
special tissue gets its special composition.


_I. and II. C. For Syphilitic Patients._

The diet for people affected with syphilis does not vary from the one
given under I and II. A. for scrofulous patients. Just as in the case of
scrofulosis, a rich diet is recommended for syphilis. (Form VI).

In former times starvation-cures were applied in case of syphilis, based
on the hypothesis that diseased humours in the body should be reduced.
In view of the noxious effect which the disease exercises on the entire
body, this method has been given up. In case of the hereditary syphilis
of infants, the best possible diet for the mother must always be
insisted upon. (Never less than Form VI and Dech-Manna Eubiogen, with
each meal). If nursing by the mother is impossible, and since a
wet-nurse cannot be subjected to the danger of contamination through the
child, easily digestible substitutes for mother's milk should be
selected; that is, not cow's milk, but other approved nutritive foods
for infants. It will be most beneficial to add Dech-Manna Eubiogen
Liquid to the child's food.


_I. and II. D. For Cancer Patients._

Cachectic patients should not, as some authorities recommended in former
times, be starved by poor diet in addition to the losses which they
already suffer when afflicted with diseases, such as cancer. Except in
case of cancer of the stomach and bowels, when I would recommend Form
III and, with gradual improvement, an increase up to Form VI, the latter
form of diet should always be prescribed in case of cancer. Special
instructions, as given under the heading, I. and II. C. For Syphilitic
Patients, should also be followed in these cases.


_Dech-Manna-Compositions_: (Only main compositions, specialities to
Doctor's order).

  I. Anaemia: Plasmogen, Eubiogen.
  I. and II. A. Scrofulosis: Plasmogen, Lymphogen, Dermogen, Eubiogen.
  I. and II. B. Tuberculosis: =Plasmogen=, =Lymphogen=, Mucogen,
    Gelatinogen, =Eubiogen=
  I. and II. C. Syphilis: =Plasmogen=, =Lymphogen=, Dermogen,
    =Eubiogen=
  I. and II. D. Cancer: =Plasmogen=, =Lymphogen=, =Eubiogen.=

_Physical_:

  I. Anaemia. Breathing Exercises.
  I. and II. A. Scrofulosis: Partial Packs, Oxygenator baths, Radium and
    Salt whole baths.
  I. and II. B. Tuberculosis: Ablutions, Breathing Exercises.
  I. and II. C. Syphilis Abdominal packs, Partial packs, Oxygenator, Radium
    and Salt half baths.
  I. and II. D. Cancer: Oxygenator, Radium and Salt whole baths.


II. DEGENERATION OF THE LYMPH TISSUE.

The lymph, the second life-giving fluid, is first drawn from the chyle,
the milky juice, into which all food is converted after it leaves the
stomach, and after having directly fed the nerves, enters the blood
through the ductus thoracicus, and accompanies it in its circulation.

According to its nature some degenerations of the lymph tissue are
coincident with degenerations of the blood, and especially the plasma,
such as Scrofulosis, Tuberculosis, Syphilis and Cancer, while other
degenerations of the lymph tissue coincide with degenerations of the
lymph-fed nerve tissue and are consequently treated under that heading.


III. DEGENERATION OF THE NERVE TISSUE.

The nerves which form the very complicated system of gelatinous cords of
various sizes which emanate from the brain and the spinal cord, send
thousands of branches throughout the entire body. They communicate the
impressions from the outside to the brain and convey its conscious or
unconscious (instinctive) mandate to the muscles of all organs.

The nerves are fed by the lymphatic system and are everywhere
accompanied by blood-vessles, and the oxygenous blood in the latter
conveys the oxygen to the nerve substance, which it consumes and thus
develops power sufficient to execute the various functions.

Naturally the supply that replaces the burned nerve substance, must be
adequate, and if for any reason whatsoever more nerve substance is
consumed than the body is able to renew by the time it is needed, the
nerve system becomes degenerated and numerous disturbances are the
consequence.

This is the great field of mental functions and disturbances, of moods
and reactions on muscular tracts which in themselves are healthy, but
are paralyzed in their work through the defective functioning of the
power-conveying nerves.

Again it is impossible here to give more than a general description,
showing on what conditions nervous diseases are based. The manifold
manifestations of this degeneration were combined into groups under the
old system in which the Greek name of a system was everything, its
practical explanation but little.

The principal ways in which these degenerations manifest themselves are
pains, mental agony and derangement, temporary cessation of functions,
cramps, involuntary movements and similar disturbances.

The names generally applied to them are neuralgia and neuritis,--causing
pains in the nerves of certain parts of the body; neurasthenia,--consisting
mainly of the complete relaxation of tension in the nervous system, causing
sadness, inability for work, etc.; asthma, cramp-like cessation of certain
functions of the small vessels of the lungs, alveoli, which impedes
respiration; epilepsy, temporary cramp in the greater part of the body,
causing loss of consciousness, involuntary movements of the limbs, etc.;
St. Vitus's dance,--a similar affection, usually in children.

While the complicated nature of nerve diseases requires very careful
treatment of great individual variety, the general rule is that the
re-enforcement of the nerves with the material of which they are built,
together with regeneration of the blood, which, when in normal condition
prevents such disturbances, will bring about a cure. Of course this is
sometimes a slow process, especially when, as in the case of epilepsy,
the nervous disease is of an hereditary character, and the resistant
power of the nerves is correspondingly weak.

In regard to one of the most disastrous diseases, caused by degeneration
of the most important nerve i.e. the Vagus, see under "Catarrh"--section
VI.


THERAPY.

_Diet_: If the entire nervous system is in a condition of pathological
irritability, as in cases of neurasthenia and hysteria, it is the object
of rational diet to keep all irritations from such a vibrating organism.

To prescribe: "No coffee, no tea, no alcohol, no strong spices and no
tobacco," will do no harm, and in most cases will prove beneficial.

Nothing is more absurd than the attempt to strengthen nervous people by
the use of alcohol. When forbidden alcohol entirely, it will very often
transpire that some symptom, like headache, neuralgia, etc., was due to
its use. Whenever the general conditions permit the continued use of
alcohol to a certain extent, it must not be left to the patient's
judgment to determine how far this may go, but definite quantities must
be prescribed in each individual case, although the patient's experience
may be of assistance in determining the quantity. (Moritz).

Good results have been obtained by limiting the meat diet of extremely
nervous patients, and prescribing for them a diet consisting principally
of milk, eggs, cereals, vegetables and fruits. In this way the
irritating effect of many of the meat extracts is avoided. At the same
time the digestive work of the stomach, reduced by the limited meat
diet, and the stimulation of stool, always promoted by a prevalence of
vegetable elements in the diet, exercises a beneficial influence on the
condition of the patient.

Disturbances of the stomach and intestines are very closely connected
with neurasthenia, loss of strength of the nerve-tissue, and hysteria,
in some cases being the cause, and in other cases, which occur more
frequently, the consequence of the same.

Excessive and, more rarely, defective secretion of hydrochloric acid by
the stomach cells, cramps, general atony or debility, of the stomach,
vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation, tympanites (excessive production of
gases), may all arise from nervous causes. In such cases the diet must
be the same as given for nervous disease.

Not only in these cases, but in most instances of nervous diseases, a
diet which does not produce irritation and excludes alcohol, will have
to be prescribed. The danger of alcohol in cases of peripheric neuritis,
epilepsy and mental diseases, is obvious.

Epileptics, like other nervous patients, should receive a diet that is
mainly, but not solely, a vegetable diet, exclusive of all highly spiced
food.

The same principles govern in case of Basedow's disease, which is a
special type of irritating disease.

Absolutely necessary foodstuffs to be recommended in this case are
clams, sole and water cress, because they contain more organic iodine
than any other known food-stuff.

As iodine is the basic mineral of the thyroid gland, and other
preparations are poisonous or dangerous, the necessity of partaking of
these dishes becomes obvious, in addition to the fact that if properly
prepared, they are delicious. This organic iodine will regulate the
secretions of the glands.

A diet void of irritation is also most important for children who suffer
from nervous conditions, such as St. Vitus's dance, involuntary
urination during sleep, etc. Alcohol and alkaline and carbonated drinks
must also be avoided in all nervous conditions that are combined with
hyperaemia of the brain, as meningitis, apoplexia, tumors of the brain,
etc., since they produce congestions.

Special dietetic directions cannot be given for all of the innumerable
varieties of the various other nervous complaints. The general principle
must always govern, that sufficient food is the natural foundation, not
only of the self-healing tendencies of the organism, but also of any
effective therapy.

In special cases where neurasthenia and hysteria or nervous dyspepsia
prevail, it will be necessary to apply a special diet to be prescribed
by the physician, who must understand the underlying cause, which is, 9
times out of ten, the degeneration of the Vagus nerve. See article on
Influenza.


DECH-MANNA-COMPOSITIONS

_(Only main compositions, specialities to Doctor's order)_

Acute form, Neuralgia, Neuritis: =Neurogen=, Plasmogen, Eubiogen.

Chronic form, Asthma, Epilepsy, St. Vitus's Dance: =Neurogen=,
Plasmogen, Lymphogen, Eubiogen.

_Physical_:

Acute form: Partial packs.

Chronic form: Partial packs, Massage



IV. DEGENERATION OF THE BONE TISSUE.

=Rickets, Osteomalacia and similar diseases.=

The condition of the skeleton,--the solid structure of the osseous
frame,--is of the greatest importance to the maintenance of health. Its
various forms of disease,--such as deficient development of bone;
osteomalacia,--softening of the bones; flat foot; caries--molecular
decay or death of the bones, especially of the teeth,--are based mostly
upon rachitis (rickets).

Rachitis should be fought at the time the child develops in the womb, by
properly feeding the mother and preparing her to give it, after birth,
healthy milk, with all the elements necessary for bone structure.

Rachitis is principally lack of lime in the food, which causes parts of
the bones to remain soft instead of becoming rigid.

It is a constitutional, often hereditary, disease caused by poor
nutrition and by influences of environment, such as marshy regions and
humid climates.

The lack of lime in the food is often obvious when children show a
tendency to eat chalk, and even to scratch walls in order to eat the
lime obtained therefrom.

More solid food, that gives work to the teeth and the digestive organs,
is certainly advisable in such cases.

The symptoms of rachitis become apparent at the pelvis and at the wide
open, soft parts of the skull, the unossified fontanelles. The cartilage
in the wrists and ankles becomes thick. Slow development of the teeth,
swollen glands in the neck, inflammations in different parts of the
body, cramps and convulsions,--among others, of the vocal cords,--are
further indications. In the progressive development of the disease, the
softened cartilage grows and protrudes everywhere, especially in the
thorax, such as "rachitis rosary." Crooked bones and hunchbacks not
infrequently develop.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: Older children should receive chopped meat, eggs, zwieback or
whole grain bread. Bouillon will stimulate their digestion. Uffelmann
recommends a mixture of one part veal bouillon and two to three parts of
milk, which children like.

It is unnecessary to give calcium directly, when a rachitic diet is
observed. Sufficient is contained in the Dech-Manna-Diet, given
principally in milk and as a rule also in the drinking water.

Quantities of amylaceous (starchy) food, candy, cakes and other sweets,
coarse vegetables and potatoes must be avoided, since with children they
are the cause of stomach trouble, resulting in decomposition and the
formation of acids in the intestines.

_Breakfast_: Milk and whole grain bread, or oatmeal porridge and
fruit.--Whole grain bread signifies any variety of bread made from flour
containing the entire contents of the grain, the gluten as well as the
bran; among these are Graham-bread, rye-bread, pilot-bread, and Rhenish
black bread.

_Mid-morning Lunch_: Raw scraped carrots; for small children and for
those having poor teeth, oat flakes.

_Dinner_: Every other day--legumes, prepared in various ways, and fruit,
vegetables or fresh greens; for example:

(a) White beans boiled to the consistency of a thick soup, with apples.

(b) Fresh pea soup containing rice, barley, sweet corn or oatmeal; a
thick pea-porridge with parsley, served with carrots, cabbage, white
turnips, red cabbage, Savoy cabbage, or various fresh greens; or simply
browned.

(c) Dried pea soup with similar contents; barley porridge, fresh greens,
baked potatoes; or browned and eaten with any vegetables.

(d) Lentils boiled in soup with the same contents as before; or as
porridge, particularly with potatoes and fresh greens.

Care must be taken never to eat leguminous products in large quantities,
because their nutritious properties are so high. Potatoes should be used
whole when added to other vegetables, and steamed not strained, because
they easily lose thereby their valuable sulphuric contents.

_Afternoon Lunch_: Fruit and whole grain bread, or a glass of milk and
bread.

_Supper_: In summer, cold or warm porridge with fruit and fresh greens,
and besides these millet, buckwheat, oats, barley and Graham-bread, as
especially efficient bone material. Sweet or sour milk proves a
relishing addition. In winter, soup made of the above grains, or of
potatoes not deprived of their mineral contents by peeling and
straining.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions_: =Osseogen=, Plasmogen, Cartillogen, Eubiogen.

_Physical_: Gymnastics, Massage.


V. DEGENERATION OF THE MUSCULAR TISSUE.

=Muscular Rheumatism, Sciatica, Infantile Paralysis, Atrophy, Amyloid
Organs.=

The muscles, about 400 pairs, which must perform all the actual work of
the body, require good nourishment through the blood, which will rapidly
replace the cells that are constantly used up.

Muscular degeneration is caused by disturbances in the quality and
circulation of the blood.

Interruption in the proper circulation of the blood, stagnation etc.,
cause _rheumatism_ with intense pains, and this can be removed only by
restoring the undisturbed circulation of the blood, carrying all
substances requisite for the proper nutrition of the muscles.

If disease of the muscular tissue combines with a diseased condition of
the accompanying nerves, we speak of _Sciatica_.

Infantile paralysis, which often appears suddenly, muscular atrophy,
which develops slowly, _progressive and chronic atrophy_ of the muscles,
are also forms of muscular disease, combined with destruction of the
accompanying nerve tissue.

A special group of muscular diseases consists of amyloid (fatty)
degeneration of vital muscle substance, as for instance of the heart,
the kidneys, the liver. These are also caused by faulty composition of
the blood, which does not feed the muscles with the substances required
and thus causes them to degenerate by developing too much fat.

The predisposition for such forms of disease is very often inherited.

Amyloid degeneration is often combined with wasting diseases, such as
atrophy, tuberculosis and dropsy.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: Sufferers from gout must always be guided by the necessity of
avoiding all food that contains large quantities of acid. In a general
way it is also necessary to live moderately in every respect and so
avoid all excesses.

There are a number of dishes that are harmful to such patients. Among
them are various meats, especially dark roast meat, also game. In
general, and especially in very severe cases, it is better to refrain
from white meat also. Spleen, liver, kidney, sweetbread, brains are
absolutely prohibited, also sausage and smoked and canned meats, oily
fish, especially eel, salmon, pike, and all smoked fish, because they
may create a large amount of uric acid.

The amount of meat eaten must not exceed 200 grams per day. The
following must also be avoided: all sharp cheeses, cabbage, sauerkraut,
and beans.

Among vegetables the following are recommended: asparagus, celery and
potatoes. The vegetables containing oxalic acid, such as spinach,
sorrel, rhubarb and cress it is best to avoid.

Butter is permitted in small quantities, also eggs.

Sweet farinose dishes are unnecessary.

Tea and coffee are allowed as beverages in very small amounts. The
principal drinks, however, should be mineral waters, such as Vichy,
Apollinaris, etc., which may be varied from time to lime.

It is strongly recommended that the patients eat much fruit. Fruit-acids
promote good circulation.

_Breakfast_: (a) In winter, tea made from the leaves of the haw,
blackberry, or strawberry, cereal coffee, weak cocoa with bread and
butter.

(b) In summer, sour milk, fruit juices, or fruit and bread; among
fruits particularly strawberries, currants, gooseberries, huckleberries,
cherries, grapes, apples.

_Mid-morning Lunch_: Radishes mashed with apples, also a raw cucumber or
tomato in the form of a salad.

_Dinner_: No meat, no soup; fresh greens, fresh vegetables with
potatoes, rice, macaroni, and a dish of corn, rice, groats, peas, beans,
tomatoes or mushrooms. In addition, light custard with fruit or
sweetmeats with fruit.

_Afternoon Lunch_: Fruit only.

_Supper_: Fresh lettuce, with macaroni, baked potatoes, pancakes,
custard; or radishes with cream and potatoes, custard, mild cheese and
leeks.

Exclusive fruit dietaries, comprising strawberries, currants, cherries
and grapes, are effective in preventing eruptions on the skin and
removing their effects.

From one to three-quarters of a pound of fruit should be eaten at a
meal, either with a little bread or with sour milk, and at dinner as a
desert.

In winter, from three to seven lemons a day serve the same purpose. The
juice is used without sugar and with as little water as possible, never
with the meal, but a little before, or in the morning on an empty
stomach. Only fresh lemons should be used for this purpose, not the
prepared lemon juice which is on the market. Tomatoes may be eaten in
the raw state, likewise.

In mild cases of gout and rheumatism some crisp lean meat and fish may
be eaten, but not every day. A diet without meat has a better curative
effect upon the disease.

Alcohol is to be shunned as totally inadmissible. The wines which
contain no alcohol must serve as substitutes.

_Special Diet: For Diseases of the Heart and Inactive Kidneys._

Patients, who are afflicted with any kind of heart or kidney disease,
must be very careful never to overload the stomach. They should eat
small meals, at frequent intervals, and avoid irritating food; the
amount of liquids and milk must be determined by the physician. A
moderate amount of salt only is allowed, and if the physician so
prescribes, a diet containing little salt, must be observed.

In case of acute inflammation of the kidneys, meat is absolutely
prohibited; the best diet is an exclusive milk-diet, consisting of at
least 1 to 1-1/2 quarts fresh milk, and in certain cases warmed milk,
taken by the spoonful; the quantity to be increased, if necessary, to 3
and 4 quarts per day. Instead of milk, buttermilk, sour milk, kefir,
koumiss or yoghurt may be taken.

Beef broths are strictly prohibited. In their place glutenous soups, of
oats, barley sago, tapioca, rice, groat, may be taken; furthermore
leguminos soups, made from the preparations of the firms Knorr, Liebig,
Maggi, and others. 1 to 2 spoonfuls of these preparations are put into a
cupful of water, some salt is added and the mixture is then boiled.

A more varied diet is allowed in lighter forms of the disease, such as
milk dishes, mashed potatoes, preserved apples or pears, rolls and
butter, bread, cream, cream cheese, farinaceous dishes, eggs and green
vegetables, meat according to the orders of the physician. Spices and
alcohol must be strictly avoided.

In cases of chronic kidney diseases, greater variety should be observed
in the diet. In any event, however, a certain quantity of milk should be
taken, not less than 1 quart per day.

The following food is to be limited: All game, including birds, sausages
and smoked meat, sweetbread, brains, liver, spleen, crawfish, lobster,
rich cheese especially Roquefort, Parmesan, Camembert, all sharp spices,
such as pepper, paprika, mustard, cinnamon, garlic, onions; among
vegetables such as radishes, horseradish, celery asparagus, mushrooms,
tomatoes, sorrel; furthermore, all meat extracts, piquant sauces and
soup spices.

No alcohol should be served on the table of a patient with kidney
disease. The exceptions must be prescribed by the physician. The same
applies to all new wines and beef soups.

The following dishes are permitted: Among meats, white meat (about 200
grams per day, preferably at noon). This comprises domestic fowl, fresh
pork, lamb and veal, also beef, especially boiled beef. As a variety
from time to time, mutton and fresh fish.

The preferable way to prepare dishes for patients suffering from kidney
diseases, is to boil them; the next best way is to steam them, and the
third and least desirable way is frying.

Strongly recommended: calf's feet and pig's feet, calf's head,
especially in the form of jellies and pickled, if so ordered by the
physician. Occasionally raw beef may be given, but without sharp spices.

Fish: Trout, pike, carp; Saltwater fish: haddock and cod-fish, boiled
blue; also frogs' legs. Eggs are permitted, soft boiled, 2 to 3 per day.

Vegetables: With the exception of those mentioned, vegetables are very
commendable, especially potatoes, green peas, white and yellow turnips,
red beets, cauliflower, lentils, beans, the last particularly, mashed;
also salad with cream and a little mild vinegar or lemon juice.
Fruit-acids must not be classified with vegetable or meat-acids, as
several, so-called "Food-Specialists" try to impress on patients, for
they do not know, what they talk about.

Fats, such as cream, butter, rich cheese, olive oil, may be given if
they agree with the patient; bacon is not so good.

Bread, white as well as brown, and especially Graham bread, may be eaten
without restrictions.

As drinks: mineral water with lemon or orange juice added. Raspberry
juice is permitted, but currant and gooseberry juice must be avoided on
account of the substances contained in them irritating to the kidneys.
Fruit juices free from alcohol (apple cider) may be given.

Every _morning_ on rising, a glass of fruit juice or some fruit. These
fruit-acids promote peristaltics of the bowels, and free circulation of
the blood.

At _supper_: Salad of cresses or celery, or a mixed salad, radishes,
asparagus, squash and cucumbers.

When the urinary flows is very scanty, supper may consist of a cup of
celery soup, or asparagus broth; in winter, haw tea.

A few suggestions for _dinner_, omitting meat entirely:

Dumplings with cabbage salad, red cabbage or Bavarian cabbage; sliced
oatmeal cake with fruit.--Cucumbers with eggs and potato bread, rolled
griddle cakes and fruit.--Cabbage with rice and butter, griddle cakes
with fresh greens.

Squash with lemon, potatoes, baked beans, fruit.--Red cabbage with
macaroni, potato fritters, with fruit.--Dumplings and pears,
lettuce.--White turnips with cream and potatoes, buckwheat groats,
fruit.--Pea soup with sweet corn, squash and rice with fruit.--Lentils
and potatoes, salad of celery or beets, fruit.--Asparagus with drawn
butter and parsley sauce and bread dumplings, oat groats with
fruit.--Cauliflower with macaroni, buckwheat groats and milk.--Cabbage
with browned potatoes, oatmeal cake with fruit.

_For Irritable Kidneys (Inflammation, Supperation, Contraction, etc.),
and Diseases of the Bladder._

For patients suffering from these diseases all spiced and sharp dishes
are prohibited, especially dishes with much pepper and mustard, also
mixed pickles, preserves containing vinegar, salads unless seasoned with
lemon juice instead of vinegar; furthermore, dishes which produce gas,
such as dishes made from yeast. Fruits are permitted only in small
quantities, avoiding absolutely gooseberries and preserves made from the
same. Preserves from other fruits, such as apples and cherries, are
permitted in smaller quantities.

As drinks, the mineral waters which are recommended for people suffering
from gout, are advisable here also.

Kidney stones require a mixed diet, preferably vegetable; fat and
carbohydrates--very little meat--no sweetbread, kidneys, brains, liver
or spleen; meat, if taken at all, must be boiled.

Not permitted: game, pickled fish, piquant sauces, beef broth.

Dispense with meat, raw celery, radishes, pears, cucumbers, even
asparagus in large amounts, at least during the state of inflammation.
Eat eggs only in a raw or very soft boiled state. In place of these
foods make up a diet of milk preparations, rice, groats, oats, millet,
buckwheat. Currant juice and wild cherries, apple sauce, diluted lemon
juice, are all of great benefit. Soups made from squash, cucumbers or
celery, haw tea, buttermilk and sour milk, mild cheese, or porridge and
fruit are excellent supper dishes.


_For Liver Disease._

In general, fatty substances should be eliminated as much as possible
from the nourishment in the case of liver disease, jaundice and gall
stones.

To be recommended are light farinaceous dishes with milk, vegetables,
fruit and all easily digestible foods.

Meat must be taken only in very small quantities, according to the
advice of the physician, and with very little fat. Spices and alcohol
are prohibited. Pastry and rich foods must be avoided.

In case of jaundice the patient should receive liquid food only during
the first few days, consisting of soups, light tea, carbonated waters;
later, milk, the yolks of eggs, zwieback and light milk dishes.

Patients suffering from gall stones may receive the same diet as
prescribed for those suffering from liver disease, generally speaking.

In case of liver disease it is necessary to adhere very strictly to the
prescriptions of the physician, since they are due to various reasons,
and only the physician can give the proper individual directions, after
having determined the cause.

Every morning on rising, a glass of unsweetened lemonade, or a
wineglass of currant wine or grape juice, or some acid fruit.--The same
on retiring at night.

For a second breakfast, four or six radishes, or a tablespoonful of
grated radish, or a teaspoonful of horseradish mixed with broth and
white bread, eaten with a little toast and butter.--The same for supper.

The following are a few suggestions for dinner without meat:

Cabbage, potato porridge, gooseberries with egg and milk sauce.--Lentils
with potatoes and fresh greens, cresses or lettuce, fruit.--Savoy
cabbage with rice and tomato sauce, fruit with millet cakes.--Leeks with
potatoes, macaroni and plums.--Young green beans with dried white beans
and apples or other fruit, beets with cream, rolled dumplings,
fruits.--White cabbage with macaroni, chopped apples or curdled milk.

_Dech-Manna Compositions_: (Only main compositions, specialities to the
Doctor's order.)

_Rheumatism_: =Muscogen=, =Plasmogen=, Eubiogen.

_Sciatica_: =Muscogen=, =Plasmogen=, Neurogen, Eubiogen.

_Amyloid heart_: =Muscogen=, =Plasmogen=, Eubiogen.

_Amyloid kidney or liver_: =Muscogen=, =Plasmogen=, Mucogen, Eubiogen.

_Physical: Rheumatism_: Partial packs, either vinegar and water or
radium and salts. Massage, if necessary, and special oxygenator baths,
and radium and salt baths.

_Sciatica_: Leg packs, oxygenator baths, half radium and salt baths,
followed by massage.

_Amyloid heart, kidney or liver_: Abdominal packs, gymnastics,
oxygenator baths, whole radium and salt baths.


VI. DEGENERATION OF THE MUCOUS MEMBRANE TISSUE.

=Catarrh in acute and chronic forms, bronchitis, pleurisy, pneumonia,
inflammation of nose, throat, bowels, stomach, bladder.=

=Decomposition of mucous membrane, hemorrhoids, polyps, benign tumors,
also Bright's disease in initial stages.=

Catarrhal disease is amongst the most common, in varied form and degree,
owing to the very tender nature of the mucous membrane.

These ailments are characterized as destructions of the protective
membranes which cover the serous layer of the organs, in which layer the
lymph circulates.

The numerous ends of blood-vessels and nerves which are thus exposed to
attack, and the spreading of the disease to healthy tissues which thus
become affected in the same way, make the various catarrhal troubles
with their accompanying excretions particularly unpleasant.

All degenerations of the mucous membrane are based on deficiencies in
blood circulation and composition.

A cure is effected through the restoration of the serous layer to normal
conditions and the regeneration of the blood and its circulation.

These various forms of catarrh affect all parts that are covered with
mucous membranes, among them the female sexual organs, hence leukorrhoea
or fluor albus, which, if not properly treated, constitutes the basis
for all sorts of polyps, tumors, etc., and in many cases of continued
attack forms the predisposition to cancer.

The lymphatic system is the carrier of all germs to the various mucous
membranes, and promotes the spreading of catarrh to all parts of the
body.

Among the more serious and dangerous forms of acute disease of this
class which, lacking proper treatment, develop into chronic forms, are
the catarrhal affections of the lungs and bronchia, =grippe=,
=influenza=,[B] catarrh of the intestines, the bladder, the hemorrhoids
and Bright's (kidney) disease. The latter especially is among the most
dangerous diseases, and is considered incurable by the adherents of the
old medical school. The discovery that it is essentially the same as
other catarrhal diseases has, however, established the possibility of
complete cure, which has been effected in many, even neglected, cases of
long standing, under my present system.

The many varieties of symptoms, all of which are finally reduced by
proper treatment of the mucous membranes, it is impossible to cite, in
this brief synopsis.

More details concerning this important group will be found, together
with the modern explanation of the development of serious disease from
apparently unimportant catarrhal affections, in the very complete and
extensive descriptions given in Chapter X, Section 6, of my greater
work.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: (a) Catarrh in all its acute forms.

In these cases the diet is almost identical with the fever diet, as
given in Forms II, III, and IV.

(b) Catarrh in all its chronic forms.

Diet as above, but apply Forms IV, V, VI.

(c) Haemorrhoids, Polyps, Adenoids, Benign Tumors or Fungus Growths.

There are no special prescriptions for these, regarding diet, except
that easily digestible food must be eaten. Mashed vegetables and fruit
should prevail. The indigestible tissues, such as skin, sinews and
gristle, should be removed from the meat. No gas-producing dishes, such
as sauerkraut, cabbage, turnips or beans, ought to be taken.


_Throat and Larynx Disease._

To avoid irritation of the mucous membranes of the mouth and larynx, all
sharp and spicy dishes and drinks are prohibited.

In case of fever, particularly recommended are warm glutenous soups,
creams, milk, steamed fruit, fruit soups and sauces, minced white meat,
baked or steamed fish, no sharp spices.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions_: (Only main compositions, specialities to the
Doctor's order). In general: =Muscogen=.

_Bronchitis, Pleurisy, Pneumonia, Inflammation of nose, throat, bowels,
stomach, bladder, also benign growths in all chronic forms._ =Muscogen,
Plasmogen=, Gelatinogen, Eubiogen.

_Bright's disease_: (See special section XII chapt. X, "Dare to be
healthy.")

=Physical Treatment.=

_Bronchitis, pleurisy_: Ablutions with vinegar and water; partial packs
or ablutions with vinegar and water; shoulder packs.

_Pneumonia_: Shoulder packs.

_Inflammation of nose, throat etc._: Partial packs or radium and salt
three-quarter packs.

_Inflammation, of bowels, stomach and bladder_: Warm abdominal packs in
addition to the above.

_Catarrh in chronic forms_: Cold abdominal packs, massage.

_Decomposition of mucous membrane_: Abdominal packs, partial packs, with
vinegar and water, or salt and radium emanation, oxygenator and other
baths, in case especially prescribed.


VII. DEGENERATION OF TOOTH AND EYE TISSUES.

It has been explained that this unusual method of classifying the eyes
and the teeth together in one group, is based upon the biological,
chemical discovery that the lens of the eye, like the enamel of the
teeth, contain fluoric acid, otherwise contained also in very small
quantities in the enamel of the finger-and toe-nails.

Disease of the eyes and of the teeth would require lengthy description,
for which space is lacking; suffice it to mention that the best way of
preserving the health of the teeth and of the eyes is to keep them
scrupulously clean. This simple hygienic method, regarding the teeth,
will prevent decay.

In all cases where eye trouble concerns the lens, as well as when there
is a general disposition to caries in the teeth, the following treatment
will produce a curative and preventive effect.

_Therapy_

_Diet_: Since most of the disease of the teeth and eyes is merely the
consequence of other disease, such as Bright's disease, diabetes, etc.,
the diet will be in accordance with the main disease, as described. In
the treatment of both, rye bread, which contains large quantities of
fluoric acid, is highly recommended.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions: Teeth_: =Dento-Ophthogen=, =Plasmogen=,
Osseogen, Eubiogen. _Eyes_: =Dento-Ophthogen=, =Plasmogen=, Gelatinogen,
Eubiogen.

_Physical_: All physical directions according to the main disease of
which the tooth and eye disease, is but an accompanying symptom.


VIII. DEGENERATION OF THE HAIR TISSUE.

The hair, though a tissue by itself, is connected with the rest of the
body and nourished by the blood, as are all the other tissues, in
organic unity.

In the long course of years that mark the progress of the race, it has
lost much of its original significance as a body covering against the
elements, but even in its present reduced capacity, it is a good and
true indicator of certain deficiencies in the blood and in the functions
of the body.

Its principal disease manifests itself in loss, through the shrinkage of
the little globular terminal, by means of which it is rooted in the
skin.

The hair has become an accepted criterion of youth and beauty, and its
change in color or its loss are consequently regarded as the unfailing
heralds of approaching age. The vast majority of people accept this
fact with reluctance, and thus the hair, more than any other feature has
become a centre of the nefarious activities of impostors.

Its loss can be prevented to a great extent, and its quality kept in
healthy condition, if it is treated in the proper hygienic-dietetic
manner.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: Diet in case of hair disease calls for a combination of food
containing lime, silica and gelatine. It must be selected from a list of
foods that possess these special nourishing qualities.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions_ =Capillogen=, =Plasmogen=, Gelatinogen,
Eubiogen.

_Physical_: No special directions required.


IX. DEGENERATION OF THE SKIN TISSUE.

According to the conception of the human body as a unit, it is not
difficult to understand that the skin, while not a separate organ, forms
the outermost layer of the body-tissues and is nourished _from within_.

By means of more than 2,500,000 small openings in the skin, called the
pores, communication is established between the external and the
internal parts of the body. This produces a permanent exchange of
matter, and thus the skin is, in fact, a second system of respiration of
the greatest importance to the health of the entire body.

Naturally it is subject to traumatic accidents through its exposed
position. Traumatic affections cannot now be discussed; except to give a
brief idea of the constitutional diseases of the skin which, like all
others, originate in deficient blood. Often they are only secondary, and
indications of various, more complicated, diseases. In a few cases they
affect the skin alone, but are nevertheless constitutional, especially
in such cases as could not exist at all, were the disposition not
established constitutionally.

There is hardly another department of medicine where the "quack" reaps
so great a harvest as in the treatment of skin diseases. Thus the
suppression of symptoms becomes the rule; the removal of causes is
invariably neglected. Many forms of skin disease, being the result of
sexual infections, are allowed to develop because prudery and other
motives prevent the early investigation of the cause, and hence delay
its prompt treatment and healing.

It is easy and natural for every one to notice the skin and see when
there is anything amiss.

Upon discovery immediately consult an hygienic-dietetic physician, and
follow his advice closely, since skin diseases are among the most
obstinate to overcome. The physician will be able to determine whether
there is real constitutional trouble or merely a superficial skin
disease. Thus the underlying evil, if any, can be correctly treated, in
combination with such specialities as the skin tissue requires.

_Every skin disease must be treated from the inside_, so as to destroy
the disposition and even the chance for development. In view of the
large field and the great importance of this group, it will be advisable
for every one to read the many pages that have been devoted to this
special subject in my work, on "Regeneration" or "Dare To Be Healthy,"
Chapter X, Section 9.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: The general rule of abstaining from highly seasoned food should
govern all patients suffering from skin diseases. Special attention
should be given to a diet consisting of good, fresh meat, not too rich;
it should be alternated with days on which no meat is eaten. Strong
cheese (Roquefort), mustard, sardelles, mixed pickles must be avoided.
See also remarks on Scrofulosis under I. A.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions_: =Dermogen=, =Plasmogen=, Gelatinogen,
Eubiogen.

_Physical_: Partial packs, either vinegar and water, or salt and radium.
Special packs by order of the Doctor.


X. DEGENERATION OF THE GELATIGENOUS TISSUE.

Another group of organ's of vast importance is the one which consists of
gelatigenous tissue. In fact all blood and lymphatic vessels, air
alveoli of the lungs, tendons and cords of the whole system, the
digestive tract from the mouth to the anus, the stomach, the bladder,
and indeed every organ or tissue which has the function of expansion and
contraction, must be made of gelatigenous (rubber-like) tissue.
Otherwise it cannot perform its duties in the organism and must needs
become degenerate.

While there are not many special forms of disease of the gelatigenous
tissue itself, many diseased conditions occur in connection with its
degeneration. This in turn is caused by the lack of gelatigenous food,
which the blood must convey to this tissue wherever it exists in the
body.

It is obvious that any degeneration which may affect the intestinal
duct, the bladder or other organs which contain gelatine in their
composition will require gelatigenous regeneration.

The principal forms of disease which may affect the organs in question
are those which have been discussed under catarrhal diseases (Section
VI). The acute and chronic forms of stomach and intestinal disease,
especially, belong to this group, and have consequently received special
attention. The treatment of this question in my work, "Regeneration" or
"Dare To Be Healthy," Chapter X, A and B, will answer, in detail the
questions of those who desire more enlightenment on this most vital and
intricate subject.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: These forms include all catarrhal disease mentioned under VI. A,
also all inflammatory conditions of the stomach and intestines, in their
acute form. As far as the latter are concerned, the suitable lists of
diet will be found under Forms II, III, IV, V and VI. Regarding the same
diseases in the chronic form, the special diet lists are given under
Forms IV, V and VI. In addition the following suggestions will be
helpful:

_Diseases of the Stomach and Intestines._

These prescriptions of diet serve especially for the diseases of the
stomach and intestines. In most cases a prescription for the rational
preparation of food is such as only the hygienic physician is able to
give. Food for persons suffering from diseases of the stomach, must be
selected individually according to their idiosyncrasies. In one case the
stomach must be prevented from doing too much; in another case it must
be stimulated. In one case the object is to fatten; in another, to
remove fat. In some cases the physician prescribes food which will
retard the movement of the bowels, in other instances, the patient
requires food that will promote such movement. The diet for patients
with fever must be different from the diet for convalescing patients.
People suffering from diabetes require a peculiar preparation of their
food. Not everything that is good for an adult will be beneficial to a
child. The digestibility of many foods depends upon their preparation.
The value of food for patients can be judged rightly from but one
standpoint, that of digestibility.

The fundamental principles governing the nourishment for patients are
digestibility, great variety, abolition of all strong spices, nutritive
and well selected material.

The temperature of drinks must be in strict accordance with the
prescription of the physician. The patient must be urged to thoroughly
masticate the food, so that it will be properly salivated and thus
facilitate digestion. Patients seriously ill, should receive their food
mashed or minced, so that they can partake of it more easily. All waste
parts, such as skin, fat, sinews, bones, must be removed from the food,
even for convalescents. Warmed up food and fibrous vegetables must be
banished from the patient's diet. It must not be a question as to what
the patient wants; the prescription of the physician only must govern.
The patient's food must be prepared carefully, absolutely correctly and
in a cleanly manner. In case of strong thirst, great care must be
exercised in regard to drinks, depending on the physician's directions.
The thirsty feeling of the patient may be alleviated by putting
glyzerine on his lips and small pieces of ice on his tongue, without,
however, permitting him to swallow the water as the ice melts.

_Normal Diet for Stomach Diseases._

Milk, sweet and sour, buttermilk, yoghurt, kefir, albumen cacao, cereals
in the form of mush, strained legumes, cooked in soup or milk, all sorts
of glutinous soups, farinose dishes prepared from stale rolls, biscuits,
zwieback, tender and easily, digestible meats, mashed game meat,
chicken, raw beef, ham, meat jelly, young vegetables, preserved fruit.

Avoid the following: all indigestible fats, meat which requires more
than 4 to 5 hours for its digestion, hot salads, gas-producing
vegetables, gravy, fruits which abound in cellulose, such as apricots
and peaches, hard stems, xylocarp ribs of leaves, the strong smelling
and sharp tasting parts of some kinds of vegetables, as for instance,
new potatoes, cabbage (in the cooking of which the first water must be
poured off), hot soups and spicy herbs, spices of all kinds, high game,
sausages, bacon, yeast pastry, drinks too hot or too cold, strong coffee
(in the place of which fruit coffee is recommended), stale raisins and
almonds, nuts, too much candy, much liquid with meats, and excitement of
all kinds while eating.

_General Hints for a nourishing treatment._

The patient who is to gain in flesh must adhere strictly to the
prescribed diet as well as to the prescribed rest, if the treatment is
to take effect.

The following articles are very nourishing: yolks of eggs prepared in
any style, milk, cream, kefir, rich cheese, beef marrow on toast (cooked
in soup), all kinds of noodles and dumplings, puddings, cocoa and
chocolate, white bread, rich thick soups, gravy, potatoes and oats
prepared in various ways, sweet beer, malt beer, sweet wines and
puddings with preserved fruits, fruit juices, meat from well-fed animals
only. All meals must be served in small portions, so as not to create
distaste for food.

7 _A.M._--250 grams of fresh, boiled, unskimmed milk, or 1/4 quart cocoa
prepared with milk or Knorr's oat-cocoa, or 1/8 quart cream with tea
added, one roll, butter and honey.

9 _A.M._--1 cup bouillon, 20 grams hot or cold roast meat, 30 grams
Graham or gluten bread, 10 grams butter. Then 1/4 quart milk, butter and
Graham bread.

11 _A.M._--1/4 quart milk with the yolk of one egg.

1 _P.M._--100 grams soup (oat, barley, vegetable soup), green corn, sago
soup, 100 grams potatoes, 100 grams tender vegetables, such as spinach,
mashed peas, mashed carrots, mashed artichokes, asparagus tips strained,
20 grams easily digestable rice, 50 grams preserved fruit; or, no soup,
but, instead meat, vegetables, apple sauce, dishes made from milk or
flour, such as noodles, fruit, 1/8 quart cream.

4 _P.M._--Light tea or milk, with malt or cocoa added, two crackers, 1/2
quart milk.

6 _P.M._--20 grams meat (hot or cold roast meat), raw meat or 10 grams
Graham bread, 10 grams butter, milk chocolate, Graham bread, butter,
honey.

8 _P.M._--1 cup soup with 10 grams butter and one yolk, barley, oats,
etc., eggs or meat, vegetables, preserved fruits, Graham bread, butter,
mild cream cheese.

9.30 _P.M._--1/4 quart milk, with a spoonful of malt extract, 1/8 quart
cream.

As a special breakfast, for a thin patient, the following drink is
recommended: To a cup of unskimmed hot milk add one yolk and one
spoonful of pure bee-honey. This must be taken in the morning on an
empty stomach for several weeks.

_In case of Constipation._

If constipation is due to nervousness or sluggishness of the bowels, the
best means to overcome the trouble is mixed coarse food, using various
mineral waters, and little meat, but plenty of vegetables, especially
sauerkraut, cabbage, comfrey, cauliflower, pumpkin, tomatoes, cucumbers,
various salads and fruits, jellies. Among beverages sour milk,
buttermilk, kefir No. I and II, yoghurt, various new wines, fruit
juices, different mineral waters, such as Apollinaris, Karlsbad waters,
Hunyady; coarse bread, such as Graham, avoiding fine white bread. In
extremely chronic cases use my Laxagen Tea in case of emergency.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions_: =Gelatinogen=, =Plasmogen=, Mucogen,
Eubiogen.

_Physical_: Abdominal packs, with vinegar and water.

Acute--warm.

Chronic--cold.


XI. DEGENERATION OF THE CARTILAGINOUS TISSUE.

Cartilage in the human body is the material which must cover the end of
each bone so as to prevent its destruction by friction. It is the
important part in all joints. It is obvious that any degeneration of
this particular tissue will cause friction, which is combined with
severe pains, called Ankylosis, Gout.

The degeneration is usually a consequence of improper proportion of the
various food ingredients consumed, omitting the material necessary for
the construction of the cartilage, which, being in use, is constantly
used up rapidly. Regeneration of the blood, by assisting it in its
important task of feeding the cartilaginous tissues, and regulation of
the diet are the only two possible remedies for this form of disease, of
such frequent occurrence, the alleged cure for which attracts thousands
to bathing resorts, where they derive not the slightest real benefit.

The variety of gout called arthritis (deforming gout), is the most
pronounced and dangerous phase of this form of disease.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: The diet is exactly the same as prescribed for rheumatism and
gout under V, Degeneration of the Muscular Tissue.

_Dech-Manna-Compositions_: =Cartilogen=, =Plasmogen=, Gelatinogen,
Eubiogen.

_Physical_: Partial packs, salt and radium, massage, oxygenator bath,
half bath radium and salt.

In case of arthritis, also special packs according to the directions of
the Doctor. It is impossible to give a diet for arthritic patients,
peculiarities of this disease being largely individual.


XII. DEGENERATION OF THE BODY TISSUE IN GENERAL.

By "body tissue in general" is understood the body with the total sum of
its cells--especially the red blood corpuscles--and their various
aggregations. Consequently a special composition of nutritive salts,
under the name of Eubiogen, has been composed, which is the most perfect
duplication of all the chemical elements of the entire body in the
correct proportion. Eubiogen, therefore, is prescribed as a secondary
Dech-Manna-Composition, to be taken with all other compositions. But it
also acts independently as the best means of preventing degeneration,
and in this capacity should not be missing in the diet of adults as well
as of children. The cost thus incurred would be recouped many times over
through its prevention of disease.

Eubiogen takes a leading position in reference to the following
complicated forms of disease, in the treatment of which it becomes the
most important factor among the nutritive compositions: Ataxia,
Basedow's Disease, Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Bright's Disease,
Arterio-Sclerosis. I am prepared to explain to patients, this curative
method and the reasons for its application; but these complicated
diseases, while based on the same degenerations of blood, and
consequently of the tissue and organs, as all others, offer impressions
which, from the point of view of the conscientious physician, cannot be
presented with but a few bare words of explanation. Nor does the space
at my disposal permit me to go into the matter with due thoroughness.

All of these ailments have been described in my work: "Regeneration or
Dare To Be Healthy."

The intelligent reader will readily conceive that he who has found the
secret of the degenerations constituting the various forms of disease,
will not hesitate before their complications. _Ataxia, Basedow's
Disease, Diabetes Mellitus, Obesity, Bright's Disease and
Arterio-Sclerosis, can be cured. They can be cured by the same methods
of which simpler examples have been already given.

No one, who in the struggle for health has surrendered to the attack of
constitutional disease, the germ of which may have been implanted in him
by his forefathers, needs despair. Let him seek advice before too late,
and the strong probability is that in due time he will have regained his
health, and will be enabled to fulfil his duties to himself and to
posterity._

_NOTE._--In reference to the foregoing tables of dietary "Regimen" the
reader must clearly understand that the prescriptions are merely
indications of diet appropriate to various phases of the complaints to
the treatment of which they are attached; but the decision as to how and
when these phases occur in individual cases should be left entirely to
the discretion of the physician in charge of the case who will, of
course, also pronounce upon the diet. Should there be no such authority
present, the greatest care and common sense must be devoted to the
selection from the said tables of a system of diet suitable to the
various stages of disease. Any recommendations therein contained which
may appear to be contradictory or conflicting must be ascribed to their
complication on a progressive dietary system consistent with the
prospective advancement of the case towards recovery.


INFANTILE PARALYSIS.

Amongst the forms of Degeneration of the Muscular Tissue the reader will
have noticed that of Infantile Paralysis or Poliomyelitis.

The startling prominence that this complaint quite recently acquired was
due to its world-wide ravages in epidemic form and the absolute and
confessed inability of the combined sagacity of the whole faculty of the
orthodox medical profession to cope with it or to cure it--to fathom its
cause and origin or to curtail its increasing rate of mortality. I am
therefore constrained, so far as space permits, to give the matter
special and particular consideration.

The scientific name, "Poliomyelitis," is derived from the Greek words:
polios, grey and myleos, marrow; for its chief feature is a softening of
the grey spinal marrow.

First noticed by the medical world no later than the year 1840,
statistics show that in the last decade it has appeared in various parts
of the world in epidemic form, notably in Sweden and Norway. In America,
epidemics occurred in 1907 and 1908 and again in 1916. It was promptly
and energetically dealt with by the Rockefeller Institute of New York
where the proof was established of the possibility of transmission by a
living virus taken from the spinal marrow of a victim; but whether this
disseminator may be correctly termed a bacillus, or fungus or a germ,
medical-science has been unable lo determine; neither has it succeeded
with the most powerful microscope in discovering the individuality of
this "carrier," whilst all experiments with re-agents have been bare of
results. Thus the researches of science have merely brought us back to
the starting point; namely, that there is a "something" which exerts a
degenerating influence upon the cellular tissue of the spinal marrow and
causes the morbid enlargement of its cells.

The New York Board of Health, cites eight different forms in which the
disease may appear and acknowledges a startling failure to determine
either any uniform period of incubation (i.e. the time between contagion
and the appearance of the symptoms,) or the period of infection (i.e.
how long a sick person may be a danger to others).

The New York press accepts the situation philosophically; as follows:

    "Infantile Paralysis cannot be cured by means of medicines. The
    physician must of necessity limit his ministrations to easing the
    pain, providing for easy movement of the bowels and so forth, but
    otherwise _he must let nature take its course_."

Medical reference books vaguely define the disease with diverse and
indefinite theories, showing that science on the subject is practically
mute.

But the medically "unprofessional," random remark of the New York
press-man has exactly hit the mark: "Let nature take its course."

The fact is that nothing very clear or absolute can be said about
Infantile Paralysis; for observation shows that it is apparently a
matter of racial conditions and environment and that only from the
general application of the Laws of Nature, as taught by biology can we
reasonably hope to solve the problem or cure the disease.

As the result of careful study of many cases I simply confirmed the fact
that Infantile Paralysis belongs strictly to the class in which in the
foregoing chapter I have placed it, and is subject to the same rules,
influences and treatment. In most of the cases treated I have not failed
to discover the existence of spinal trouble in one or other of the
parents. This, engendering _predisposition_ to similar complaints _in
the children of the opposite sex_, which, acted upon by the irritants
bred of poor or irrational nutriment and unhygienic environment in
greater or lesser degree, results in attacks of this disease, in plain
or epidemic form as the case may be, to which all children so
predisposed are liable. Thus, incidentally, is my recently discovered
"Law of the Cross-Transmission of Characteristics" amply verified.

As to the cause which leads to the development of this predisposition in
the children, the answer, of course, is improper nourishment; and
amongst the contributory causes I would specially indicate,
"Pasteurized" and "sterilized" milk which has been absolutely banned by
science on the basis of Physical Chemistry, according to which it was
definitely proved in a report laid before the Paris Academy of Sciences,
that valuable bone-forming ingredients in the milk, (a combination of
carbonic and phosphoric lime,) are lost in course of Pasteurization,
since at the temperature necessary for the process they are _transmuted
by heat into insoluble elements_, (phosphate and carbonate of lime)
which, precipitated by chemical action, either drop to the bottom in
sediment or cling to the surface coating and, in either case, are
eliminated and lost to the child to an extent which constitutes a
serious deterioration in its food and one likely in any case to promote
rickets. Milk also contains important constituents which change into
necessary food elements in the course of natural fermentation--gelatine
for instance--which being, as has been shown, so vital a factor in the
building up of tissue, it needs no argument to prove the disastrous
consequences its depletion must engender in the child and it may be
likewise safely left to the intelligence of the reader to grasp the
obvious fact that for the prevention or healing of Infantile Paralysis
the one and only safeguard is Regeneration through the course already
indicated of Hygienic-Dietetic treatment which will, if applied
beforehand, eliminate the tendency to disease or, in the event of its
occurrence, will conduct it along safe and natural lines to a quick
recovery.

This brief sketch of the subject must suffice for the present purpose
but a special article[C] with full and interesting details has been
devoted to the subject, which will appear in my greater work,
"Regeneration or Dare to be Healthy."


"FACIAL DIAGNOSIS" AND "THE CLINICAL EYE."

It is an incident common to the experience of all Natural Hygienic
Physicians for the patient to exclaim in quasi protest: "But Doctor! How
can you tell?"

Accustomed to the pompous pantomime of the orthodox physician--the gold
watch and chain trick, while pulse and tongue reveal their hidden
records--and then the well known questions which call forth the
personal predilection in the fashion of disease and diet, (prescriptions
which are often not untinged by the physician's own proclivities), at
first the patient misses the old familiar presence. If ill he _must_ be,
he expects that the process should proceed from the outset on the old
accustomed, "strictly respectable" lines, and something like resentment
stirs him when, in place of questioning, a physician presumes to _tell
him_ at a glance the substance of his malady _unasked_.

But such is the method of real efficiency and such the qualification of
the men who practice the new philosophy which shall save the world from
shams.

_Facial diagnosis_ is the determining factor of the logical and never
failing science of natural therapy which is coming to the rescue of
mankind, in spite of legal and commercial obstruction.

_The "Clinical Eye"_ is, emphatically, _not_ the sad old "Eye of Faith"
which has sent its millions to their doom, but the _sober, steady,
practiced introspective hopeful eye of knowledge and experience_.

The external symptoms visible to the clinical eye of a physician worthy
of the name, vastly outweigh in important significance, all the
objectionable detailed examination of parts and organs which from long
use has become the habit of the old-school practitioner. Moreover the
swift impressions gathered under the clinical eye are spontaneous and
reliable whereas, as the result of questioning or the description of the
patient, they possibly are not, but rather represent too often some
preconceived notion of alleged heredity or devotional pessimism,
sometimes original but more probably the suggestion of relatives and
friends.

The subject is a vitally important one and, with a view to clearing away
the obstruction of old superstitions from the mind of the reader, I
shall trespass upon my allotted space in order to give a brief extract
of my remarks thereon as expressed in my greater work: "Regeneration or
Dare to be Healthy."


DIAGNOSIS, PHYSIOGNOMY AND PSYCHOLOGY.

The biological healing system, based on the laws of nature and the
acknowledgment of the fact that no two cases of disease are exactly
alike, requires much broader knowledge and much deeper insight on the
part of the physician than did the old-school of medicine with its
search for symptoms of special diseases and its occult prescriptions.

Since the object is to get at the root of the evil in order to
regenerate the patient thoroughly, it becomes imperative to obtain, what
is hardest to elicit from him perhaps, the accurate truth about himself
and his ailment.

And though expert in recognizing external symptoms, it is unwise to rely
entirely thereon and research must continue into realms where the
patient himself only can lead us and where, willing or otherwise, he is
apt to mislead.

Psychology teaches how to find the way into the darkness of a patient's
soul. Physiognomy teaches, not only to read in the face and external
appearance, the story of a life which is written there in characters
which only experience may decipher, but also to realize when the patient
employs physiognomical expressions to hide what we persistently seek;
namely, the truth.

And again, in regard to healing, psychology teaches how to influence the
patient so that he may discontinue to be his own worst enemy; that he
may recognize his mistakes as such and discard them, although possibly
he may have grown so addicted to his tastes as to prefer to continue
therein in place of daring to be healthy.

In the plan of production of a regenerated and healthy humanity, every
individual of this kind must be regarded as a foe who interferes with
the prevention of disease both now and in futurity. To win such an one
over, to make him an enthusiastic believer in the theory that health is
a necessity, and, a task less easy, to prevent his relapse into his
previous degenerate manner of life and health,--this is another branch
of science for which psychology and physiognomy are more needful than
anything else.

Here again it is the true physician's principle to enlighten the layman,
and not to surround his methods with a mysterious, but imposing wall of
secrecy.

We do not hesitate to reveal the main points of our system of diagnosis,
which is much broader than the old system of scholastic medicine,--the
performance with auscultation, percussion, X rays and the rest. Certain
knowledge of these things will lead every one, ere long, to submit all
disturbances of health to the hygienic physician while prevention is
still probable and possible, instead of waiting until disease has taken
firm hold. It will also enable men to realize that the old-school
practitioner who pronounces them sound while they feel for themselves
that there is something wrong within has yet "a something" left to
learn.

The realm of psychology, however, is beyond the scope of my present
endeavour, save in so far as it may serve to show that we are fortified
with this particular knowledge, and to the end that this book may
constitute a help to the aspiring hygienic-dietetic physician, calling
his attention to the necessity of acquiring as profound a knowledge of
psychology as may be.

I will confine myself at present, therefore, to the external symptoms
which must be observed, though they are not generally considered as
symptoms of disease; and yet they indicate disease or the disposition
thereto, individual or hereditary, as the case may be.

I shall consequently deal with the peculiarities of hands and feet,
nails and hair, eyes and ears, nose and teeth, mouth, forehead, tongue,
chin, cheeks, neck, chest, abdomen, legs, and general constitution.

Nature has endowed us with strong discriminating faculties against
certain external indications of disease. We experience a pleasant
feeling when the hand is pressed by another hand that is warm and dry,
but we shrink from the hand that is cold and moist and clammy.

Perspiring hands and feet are a sure indication that some process of
degeneration is going on within the body, the production of diseased
cells being in excess of what the body, under normal conditions, is able
to excrete, and therefore they seek unusual channels of leaving the
body, that is, through the skin and mucous membranes.

Perspiring feet are a symptom of disposition to colds and possibly
tuberculosis, while perspiring hands indicate certain nervous diseases
and disposition to gout; constantly cold hands and feet are usually
found in people who suffer from scrofulosis or anaemia.

In many cases the quality of _nails_ leads to the conclusion that there
is a thorough disturbance of the process of nutrition. If they are
fragile and brittle, there is no question but that there is lack of
certain nutritive salts in the blood. Swollen and deformed nails
indicate special disturbances in circulation, chronic heart and lung
diseases.

_Hair_, or rather the absence of hair, especially in early life, is
sometimes another indication of faulty nutrition.

Baldness or premature gray hair is usually a pathological indication, as
is also the dishevelled hair of nervous people and children suffering
from scrofulosis, while rich, glossy hair is always a sign of good
health.

The development of the hair depends upon the activity of the skin, the
nerves and the composition of the blood. The blood of dark-haired people
is lacking in water and fat, but richer in albuminous matter. Poor
quality of hair is indicative of living in bad air, poor nutrition of
the skin, hard mental work, pain and sorrow. Sexual excesses during
youth are often the cause of premature baldness and thin hair.

The _eyes_ present a picture that manifests the general condition of the
body, whether it be healthy, disposed to disease, or suffering from
disease.

Protruding eyes are the sure symptom of the disease known as Basedow's
disease; they indicate also short-sightedness, and hereditary epilepsy.

The condition of the mucous membranes of the eyes permits certain
conclusions as to the genital organs.

If the eyes are abnormally small, we draw the conclusion that there is
general weakness and deficiency in nutrition. They indicate retarded
development, which may be seated in the central nervous system. The eyes
usually recede during severe diseases. A hyperaemic condition of the
eyelids, with or without inflammation, is always a symptom of a dysaemic
condition of the entire system (scrofulosis). In some cases of
scrofulosis there is not another visible sign on the entire body, and
yet the eyelids and eyelashes, which sticks together most of the time,
tell the story of an inherited condition of dysaemia.

A yellowish hue of the eyes indicates disease of the liver.

The color of the iris does not indicate much in itself, although the
theory of Liljequist, which deserves some attention, claims that if a
person deteriorates in health, the eyes, if originally light blue,
darken more and more and finally change into brown or the color of the
hybrid race. Liljequist's scale of healthy eyes reads: Light blue,
medium blue, dark blue; then light, medium and dark brown. However,
brown eyes do not represent sickness; they but indicate nervousness and
sensibility.

According to Liljequist, individuals belong to the hybrid race when they
are born of parents one of whom has blue eyes and the other brown eyes.
The weaker race transmits the brown colour of its iris to the middle
part of the iris of the child, while the colour of the stronger race
reappears in the outer part of the iris; not, however, as pure blue, but
tinted with a delicate shade of green, in consequence of the light
brownish-yellowish colour which emanates from the central part.

When death is imminent, the iris displays a grayish-black, muddy gray or
muddy brown colour.

The pupil of the eye is irritated in cases of nervous disease and
indicates this condition. In cases where only one pupil is dilated, a
local disease of the optic nerve or one side of the brain is evident. If
the pupils are insensible to external irritations and remain rigid, the
conclusion is that the brain or the spinal cord is badly affected.

It may be stated in a general way that clear, brilliant eyes, (when not
caused by fever) are usually an indication of the good quality of the
blood as well as of all other humours of the body, together with normal
activity of all the central organs.

The _mouth_ and _tongue_: Pathological indications manifested by the
mouth are principally displayed by the lips, which are clear red in
healthy people, while a hectic red indicates fever and pulmonary
disease. Pale lips indicate anaemia and chlorosis, and lips of a bluish
hue are signs of a generally weakened organism. Frequent, vivid
contractions of the lips (usually thin in this case) indicate great
nervousness.

The color of the mucous membrane of the tongue is a very fair indication
of health or sickness. If a person is in health, the tongue is rosy and
not coated. But any disturbance in the intestines causes a more or less
coated tongue, and consequently shows the detrimental influence these
particular ailments exert upon the brain and nerves. Hence, a coated
tongue affords a valuable indication in making a correct diagnosis,
especially in case of chronic catarrh of the stomach, this being one of
the main causes of depression, and melancholia, as stated by Piderit.

The _forehead_, or rather the record traced thereon, in lines of
nature's unimpeachable calligraphy, warrants certain conclusions as to
mentality and character; and these may be important in determining the
truthfulness of the patient's stories of suffering and other items which
facilitate or impede a correct diagnosis.

The interpretation of such features, however, belongs to the realm of
pure psychology, this is also true of similar conclusions drawn from the
outlines of the chin.

Of much more importance for the purpose of diagnosis is the _nose_.

Even a child understands what the red nose of the habitual drunkard
signifies. A bloated nose with a tendency to become sore is an
indication of a disposition to scrofulosis.

Other indications of disease are displayed to the experienced physician
by the condition of the nose.

The _nose_ is one of the most typical of the human organs; it is also in
the closest connection with the entire system with its groups of
organs--the brain, intestines, breast and even the sexual organs.

The infinite variety of nasal formation has attracted the intense
interest of the physiognomist to this organ.

The most important function of the nose lies in its action as a
respiratory organ. Bad habits or faulty construction which prevent it
from serving in this capacity, lead to much suffering and disease, and
it is always important to determine whether the channels of the nose are
clear and open and efficiently serve their purposes.

The function of the nose as an olfactory organ must also rank highly in
its importance. In this case, however, the nose of the physician plays
the important part; not the nose of the patient. In fact, most of the
famous authorities, among them Professor Jaeger of Stuttgart, Dr. Heim
of Berlin and Dr. Lahmann of Dresden, have made very valuable
discoveries in this respect.

Dr. Heim has found methods of determining the nature of certain acute
diseases from the odour emitted from the person.

Dr. Lahmann distinguishes the hypochondriacal, the melancholic and the
hysteric odours, which, as he says, are most characteristic.

The same applies to the odour of diabetics and other people who suffer
from disturbances of digestion, and patients who suffer from cancer and
other diseases involving a process of putrefaction.

The fact that most patients diffuse unpleasant odours is of the greatest
importance to married people, as it easily produces antipathy, and
especially in the case of chronic diseases, is frequently made the basis
of separation and divorce.

Were this defect known to be but the symptom of a curable disease, the
husband or wife would probably prefer to consult the hygienic physician
rather than the lawyer. Knowledge in such case would mean the
preservation of domestic happiness.

_The teeth_: The parents of a young man once complained to me that their
son had been rejected as a cadet at West Point upon physical
examination, because two of his teeth were filled.

The authorities are certainly justified in their decision.

The lack of perfect teeth indicates faulty digestion. Usually the teeth
are ruined during youth because children breathe through the mouth
instead of through the nose,--either on account of the physical
condition of the nose or because the tonsils are enlarged.

The lack of sufficient nutritive salts in the diet is often revealed by
the condition of the teeth.

From a physiological standpoint the teeth are no less important than the
brain, the eyes and the hair; and the conclusion that perfect eyes, hair
and teeth indicate a perfect brain is absolutely justified, while the
lack of perfection in these organs shows internal deficiencies long
before they appear in external manifestation in the form of disease.

Since healthy blood is the basic condition of healthy teeth, the fact
that people have clean white teeth, set in regular line, indicates the
existence of healthy blood. On the other hand, a bad composition of the
blood is manifested by short, irregularly set, yellowish teeth.

The teeth of healthy people are always somewhat moist, dry teeth are
accordingly a bad sign.

The only advantage of yellowish teeth rests in the fact that their
dentine is, as a rule, stronger. Extremely bluish white teeth often
consist of a soft, porous and tender dentine.

Faulty structure of the teeth indicates weak bones in general.

Crippled teeth and the late appearance of teeth in infants,--that is,
not before the ninth month,--are symptoms of rachitis. Healthy children
have their teeth between the fifth and seventh months.

The teeth of diabetics become loose without any formation of tartar, (an
incrustation of phosphate of lime and saliva).

Extremely yellow teeth indicate jaundice, while reddish teeth show
hyperaemia of the dentine. Carious teeth are a result of disturbed
circulation.

The gums are also very indicative of disease. If they are of a pale pink
colour, they indicate anaemia or chlorosis; if bluish red on the edge,
they indicate tuberculosis.

Some of the most striking indications of existing disease are
demonstrated by the _neck_. By feeling the neck and carefully watching
its external appearance, the experienced scientist will obtain much
valuable information that will aid in his diagnosis, and give him
additional knowledge as to the processes going on within the body of the
patient.

The significance of the formation of the _thorax_ (_chest_) is well
known, even to many laymen. Flat chest, so-called chicken chest,
indicates imperfect development of the lungs, and when extreme, even
tuberculosis.

A flabby abdomen indicates disposition to hernia and stagnation of the
blood, frequently causing hemorrhoids or inflammation of the prostate
gland in men, and all kinds of diseases--inflammatory or catarrhal--in
women.

As to the _legs_, the so-called varicose veins are indications of weak
blood-vessels and intestinal hemorrhage, while inflamed nerves lead to
the conclusion of gouty diathesis and the danger of paralytic strokes.

The _skin_ usually affords more indications that aid in forming a
correct diagnosis than is usually recognized.

If examination were made of the excreta through the pores of an
individual during 24 hours, some conclusion might be definitely arrived
at as to any germs of disease present in the body and in course of
expulsion in this way.

All bacteria incident to detrimental processes proceeding within the
human organism, are to be found in the perspiration.

Freckles indicate a certain predisposition inherent in the blood, while
some forms of eczema point to the conclusion that there are diseased
processes in action within the body.

It is most important under this system to determine the chemical
condition of the body in each individual case.

Acids or alkalines prevail. If the former, patients have bad teeth, a
disposition to gout, diabetes and cancer. The normal condition is the
predominance of alkalines.

In such cases as the former, physiological chemistry will point to the
counterbalancing of the acids to establish a correct composition of the
blood, and thus to prevent the impending danger. The biological system
of health which is rapidly taking the place of all others, is equipped
with so searching a knowledge of the human organism that no disease, be
it ever so adroitly concealed, can escape its minute attention; not
excepting even the disposition to disease.

The old adage is still true that "prevention is better than cure" and
the intelligent person will probably recognize the wisdom of so safe and
sane a course and endeavor to prevent the evils to which he may be
exposed. Thus, for his own satisfaction, if he be wise he will adopt
these two simple precautions:

(1) Examination by an accredited hygienic-dietetic physician.

(2) Regulation of his mode of living in accordance with the course
prescribed.

The words of the famous Moleschott ring true today, more than in the
past, when he said: "One of the principal questions a patient should ask
his physician is, how to make good, healthy blood." Experience shows
that there is but one method to attain good blood,--that _priceless
factor_ upon which our _thinking_, our _feeling_, our _power_ and our
_progeny depend_, and that is by means of _correct food and nutrition_.

FOOTNOTES:

[B] See special article on Influenza, page 408.

[C] This article is also printed in pamphlet form and may be had from
the author for 50c. Postage paid.


CHILDREN'S DISEASE.

  _"The cause of the Poor to plead on,
  'twixt Deity and Demon."_

  (Carlyle).


  _"Child of mortality whence contest thou,
  Why is thy countenance sad, and why are
  Thine eyes red with weeping?"_

  (Bartauld).

I have opened this chapter with somewhat startling mottos, for its
pathetic theme is Children and children's disease; and it seems to me
appropriate, in view of what it portends, to send forth in this form a
world-thought, as a harbinger of sympathy--a foreword which may set in
motion the thought-waves of pity. For of all living creatures born into
this world of pompous ignorance and maudlin solicitude to struggle for
precarious existence from the cradle to the grave, by reason of the
unnatural conditions of our vaunted hygienic and educational
systems--generously termed "civilization"--there is surely nothing quite
so "poor," so woefully devoid of practical protection, and, in its
exceptional helplessness, so weakly gushed over and little understood as
the child of frail humanity.

"The cause of the poor"--thus the legend runs--"in deity's or demon's
name." For truly, of the two angels which, we are told, attend upon the
birth of credulous mankind and the initial stages of development, the
malign influence would seem to be ever in the ascendant, irrespective of
the social status of the, more or less, pre-natally affected, innocent
reproduction wherein is focused the latent follies and delinquencies of
the race, as portrayed in the course of its long pangenesis.

Now, incredible though it may seem and deplorable though it be, the
secret which has revealed itself with absolute force and conviction to
the judicial minds of unemotional scientific observers is simply this:
that the children of the present generation are, as an incontestable
matter of actual fact, really brought into this world alive and some
attain to maturity, not through maternal intelligence, but rather, _in
spite of mothers_. This is a hard saying but none the less a truth. They
survive in spite of the idiosyncracies of their fondly irrational,
untutored mothers rather than because of any practical, efficient
effort these contribute towards the well being and survival of their
offspring. This, as a general rule, is unhappily beyond question. It is
a rule which has, naturally, many exceptions,--many brave and brilliant
ones--these however only serve to confirm it.

Comte, writing as an authority on the subject, made the assertion that
there is hardly an example on record of a child of superior genius whose
mother did not possess also a superior order of mind. As an example he
cites: The mother of Napoleon Bonaparte, high-souled, heroic and
beautiful; the mother of Julius Caesar, a singularly fine character,
wise and strong; the mother of Goethe,--affectionately termed: "The
delight of her children, the favourite of poets and princes--one whose
splendid talents and characteristics were reproduced in her son." There
are also, we know full well, unnumbered hosts of others, whose kindly
light has been shed in many an humble or secluded home, whose beloved
names have been called blessed by thousands though unrecorded in
historic page--who have lived and loved and passed on to higher
realms--to the world, to eulogy and to fame unknown.

In ancient days, when Athens was the centre of culture and of learning,
the Greek mothers were more prone to regard the significance of
pre-natal influences than are the mothers of the present day of putative
advancement. The hereditary tendencies of child-life, with all its
complexities of racial and ancestral character and the qualities
resulting from the dual source of parentage, were then perhaps better
understood, or at least more seriously considered; also the obvious but
grossly disregarded fact that the cradled infant of today may be the
responsible citizen of the future, was kept more effectively in mind and
its significance to the State more fully recognized. The wisdom of
Solomon was never more clearly demonstrated than when he said: "Train up
a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart
from it." It is a piece of world philosophy which has reigned
unquestioned throughout the ages--a policy upon which human discernment,
in Church and State, has relied with unfailing effect; "for the thoughts
of a child are long, long thoughts"--those well-remembered words, how
true; for those "long thoughts"--the mental environment of the formative
period of child-life--do inevitably determine the future character of
the individual, and the immediate result of neglect in these vitally
important stages is painfully and promptly apparent in the aggressive
and unchildlike deportment of the turbulent young neophytes of both
sexes, so disproportionately in evidence in all directions throughout
the community of the present, as to bring into ridicule and utter
contempt existing methods of control. This dire defect in individual
restraint may be largely ascribed to both physical and mental
degeneracy, of hereditary origin; and when to this is added the attempts
of parents to maintain the tranquility of the home by threats, bribery
and fatuous promises--undue severity on the one hand and undue licence
on the other--serious developments are not far to seek. It has been well
said that children who are governed through their appetites in their
infancy are usually governed by their appetites in maturity. Thus it is,
by unwise methods of control which appeal wholly to the spirit of
greed, emulation and selfishness in the child--the purely animal
instincts--with perhaps the occasional degrading influence of corporal
punishment, as a later development, that so many young lives are wrecked
and the downward path made easy which leads through duplicity to crime.
The infantile precosity of the age leaves little scope for the old-time
sentimental prudery of parents who fail to discriminate between
innocence and ignorance; but it has been stated by a well known American
authority on the subject of child-culture, whose experience of
child-life and schools is nation-wide, that only about one child in a
hundred receives proper instruction early enough to protect it from
vice. Then again there supervenes the evil of the competitive school
system which, too frequently, forces the education of a child beyond the
natural order of growth. Countless numbers of little ones are injured by
enforced premature development, thereby diverting the vital forces to
the development of the brain which should be devoted to the development
of the body.

Encompassed by such a chain of adverse circumstances as the combined
result of parental egotism and pedantic, pedagogical ignorance, is it
wonderful, I would ask, that the ghastly record of the hideous sacrifice
of child-life is what it is, and that the young lives which do by chance
escape the horrible holocaust, still reap the prevailing harvest of
prolific ills of which the coming explanation will give some adequate
conception.

Often the fondly futile questions fall from the anxious lips of maternal
foreboding: What has the future in store for me? Will my child live?
Will providence grant me this long-sought blessing? A thousand such
thoughts continually assail the heart in a mother's intense solicitude;
but not in vain will her hopes be set, if haply, she may reverently
follow the course of Mother Nature's laws and precepts, into which I
will endeavor to give you some insight.

Every thinking man must shudder to find it recorded in statistical
tables how insane asylums and prisons are overflowing, how suicides and
crimes against life and soul are but common incidents. It is not hard
for each one of us to see the demon of greed and avarice in the eyes of
those we meet, ready and eager to snatch away the very bread from the
lips of his fellow man because he, too, is hungry and lacking life's
necessities. The egotism of mankind grows constantly stronger; all are
in haste to become rich, that thus they may enjoy life before its little
span is spent. What has become of the youths exuberant in strength, who
once were wont to set out, all jubilant with song, in their heyday of
freedom, to revel in nature and bathe their lungs in its balsamic
atmosphere--to return strengthened to their sleep at early evening, and
who really sought to retain their health? They who were the pride of
their parents, the joy of their sisters, the blissful hope of a waiting
bride. Can we recognize such in the average youth of today,--the citizen
of the tomorrow--these effigies of men, degraded by the demons of
alcohol and nicotine, by the gambling passion, and by the company of
loose women, into dissipated dissolute invalids unwholesome in
themselves and a menace to the race?

Let us pass on rather to the gentler sex.

Where are the sprightly, modest maidens with cheeks rosy with healthy
blood, graceful in figure with well developed forms--the chaste, pure
spirit shining in their eyes, with witchery and common sense combined?
Where are the fathers and mothers whose good fortune it is to possess
such children as these? Can it be that they should deem these
caricatures of fashion worthy of their fond desire?--these whose days
are spent in idling, who find their pleasure in the streets, the shops,
the theatres and the like they term "society?"

Those men are old at forty years.

Those youths too often die at twenty, dissipated wrecks, holding as a
mere ceremony the marriage they expect eventually to consummate; or
married, now and then produce a single child that had far better never
have been born.

What of those mothers who cannot nourish their own offspring, but fain
would make shift with all imaginable unnatural substitutes and bring up
children in whom a predisposition to disease has already been born?

Oh nature! High and mighty mistress! A bitter penalty dost thou exact
from these thine erring progeny.

And rightly so.

Cruelly plain dost thou stamp thy mark on the tiny brow of the unborn
child to mark in what degree its parents have departed from thine
eternal ways of truth.

When a great man, recently, in his address before the body of a famous
university, solemnly asserted that mankind is growing better, day by
day, he must have had before his inner eye fair visions of a future
race--the Future of Truth, which come it must--some day--but now lies
dormant in the lap of the gods, its alluring, visionary, transcendental
form depicted, for an optimistic instant, in the fervent, hopeful heart
of a sincere but far-sighted reformer. But it is written: false prophets
must come, deceiving in respect to all things in heaven and earth.
"Mundus vult decipi, ergo decipiatur." (The world wishes to be deceived,
therefore, let it be deceived.) The world elects to be deceived. It is
so--often on the most paltry of pretences. And here lies the fatal and
prolific cause which has ever, throughout the ages, wrought infinite
harm and impeded the progress of the world: _The world's indifference to
truth._

For the proper understanding and radical cure of any disease it is of
primary importance to have before the mind's eye a distinct picture of
its character and developments, thus tracing it back step by step to its
source, so that the therapeutic, or healing measures employed may be
properly adjusted to its various stages.

Nature has her foes, chief amongst which are ignorance, indulgence and
fear; and these foes have ever waged fierce warfare upon her from time
immemorial. But today a positive spiritual revolution is being wrought
among men, for Mother Nature is calling defaulting humanity back to
herself with no uncertain voice.

Back to Nature is now the cry.

Never before were homilies on food so manifold and the ability to profit
by them so diminished; never were remedies so abundant and conditions of
health so bad; never were deeds of charity so numerous and the poor so
discontented; never were measures of reform so prominent and their
results so meagre; never was production of commodities so enormous and
the cost of living so excessive; never were the resources of all the
world so accessible and counterfeits so plentiful; never was
enlightenment so widely diffused and sound judgment so restricted; never
were the avenues of truth so open, yet never was falsehood so
widespread, as in our time.

Our age--well named by Dr. Rudolph Weil, the Age of Nerves--has brought
to our service the most significant development of natural
forces--electricity in all its forms of application, to medicine and
industry and traffic; the expression of motive power in terms of
machinery--railroads, ocean travel, air navigation, and endless
appliances from the almost limitless scope of which, in the hands of
man, the master, not even the very wild beasts escape. Meanwhile
however--most strange anomaly--mankind degenerates in body and still
more in mind.

The race has become diseased, is suffering, cries out for a betterment
of its conditions, grows constantly more embittered and renounces its
faith in the powers, human and divine.

Epidemics of terrific proportions sweep their recurring millions into
the arms of death; diseases of stupendous mortality, such as
tuberculosis, cancer, syphilis, diabetes, and the extensive array of
so-called contagious diseases of children, are continually increasing,
in spite of doctors, hospitals, sanatoria, hydros, hygienics, asylums,
nostrums and serums, and continue to afflict humanity, taking their
ghastly toll in daily thousands, despite the vaunted but theoretical
advancement of Medical Science.

In the field of medical science the controversy rages at full blast
today.

An endless succession of hypotheses, conjectures and dogmas lies
widespread before us--a troubled sea of uncertainties--a complex
labyrinth of doubt.

The "doctors of medicine" are many but responsible physicians are few,
while disease is constantly on the increase among mankind.

It is really little that the people have to learn, for instinct has
taught them there is little to be hoped of succour from the professional
source. But the world-old habit of superstitious fear and reverence for
the "Medicine Man" fetish yet holds its grip upon the race--alike in the
savage or the Senate and, despite the knowledge of its fallacy,
humanity, still faithful, turns to it weakly, fear-driven, in its hour
of distress, knowing no self-reliance and no safer refuge.

The reader will pardon this digression, since it is better that from the
outset we should divest ourselves of all delusions and recognize
existing conditions as they really are in order that it may help to
eliminate these ignorant superstitions from the public mind and implant
therein the wholesome fact that there is _no magic in medicine_ but
simply _an ordinary problem of cause and effect_.

Existence is movement; the whole visible world is progress, development.
These are facts which, in truth, are daily becoming more generally
known. But man--even modern man--is still so stubbornly unyielding in
his faith that what he learns in an instant becomes immovably rooted in
his mind to the utter exclusion, generally, of anything new, which even
though it be a matter of demonstrated fact, it matters not if at
variance with this earlier knowledge; to him it is an impossibility.

How often the fallacy of such ultra-conservative principles has been
demonstrated has no bearing upon the case; the fact remains--irrational,
stupid though it be--that, sublimely indifferent to criticism, it
survives, with all the wrong and persecution that follows in its train.

But one of the most noticeable surprises of this description occurred in
the year 1896, when Professor Roentgen made public his discovery of the
X-rays; for through this discovery facts were disclosed such for
instance, as the permeability of solid bodies by luminous rays and the
possibility of photographic examination of bony tissues in living
creatures--facts entirely incompatible with prevailing ideas and
teachings. But these facts were not only intrinsically veracious but
were capable of occular demonstration, beyond all possibility of doubt,
and thus, as nothing could be changed or refuted, _science found itself
compelled, for once, to honour the truth in its initial stage_--to
receive them gracefully unto itself and adopt them in its teachings.

This discovery of the X-rays was followed closely by that of the N-rays,
by the two Curies, husband and wife. This further discovery was a still
greater surprise to the scientific world than the former one; for by its
aid was established nothing less than the inconstancy of matter.
Hitherto science, dealing not with knowledge, but with opinions, had
held the belief that the atom is the ultimate form of matter and that no
chemical or physical force can divide it, a teaching held to be
incontrovertible.

First, the discovery of the X-rays had markedly disturbed this belief,
and then, on the discovery of the N-rays, it soon became indubitably
clear that a constant destruction is taking place within the atom, an
uninterrupted throwing off of smaller particles.

But it is not our task to show how one discovery after another was made.
We are merely interested in knowing that, because of these discoveries,
we find today in the atom--not in the radium atom alone, but in every
atom as such--only a union of particles identical with one another, the
so-called electrons, being but special forms of electro-magnetic forces.

Professor Gruner writes as follows: "The atom is no longer the accepted,
final unit of matter, but has given place to the electron.

The atom is no longer an individual compact particle of matter, but an
aggregate of thousands of tiny bodies.

Furthermore, the atom is not indestructible; it can throw off successive
electrons or groups of electrons from its numerous contents and so keep
up a gradual, but veritable destruction."

Professor Thomson, who won the "Nobel" prize for his work on natural
science, makes these distinct assertions:

     "(1) The electron is nothing more than a form of electricity.

     (2) Each electron weighs 1/770th of a fluid atom. Of an atom, that
     is, which, hitherto had been regarded as the smallest individual
     particle.

     (3) A fluid atom consists of 770 electrons and is formed of
     electricity without any other material.

     (4) The atoms of other elements, besides radium, are also composed
     of electrons and of nothing else.

     The number of electrons varies in different elements; for
     instance, an atom of quicksilver is composed of 150,000 electrons.

     (5) Electricity is the basis of all being."

Hitherto we have been taught to consider our bodies and their organs
from no other standpoint than that of their elements. For if we
attribute all the life of the body to the cells, these must consist only
of primary matter, like the atoms of which they are formed. But we have
now come to know that atoms, and, therefore, our bodies as well, are
formed of electrons, or we might say, of crystalized electricity,
consequently, we are compelled to recognize in the body a human machine
operated entirely under the direction of electrical forces. For
electrons cannot lose their electrical character, merely because they
are grouped together in atoms and form our bodies.

It is a well known scientific fact that atoms attract and repel each
other, just as is the case with electro-magnetic forces.

Our bodies, then, are not only formed of electrons, which unite into
atoms, but they are absolutely filled with free electrons; for every
atom is surrounded with an envelope of free electrons, or, in other
words, is the centre of a molecule of electrons, and carries its
envelope of electrons precisely as the earth carries its envelope of
air.

Thomson asserts on the basis of his latest observations that:

    "Every atom forms a planetary system.

    The 150,000 electrons of mercury, for instance, are arranged in
    four concentric spheres, like a system about the sun."

When we arrive at a complete understanding of these facts and their
bearing upon life, we shall be able to control our bodies with perfect
success by regulating their electric forces and adjusting their
energies.

As yet the main difficulty which obstructs our comprehension comes from
the seeming dissimilarity of things within and things without man's
"passing strange, complex mortality." This apparent lack of
co-ordination presumedly stands in direct contradiction to the
similarity of electrons.

But however similar electrons may be, they still have different
vibrations, which cause the differences between various
objects,--between colors, shapes and sounds, between positive and
negative conditions.

It is only by differences of vibration in this world substance, which we
may now venture to term electrons, that we are able to perceive a
difference in objects around us.

It is a matter of primary interest that the organs of the body should
differ in this way; for in them are electrons with their inherent
electro-magnetic properties, upon which the whole bodily machinery
depends.

Within our bodies positive currents of energy flow from above downward;
for manifestly the remainder of the body is governed by the head.

The electrons of the head must consequently be arranged as in a
magnet--the positive pole above, the negative below--and they must be
always connected with their opposite pole, because the strength and the
nature of a magnet depend entirely upon such connection. Thus our heads,
under normal conditions, are cool, and our feet warm, so long as
positive electro-magnetic force flows from above downward.

In most men of the present day, on the contrary, a condition usually
exists the exact opposite of that common to normal healthy individuals.

A sense of well-being prevails in the body only so long as the
electrons are in sympathetic contact with their opposite poles, and,
because by this means they increase and extend their forces
reciprocally, there exists also throughout the entire body a feeling of
physical strength.

Life upon the earth is dependent, as we know, upon the power of the sun.
Positive electrical forces are displayed in sunlight, and we find that
the electrical forces of the soil furnish their complements. Electrical
power is manifested by both the earth and the sun--a fact unquestioned
by those acquainted with observations made in the field of
radio-activity.

As a third factor, absolutely essential, I may mention the ocean, which
I regard as the storage battery that distributes the power.

Then mark the natural contrast between these mundane and solar
forces--the one of a nature warm and vibrating quickly, the other cold
and more slow of vibration.

From this we may infer that we have before us an electrical opposition,
a polarity; and assuredly the electrical forces of the earth are those
which are negative, since they vibrate more slowly and yield to control,
while those of the sun are, on the contrary, positive, since they
possess the higher capacity for vibration and dominate the electrical
forces of the earth.

We may assert, further, that the forces of the earth are electrical,
whilst those of the sun are magnetic. In support of this assertion the
proof may be advanced that a magnet can raise a heavier load after lying
in the sunlight; for the close affinity, between magnetism and sunlight
are, in this way incontestably demonstrated.

The interchange of these principles underlies all mundane activity and
existence, and upon its cessation life would wholly disappear from the
planet.

The various organs of the body, like everything else, fall under the
immediate influence of this interchange of polar forces. The same
electric or electro-magnetic opposition exists therein as are elsewhere
apparent in nature and, for evidence of the same we have not far to
seek.

The phenomena occurring in electrolysis--the science of chemical
decomposition by galvanic action--are well known.

When a current of electricity passes through a fluid capable of
decomposition the acids gather about the positive pole and the alkalies
about the negative pole. We thus detect the exercise of separate
activities on the part of the positive and negative electrical
forces,--their polarization,--when we notice that alkalies and acids
separate upon the application of electrical forces.

Similar conditions exist in our bodies.

They occur in the mucous and serous membranes; for the serous secretions
react acid, the mucous ones, alkaline.

The contrast, in anatomical structure, between the mucous and the serous
membranes is due to the fact that they line the various organs,
respectively, within and without. It also indicates an opposition in
their electro-magnetic forces.

These membranes cover, not only the large organs, but also the small
ones, to the smallest muscular fibres.

In this way an electro-magnetic contrast exists in every part of the
body, and it is this opposition Of forces which keeps the vital
machinery of the body in working order.

Electro-magnetic attraction and resistance are the agencies which
control metabolism and the action of the organs, so long as bodily
strength and healthy blood are maintained. All internal and external
stimuli are nothing more than electro-magnetic processes.

Even our bodily temperature, as we commonly think of it under such
conditions, resolves itself into electro-magnetic force or its product.

Electricity, magnetism, light, and heat differ only in respect to
vibration, and are in the final analysis one and the same.

But since our bodies are not cold like the earth or, like its electric
forces, vibrate slowly, but are warm and of quick vibration, we are
sufficiently assured that they contain, not only the cold
electro-magnetic forces, of slow vibration, but also those that are warm
and vibrate rapidly. And thus, when a correct relation exists between
positive and negative forces--that is to say, between the forces of
electricity and magnetism, then only have we normal temperature, _then
alone are we normally healthy_.

When we come to enquire into the sources from which the body obtains
these forces, there is little to be said. They are well known, can
easily be traced, but to the keenest mind of scholarly research their
source of origin is still an unturned page.

Of things in the human economy which count, however, first in importance
are food and breath; for in every atom of food we eat and every breath
of air we breathe there are electrons which enter the body, there to be
seized by the attraction of electro-magnetic action, stored away, and
applied in vital processes.

A source of vital energy, commonly known and little recognized, is the
free, pure air, or, ether charged with the electrons of space.

Out of space, positive and negative electrons constantly pass into the
human body, their effect we feel at once; when, for instance, in a cold
room, we commence to feel chilly, or on removal to a warm room, or into
the sunlight, a comfortable feeling of warmth pervades the body and
restores its normal temperature.

Weather and local conditions have no small influence upon our state of
health. In dry and elevated positions or in warm weather the condition
of the body is more positive; in damp, low-lying places and in raw
weather the electro-magnetic forces have a negative tendency. _This is
the explanation of those disturbances of health which occasionally arise
and which we sometimes experience in the dire form of epidemics._

As an illustration, the difference of climatic conditions between the
adjoining States of Washington and Oregon are a case in point.

Among other disturbing influences which effect the electro-magnetic
forces of the body are _overfeeding_ and _underfeeding, too much_ and
_too little exercise_, particularly too much or too little
_stimulation_, or _false stimulation_, or excitement of a physical or
mental nature. Any one of these influences may produce disorder in the
relations of the electro-magnetic forces of the body. The positive or
negative electrons may be abnormally increased or diminished or their
location disturbed.

When the body contains too many negative, slowly vibrating forces, or
electrons, and its aggregate of electron vibration is consequently
diminished, the result follows that the feeling of strength--the
vitality, that is, becomes depressed; we feel weak, tired in the limbs;
we possess little warmth and easily grow cold; metabolism falls below
the normal; the skin becomes pale and so causes the overplus of negative
electrons stored in the mucous membrane to set up a morbid action of
that structure. Catarrh sets in. In short, negative diseases are the
immediate result; such, for example, as nervous debility, anaemia,
diabetes, catarrh of the stomach, intestines or air passages,
_influenza_, cholera and diphtheria. In these conditions the principles
of physiological chemistry laid down by me may well be called into
service and improvement effected by a correct adjustment of diet.

When there is an excess of rapidly vibrating, positive electrical
forces, or electrons, raising the vitality of the nerves and blood above
the normal, the sufferer becomes easily excitable; the body is hot and
inclines to inflammatory, feverish or positive diseases, which take the
form of inflammation of the lungs, measles, scarlet fever, chicken-pox,
typhoid fever, etc.

As I have already remarked, in order to understand a disease and to
undertake its cure, it is first of all necessary to form a clear mental
picture of its course and origin. With this purpose in view and a
medical library at command I have honestly tried to formulate from the
initial stages a mental picture of scarlet fever, measles, and kindred
ailments; but the entire medical literature did not advance me further
than pathological anatomy, which informs us that the original cause of
disease is certain changes in the form of the cellular elements of
different digestive organs, in the explanation of which the customary
technical terms are used, such as atrophy, degeneration and
metamorphosis.

By the aid of true physiological chemistry I have been enabled to trace
these mysterious incidences in the life current, learning that the
cellules--the smallest elements in the human system--require for their
composition alternating quantities of different chemical substances.

Which of the chemical elements these are, what mutual relations exist
between different organs of the body, and by what means they enter the
organism, it has become my intricate and absorbing task to observe.

In this investigation it was gradually made clear to me that every organ
and every tissue is dependent upon the introduction of proper nutritive
constituents into the blood.

Healthy blood formation is the one great essential requisite to the
maintenance of health or the cure of disease. And such blood must be
formed from a full supply of the requisite chemical factors, including
all of the mineral ingredients.


_Dech-Manna Diet._

This is a point commonly overlooked, and my organic nutritive cell-food
termed Dech-Manna-Diet is especially designed for the purpose of its
enforcement.

In order to obtain a clear understanding of the various forms of disease
which attack the human body, it is requisite to know more of the
condition we call inflammation. To this end we may consider successively
the following facts; namely, that electrons so fill the body as to bring
its condition to one equivalent to that of a magnet; that electron lies
ranged beside electron; and, that no alteration of location takes
place.


_Effect of Injury._

But now, suppose some part of the body is subjected to a morbid
irritation by some injury. The affected electrons are set into increased
vibration and acquire an excess of force above that of the neighbouring
electrons. For, the faster a substance vibrates, the more its force
increases--a fact with which we are familiar in the action of boiling
water and the generation of steam. In proportion as the affected part
exceeds the adjoining parts in the vibration of its electrons, it
becomes more positive than they and gradually involves these adjoining
electrons in the accelerated process of vibration. So, at the seat of
injury a centre of positive action is brought into existence which
becomes the more intense the longer it continues.

Since the electrons in this locality fall out of their regular
positions, in consequence of the general attraction and gravitate toward
their appropriate poles, they are found to exercise a reciprocally
repellent influence upon each other, by which action the vibration
naturally increases still further. This causes pain; for the pronounced
opposition of the electrons is attended by a feeling of considerable
unpleasantness. The blood, which is an efficient conductor of
electro-magnetic force, becomes involved through its ready mobility. The
affected part becomes filled with blood. It swells and becomes
inflamed;--quickened metabolism and greater warmth are produced by the
increase in blood contents and by the more rapid vibrations of the
electrons. If the inflammatory process progresses further, the tissues
finally disintegrate, partly because of blood stagnation, but chiefly
because of the supra-normal vibration of the electrons. Either the
tissues are shattered by this motion, or melt in the resultant heat.
They undergo purulent disintegration, as we may call it.


_Bacteria._

Since the cells created are formed of bacteria, that is to say, of vital
germs, as the body tissues are of cells, the destruction of the tissues
and cells of necessity sets bacteria free; these therefore are not in
reality the cause, but the result of disease.


_Febrile, or Positive Diseases._

In pronounced inflammation the disturbance of the electrons, the heat,
apart from the functional irregularities which occur in systemic
processes, is diffused through the entire body: the sickness becomes
fever. The blood is impelled with increased pressure throughout the
whole body. If during this process negative electrons hold the
preponderance in the body, the fever is of a feeble, adynamic type. But
when there are many positive electrons in the body and extensive regions
are involved in the disease process, so that pronounced cause exists for
increased vibration of electrons, there arise those conditions we
designate as scarlet fever, measles, and chicken-pox. For, just as in a
steam engine, the increased vibration of the steam exerts a strong
pressure upon the piston, so the increased vibration of the electrons in
the body finally drives the blood with a similar pressure to the skin,
where it produces stasis, or stagnation, sweats and other like
disturbances.


_Curative Process._

As to curative measures, the course to be followed is clearly
self-evident and defined. It could not be other than that of regulating
each vibratory body, of soothing the electrons quickened by morbid
conditions, and accelerating those which have been depressed.


_Law of opposites._

Since treatment can effect this end in no other way than by producing
contrary conditions it is evident that a plan of opposition must be
followed. And, just as day is the opposite of night, summer of winter,
heat of cold, the positive of the negative, so, from the changes
effected by this opposition every circumstance and every manifestation
takes its rise. This is Natural Law, fixed and immutable throughout
nature and for all time. Following this law consistently, our course is
clear and simple: in cases of innutrition we seek to increase the
nutritive faculty by means of proper food; for the overworked we
prescribe rest, for those who need exercise, work; warmth for the cold
and cooling for the feverish.


_Action of Water._

For cooling we use pure water, the most common and most serviceable of
remedies. It cools, soothes and restores equilibrium because its mineral
affinities determine its vibratory action as of lower, slower grade, and
because one of its constituents is oxygen, the most negative of all
elements.


_Action of earth or mud._

Even more opposed to inflammation than water, is earth, or mud. Mud
produces a more decided cooling effect than water; necessarily so,
since its nature is more pronouncedly negative, its vibrations slower.
Antiphlogistine, clay acetate, or mud, would be of undoubted service in
accordance with the law we have been following; But the same object may
be more easily and readily attained by the use of packs.


_Vinegar packs._

In employing vinegar in this connection, it should only be used with mud
or water. Acids are decidedly negative in their electrical action, and
therefore, have a curative effect upon inflammatory diseases. The use of
vinegar in connection with clay and water in the treatment of
inflammations and fevers is a common, old-time custom; but those who do
so, ignorantly perhaps, from force of example or hear-say, unconsciously
carry out in so doing one of the plainest scientific laws. Why so? Is it
because this liquid kills bacilli or destroys morbid products? No,
because it quiets the agitated electrons and equalizes their
distribution.

The safest plan is to take two parts water and one part of vinegar.
Vinegar prevents coagulation of the blood-cells, and in consequence,
stagnation and inflammation are avoided.


_Cooling Drinks._

For a similar reason acid drinks, such as lemonade, raspberry vinegar,
and diluted raspberry juice, are of the greatest services in
inflammations and fevers. They compose the system from within outward.
For, as soon as any electrical negative is brought into contact with the
system, streams of electricity course through the body and reduce the
inflammation. The best lemonade for this purpose is my preparation
"Tonogen," because it contains all the necessary acids, besides the
necessary constituents for inducing circulation and thereby preventing
stagnation It is easily established that patients treated according to
my method have become very much stronger and healthier than they were
before the beginning of their illness.

Formerly, the proportion of deaths among these who contracted typhoid
fever reached twenty and thirty per cent and even higher. These deaths
occurred simply because of excessive internal heat. Today, a wide
experience shows that hardly any of such cases succumb.


_Temperature Reduction._

The application of water in typhoid fever has secured for it a permanent
place in the sickroom. Not only have we been enabled by reducing the
temperature with water, to attain the very best results in the treatment
of typhoid cases, inflammation of the lungs, and all positive heat
diseases, but by the same measures, we are now able to forestall its
development with increasing certainty.

Brand kept typhoid fever away from his soldiers while it raged around
them in the severest form, by the simple specific of a daily bath of an
hour's duration in cold water.

It is easy to understand why scarlet fever, measles and chicken-pox--all
positive diseases--demand the exclusion of sunlight in their treatment.
Experience has shown that the treatment of these diseases makes a more
favorable progress when sunlight is excluded.

This fact stands in sharp contrast to all previous observations as to
the importance of sunshine in the treatment of disease.


_Negative Diseases._

Now let us leave the consideration of the febrile or positive diseases
and turn to those of negative character, as well as to disturbances
where a reduced vibration of the electrons, a preponderance of cold
negative electrical forces, and unhealthy action on the part of the
mucous membranes, constitute the condition.


_Curative Process._

In this instance, in order to initiate the curative process it is
necessary to accelerate the vibration of the electrons in the body--to
render the system positive.

The principal remedy is heat, because it engenders a higher rate of
vibration of the electrons. For this reason steam baths and other
methods of applying heat prove highly remedial in negative diseases of
the catarrhal and kindred varieties. They increase the vibration of
electrons throughout the body and consequently, stimulate metabolism.
The morbid activity of the mucous membranes is reduced and the blood
flows actively again toward the surface, so that the internal organs
experience immediate relief from abnormal pressure.


_Sun baths. Light baths._

Unquestionably in this age, marked as it is by the prevalence of
negative ailments, sun baths and electric light baths will celebrate
triumph upon triumph over disease, for they reanimate the vibration of
the electrons even more than do steam baths, and create a direct supply
of rapidly vibrating positive electrons. One can easily be satisfied on
this point by observing the result of the simple but conclusive
experiment of lying in the sunshine when cold. Baths in electric light
and in sunshine strengthen the system of one negatively sick, just as a
strong current of inductive electricity gives augmented force to a
machine operated by inadequate electric power. The responsive reaction
need cause no surprise, for every popular sea-beach shows with what
wonderful electrical results a salt water bath is attended when followed
by a sun bath in the sand.


_Exercise._

Equally important in the management of negative diseases is exercise.

Everyone knows that exercise makes us warm, and we know now that warmth
comes from a quicker vibration of ether, or rightly speaking, the
electrons of ether. So, not only is the circulation of the blood
improved and metabolism increased by exercise, above all, the vibration
of the electrons is enlivened, thus causing their character to be
changed to positivity, and the number of positive electrons in the body
to be increased. Consequently, negative diseases, which result from a
preponderance of negative electrons in the body, disappear before
systematic exercise, as the darkness of night before the rising of the
sun.


_Massage._

Massage not only removes mechanical disturbances of circulation, but
also increases the vibration of electrons in the body. It is, therefore,
an invaluable remedy in negative diseases.

In case of chronic depression, we should by no means underestimate the
importance of that comfortable feeling induced by the exercise of
electronal vibrations, which supervenes upon properly administered
massage.


_Colored Light Treatment._

A recent method of treatment is that by colored light. Sunshine,
prismatically dissected, is known to vibrate at a rate of about four
hundred million for red and eight hundred million for blue. The
different rays of sunlight therefore must have different effects upon
the world of living things, and red light must produce conditions of
less violent vibration, blue light of quickened vibration.

In scarlet fever, measles, and chicken-pox, as in all positive febrile
diseases, we have seen that there is a morbid increase of vibration in
the electrons. Here, therefore, red light is used for curative purposes
because it vibrates quietly. In lupus, chronic rheumatism, anemia, and
such diseases, a slow vibration of electrons takes place in the body;
hence, in such cases, blue light is a medium of cure.


_Internal Treatment._

These considerations of the effects of colored light bring us to the
treatment of disease by so-called internal means.


_Salts._

In a chemical sense the salts of the body are those compounds which
consists of two elements, such as water. All salts possess the
peculiarity of producing electrical excitation; consequently it is
possible for them to generate electricity when coming in contact with
carbohydrates. Now the entire structure of the human connective tissue
is nothing more or less than a combination of carbohydrates with a salt,
that is, with sulphate of lime-ammonia. In this way, natural electrical
energy of a positive character exists in the connective tissue which
forms the basis of the spleen, the lungs, the stomach, the intestines,
the muscles, in fact of the whole body. Therefore, the nervous and
arterial systems, together with the heart, are supplied, through the
medium of their basis of connective tissues, with electrical energy, by
the contact of the electro-negative oxygen which the blood furnishes and
the positive sulphate of lime-ammonia in the walls of these organs.


_Nourishment._

We now come to a consideration of nourishment. We recognize today the
truth of what was asserted years ago by Jezek; namely, that food
undergoes a kind of gaseous decomposition in our bodies--one in which
the atoms of the elements are resolved into electrons and so become the
foundation of new atomic structures. For the separation of atoms into
electrons and their entrance into new and different forms--that process
which is constantly taking place before our eyes in the external world
of Nature--must assuredly be likewise going on in like manner in the
human body.


_Food._

The world is just awakening and far more inquiry will now be made in the
future as to the chemical properties of food, and also as to its
necessary quantity and calorific value. It will then be clearly
appreciated that vegetable food has a higher value as a producer of
energy than animal food, because we find in it in more available form
the original elements of force which exists in all matter. For the
animal kingdom lives upon the vegetable kingdom and obtains every power
it has from vegetable atoms. In the vegetable kingdom the vibration of
the electrons is of an electrical character; therefore, vegetable food
is of value in the form of electrical force, through its nutritive
salts. By maintaining vital processes through its vibrations it renders
us another service of a magnetic nature. It is definitely known that
quite as much force is derived from vegetable as from animal food,
because the former is introduced into the system chiefly in the form of
a rapidly vibrating positive magnetic force. Because of its slow
vibration vegetable food manifests a lower degree of heat than animal
food, and plants possess less warmth than animals.


_Diet._

For this reason vegetable diet is distinctly appropriate in febrile
diseases. By reason of its more moderate vibration it is also the best
diet for nervous people.


_Food Standard._

The usefulness of any article of diet depends upon its adaptability for
entering into combinations within the system. This, in turn, depends
solely upon its higher or lower standing in respect to vibrations. This
is the reason why the human organism cannot subsist upon mineral food.


_Heat._

We need in our vital economy a definite amount of heat, or positive
magnetic force. This is lacking when the system neither produces enough
to meet its needs in compensation for expended energy or is not properly
supplied with food, fresh air and sunshine.


_Discretion._

For this reason it is well to remember that discretion must be used, as
any unauthorized, unwise or too rapid change to a strict vegetarian
diet may result, in certain cases, in bringing about an underfed
condition or in weakening, and even disease, so that the system may be
obliged to call in the aid of digestive tonics in order to obtain all
the material it needs for the formation of its body-cells.

Enough, however, has been said on the subject I think, to clear the
stage, as it were, of the debris of antiquated "orthodox" performances.

We of the independent and rational branch of the science of healing,
ignorantly termed "unorthodox," have devised a means of preventing
disease and curing it, when encountered, in a natural way, with
materials that regenerate and invigorate the blood, and this method is
slowly but surely fighting its way into general recognition. In time we
may hope to be able to make the so-called "inevitable" children's
complaints a matter of the past, and to raise a generation in which the
sins of the forefathers shall be extinct, so that sane and healthy
offspring will be the result. But pending such time--until the final
victory of the biological-hygienic system for the prevention of
disease--we are now prepared and able to cope with the still existing
conditions, and to heal, if proper attention is paid to our teachings.


_Diet for Children in General._

For the infant child as well as for its mother, it is naturally best
that it should be nursed by the mother. The infant should receive the
breast every three hours approximately, and no food should be given it
during the night, in order to make the feeding regular and avoid
intestinal catarrh through overfeeding.

A regular diet is necessary for a nursing mother. Hot spices and foods
producing gas, must be avoided. Tight clothes that cause degeneration of
the mammary glands, are prohibited.

If the mother is unable to nurse the child, and a wet-nurse cannot be
afforded, the child must be fed artificially, and this requires
painstaking care and attention.

The main factor is to secure good cow's milk, which is most like human
milk. Milk from cows that are kept in barns, should not be used, for
these animals constantly live in stables that lack fresh air, and under
conditions very detrimental to the milk.

The milk should be warmed carefully, thereby approximating the
temperature of the mother's milk (86° to 98.6°) before it is given to
the infant. The nursing bottle and the rubber caps must be kept
scrupulously clean. The milk should be shaken thoroughly before being
used, in order to make a perfect intermixture of milk and cream.

The newly born infant is not able to digest undiluted milk, and
therefore must receive:

1st to 5th day: 1 part milk to three parts water.

5th to 30th day: 1 part milk to two parts water.

30th to 60th day: Half milk, half water.

3rd to 8th month: I part milk, one-half part water.

Or:

1st to 3rd month, every 2 hours; 1 part milk, two parts water, with the
addition of 2 table-spoonsful milk sugar to I or 1-1/2 quarts milk.

4th to 5th month, every 3 hours: 1 part milk, 1 part water.

6th to 9th month: 2 parts milk, 1 part water.

Thereafter pure milk, with the addition of very little sugar, or gruel
made of oatmeal or something similar. Among the preparations that are
best known are Knorr's and Nestle's.

Not until the first teeth have made their appearance, should the child
begin to have thin groat soup, a few soft boiled eggs, and a little more
solid food.

Infants fed artificially must receive food frequently.

Later on, still maintaining the milk diet, light milk and flour food,
vegetables and meat gravy may be given. Infants and even older children
should, under no circumstances, receive miscellaneous delicacies, or
highly seasoned and greasy dishes. Strong tea and coffee are poison to
the nervous system of children.

In case of intestinal diseases milk must be substituted for other diet,
with decoctions of cereal flour. Furthermore, Dech-Manna chocolate and
malt-chocolate, boiled in milk, are recommended.


_Diet for School Children._

The appetite of children increases with their growth and years, and is
always a sign of good health. Much exercise in the open air is of the
greatest benefit to children. It is not, however, immaterial how
children are fed. The theory that children should receive whatever is
served on the family table, may be correct from the standpoint of
discipline, but it may bring about trouble if the food that is offered
does not agree with the stomach of the child. Food for children should
be light and display variety. It is not correct to believe that what is
eaten with aversion, has a healthy effect, and by forcing children to
eat food against which their natural instinct rebels, parents have often
seriously injured their children.

In a general way, soup, vegetables, farinaceous food or a little meat
and fruit is sufficient for the principal meal.

In the morning a cup of milk, cocoa or weak coffee (fruit or malt), with
a piece of bread; for anaemic children, butter and bread and honey.
Prepared in various forms, plenty of milk and farinaceous food, rice,
groat, oats, barley, cornmeal, fruit and cooked fruit should be eaten,
which all children like and which are superior in effect, since they are
so easily digested. Pure water with a little fruit-juice added
occasionally; in the afternoon weak tea with milk, fruit coffee, cocoa,
malt chocolate; in the summer time, cold sweet or sour milk; these
should be the drinks for growing children. Bread and butter with a
little marmalade is always welcome. When fruit is in season, some fresh
fruit and dry bread is sufficient in the afternoon; the supper should be
simple, warm or cold, but without high seasoning; potatoes with butter,
soft boiled eggs, bread and ham, cold roast meat, soup or some well
prepared farinaceous food one hour before bedtime. Food should not be
served very hot, should be well masticated and eaten with little to
drink during the meal. It is better to take a glass of water before the
meal.

Alcoholic drinks are strictly prohibited, since they produce nervous
irritation and make study much harder.

Game, when not too high and without spice is good for growing children.
Dishes prepared from internal organs, such as liver, kidneys and brains,
are usually repugnant to children, and should be avoided. Steamed
vegetables are preferable to those cooked with sauce. Salads for
children should not be highly seasoned, but should be prepared with
butter, cream and lemon juice, in which form they are of great nutritive
value. Avoid delicacies and mayonnaise dressing. Ice cream is the
delight of most children. Permit small quantities, but eaten with crisp
biscuit only, so as to avoid catarrh of the stomach.

Children should have one or two meals between the regular meals.
Greatest variety should prevail at dinner and supper, and the favorite
dishes of the various children should be served from time to time.

Taste and appetite are the means by which the intestinal organs express
what they consider most suitable for the system. That which tastes good
not only influences the health of the body, but also the mental
condition of the child. Proper food, ample time for play and much fresh
air will make the physician's visit a rare necessity. However, if a
child becomes ill, medical advice should be obtained immediately and
followed strictly, thus avoiding many sad experiences.

Nearly all forms of children's disease are combined with fever, and even
without any of the characteristic symptoms of the various forms of
disease, children are often subject to more or less intense attacks of
fever. Therefore, in the following pages I am giving an extensive
description of fever from a biological standpoint, together with its
dietetic treatment--not _cure_ for, as will be seen, _fever in itself is
not a disease, but the attempt of nature to get rid of a disease_.

This elaborate description of fever in all its phases will also serve as
a valuable illustration of the manner in which all subjects dealt with
are treated in my greater work: "Regeneration, or Dare to be Healthy."




FEVER AND ITS TREATMENT, BASED ON BIOLOGY


(A) GENERAL DESCRIPTION.

Fever is one of the protective institutions of the body, which very
often acts most advantageously in the interests of the preservation of
the organism. It is a symptom, or rather a group of symptoms, consisting
of an increase of temperature, acceleration of metabolism, excitement of
the nerves, numbness and frequently delirium.

Undoubtedly a fever of long duration and high temperature may injure the
organism to the extent that death ensues.

There have been, nevertheless, at all times, those who hold the opinion
that fever, as such, does not under any circumstances, injure the
organism of itself alone.

Fever has at all times been regarded, and to a much higher degree today
than formerly, as a healthy reaction against diseased matter, and
indeed, as an expression of the healing tendency of nature, Hippocrates
considered it an excellent remedy. Thomas Campanello recognized its
qualities of removing diseased matter.

This doctrine is corroborated by the findings in regard to infections.

Through fever the organism is freed from micro-organisms which may have
forced their way in. Fever operates like fire, destroying the contagious
matter. After this is done the remnants are excreted through intense and
extremely offensive perspiration.

Experiments have taught us that the growth and the resisting power of
many microbes decrease if the temperature of the body rises, but 1.8 to
3.6 degrees above normal. It is also a remarkable fact that in every
disease where bacteria are found, there is a special type of fever,
which takes its course in such strict accordance with its law, that the
physician is thereby able to determine the nature of the disease.

While the degree of temperature is decisive in regard to the life of
micro-organisms, the height of the temperature does not, in itself,
constitute a criterion of the gravity of danger. It is the duty of the
physician to fight the fever, since the patient may succumb to a high
temperature, as to a low one.

In order to gauge the situation accurately it is necessary to regard
fever, not as a disease, but as what it really is in essence: a symptom
which accompanies the greatest variety of the processes of
disease,--symptom of the most variable significance in various cases. It
must be fought like other symptoms, such as vomiting, coughing, pains
and diarrhoea; namely, in a general way--provided only that it is not a
manifestation of the healing tendency of the organism.

In decreasing the fever, we moderate the excitement of the nerves,
remove the numbness, secure calmness, refreshment and sleep, and defend
the patient against threatening manifestations of disease.

Very often it is not a case of treating the fever, but of dealing with
the disease which causes the fever. We must consequently not be guided
by the thermometer but by the condition of the nervous system.

Two conditions must be observed in treating fever according to the rules
of biology.

In the first place, the treatment of febrile disease must not be carried
on in accordance with general principles, but individually, according to
the nature of the disease in each particular case.

In the second place, it is necessary that the antipyretic treatment, to
reduce the fever, should not be foreign to the organism and should not
be such as is not measurable in degrees as to its effects, or has any
unpleasant accompanying effects or after-effects.

Only the biological system of healing responds to these demands. Only
cognate physical forces, in affinity with the human organism according
to biological laws, can influence vital occurrences with the hope of
success and without the danger of unfavorable accompanying effects and
consequences.

Only physical remedies and treatments permit of adequate gradations such
as will appeal to the power of reaction of the organism.

In the appropriate application of certain, influences of nature,
especially in the diversified applications of water, we possess a mode
of procedure which, assisted by an appropriate dietetic regime adapted
to the principles of biological healing and to the conditions of life in
health and disease, offers advantages which no other treatment affords
and benefits the patient to an extent which cannot be too highly
estimated.

In the treatment of fever we must, in the first place, follow the
impulses of instinct--harmonized, however, with the fundamental laws and
methods of biological treatment--if success is to be obtained.
Instinctively, in the case of a hot forehead, we turn to the application
of cold compresses; for cold feet, the use of such appliances as will
bring about heat. Tormenting thirst is assuaged by a mouthful of cooling
water. But the instinct of impulse alone might also lead one burning
with high fever to seek relief by immersion in cooling water; thus, in
order to discover the rational course we must be guided by the
fundamental laws of the biological system of healing.


(B) TREATMENT.

To these biological explanations of what fever is, it will be
interesting to add some general description and explanation of its
treatment, such as may serve in an emergency as an indication of the
proper course to be pursued and by the most simple means, pending the
attendance of an hygienic physician.

I must again call special attention to the importance of not clinging
too literally to the letter of the law,--of every rule laid down,--but
rather to study by the light of such laws and with alert intelligence
the special features of the case at issue.

Of all hygienic treatments of fever, which have come under my notice in
the course of many years, there is none more clearly, simply and
intelligibly described than that which Dr. C. Sturm, has published in
his book, "Die natur liche Heilmethode" (The Natural Method of
Healing). I will, therefore, employ it in my explanations, (as
translated from the German) adding to it my advanced methods, especially
the hydropathic and dietetic treatments which are more in accordance
with the demands of modern biological therapy.

In the first place, as we know, fever is indicated by an abnormally hot
skin. This heat is noticeable even by touching the patient with the palm
of the hand.

A precise measurement of this heat, of course, requires a thermometer.
The best kind is a so-called maximum thermometer.

The temperature is taken by putting the lower end of the glass into the
axilla, or arm-pit, of the arm, or in the mouth or the rectum of the
patient, and leaving it there for from 8 to 10 minutes. When withdrawn,
the temperature of the patient can be read at a glance.

The temperature of the skin, however, is not the only indication of
fever. It is accompanied simultaneously by accelerated action of the
pulse, up to 120 beats per minute, and even more; also by increased
thirst and, as an indication of very intense affection, extreme
exhaustion and lassitude. The increased excretion becomes manifest
through dark and strong-smelling urine and, especially at the time when
the fever begins to abate, through intense perspiration.

In the beginning of fever the change alternating between chills and
abnormal heat is very characteristic; frequently, and especially in
severe attacks, it begins with shivers. The patient suddenly feels an
intense chill, so that he commences to shake all over, his teeth chatter
and he grasps whatever covering he can for warmth. Suddenly, following
this, a rapid increase of temperature occurs, and the patient begins to
complain of intense heat. In other cases patients complain of feeling
very cold, while their skin indicates a marked degree of warmth.

With higher degrees of temperature, the fever may induce a loss of
consciousness. The patient becomes delirious, loses urinary and fecal
control and displays the signs of total collapse.

Fever, as I have already indicated, is a kind of physical revolution, a
state of excitation which, differing so widely as to cause, character
and degree, cannot be judged according to any fixed rule. The
temperature of a patient we may read from the thermometer; but the real
nature of the fever we do not learn until we consider his constitution,
his innate faculties and the strength to which his various organs have
attained. For this purpose we must take into consideration not only the
physical attributes, but also the quality of the senses and of the mind,
since these items are of the utmost importance in determining the
tenacity, i.e., the power of resistance of the patient.

From this point of view it will be understood that people possessing a
calm and phlegmatic temperament, will not attain to high degrees of
fever, except in cases of very serious complications, while nervous
people may quickly reach very considerable degrees of temperature.
Children and younger people are more inclined to high fever, since their
organs are still immature. This explains why simple inflammations, which
are not general throughout the body, or frequent indigestion, which in
itself does not figure as a dangerous illness, will in the case of
children appear under the gravest symptoms. It follows, therefore, how
necessary it is to discriminate closely and decide accordingly between
severe symptoms of fever as manifested by people of calm temperament,
and similar cases when manifested by people of nervous temperament.

Unfortunately fever has been treated in the past according to set and
rigid rules. As soon as the temperature of a patient rose from 98.6° and
99.6° to 100.4°, it was pronounced to be fever, and preparations were
made to treat it accordingly. The treatment became more energetic the
higher the fever rose to 105.8° and 107.6°.

It was said that under all circumstances the temperature must be lowered
to normal.

This idea is decidedly wrong and most dangerous for the patient. For,
while a calm and phlegmatic patient may withstand this strong reduction
of excitement in his internal organs, which in fact require it, the
procedure necessary to bring it about, as a rule exceeds what the
nervous patient can endure.

The fever should only be reduced in accordance with the strength of the
patient, otherwise extreme irritation must ensue, such as has caused the
death of hundreds of thousands in the past. It is better, therefore, to
leave a nervous patient in his fever and strengthen him by various
devices, so that he may overcome it. Later he may require and,
consequently, be able to withstand stronger measures. For this purpose I
recommend simple ablutions, in some cases the application of abdominal
packs for half an hour _using two-thirds water and one-third vinegar_,
as previously prescribed. In addition, the natural vigor of the patient
is to be strengthened by administering to him, at intervals of from half
an hour to two hours, Dechmann's Tonogen and Dechmann's Plasmogen
alternately.

The treatment must be in proportion to the strength of the patient.
Thus the quiet, energetic temperament can endure more extensive packs;
his nature in fact requires them. His body may be completely packed or
at least three-quarters, by placing the moist sheet around his entire
body except the arms, while the woolen blanket is either wrapped around
the whole body, including the arms, or, as before, leaves the patient
free to move his arms, which are then only covered by the bed-clothes. A
patient of this kind may also be treated with ablutions or put into a
half bath at 75.2°, while cooler water is poured over him. Young and
strong patients have endured even cooler baths as powerful stimulants.

The nearer a patient approaches to a nervous, weak condition, the more
caution is required to allow him hike warm baths only, or, still better,
ablutions at 77°, which may be made severer by not drying the patient.

It is very beneficial to weak patients to frequently wash their hands,
face and neck, without drying them.

A very careful treatment of the hair is also a great necessity,
especially for women. Clean and well combed hair is very beneficial to a
patient. Slight ablutions of the head and combing the hair while wet,
are very cooling and refreshing.

The stronger the nature of a patient, the safer it becomes to rely upon
a single mode of procedure. Thus, cold packs may be sufficient in case
of high fever if applied about every half hour or hour; or, if the
temperature is not quite so high, at intervals, from one hour and a half
to two hours With weaker persons more variety of procedure is
imperative, but none of them must be too stringently applied. In these
cases mild ablutions should be used several times during the day, and
they may be alternated with packs of the whole lower part of the body or
packs on the calves of the legs.

Cool or cold enemas are rapidly absorbed and thus have a quieting
influence on the large blood reservoir in the abdomen. Little mouthfuls
of water are also taken from time to time, but too much water always
weakens the patient.


(C) DIET IN CASES OF FEVER.

As diet in cases of fever I recommend the prescriptions of Professor
Moritz, which coincide with my own experiences, so far as a fever diet
is concerned; and in addition the physiologico-chemical cell-food which
I have used for many years with the greatest success (Dech-Manna Diet).
The importance of the latter is due to the fact that it not only
_prevents_ the destruction of the cells, but has a general strengthening
effect upon the system.

Whatever the differences in manifestation the febrile diseases may show,
the _febrile reduction of the digestive capacity of the stomach and the
bowels is so characteristic_, that it should be specially noted in this
connection.

True, fever shows considerable _disturbance of metabolism_, since the
_decomposition of the albumen is increased in an abnormal way_. This
fact, however, does not demand any particular attention, in regard to
diet. As far as possible during fever it is well to exercise an
economizing influence on the decomposition of the albumen of the body
through the introduction of _all kinds of food_ that produce energy, so
that it is not necessary to _give preference to any one particular kind
of food_.

The injury to digestion during fever comprises not only the peptic
functions, which manifest themselves clearly in a reduction of the
excretion of hydrochloric acid, but all functions pertaining thereto,
the motory as well as the resorptive.

The danger that the patient will receive too much solid food, hard to
digest, is generally speaking not very great since, during acute fever,
patients as a rule show a decided lack of appetite. The other extreme is
the more likely to occur; that the amount of nutrition given may be less
than what is requisite and helpful; too much deference being paid to the
inclinations of the patient. Formerly the general belief obtained that
fever would be increased, in a degree detrimental to the patient, by
allowing the consumption of any considerable amount of food, and
following this doctrine, the patient was permitted to go hungry. This,
however, is absolutely erroneous. _No one would feed a feverish person
in a forcible manner, but it is absolutely imperative to take care that
he receives food productive of energy in reasonable quantities._

As a rule hardly one-half, or at the most two-thirds of the normal
quantity of nourishment necessary for the preservation of life, may be
introduced into the organism in case of acute febrile disease. I have
already indicated that there is no particular danger in such partial
"inanition" (starvation) for a short period, but that, accordingly, the
qualitative side of the nourishment becomes more important the longer
the fever lasts. It has also been mentioned that the organism reduces
its work of decomposition, gradually adapting itself to the unfavorable
conditions of sustenance, and thus meets our efforts to maintain its
material equilibrium.

_It is important always to make use of any periods of remission and
intermission, during which the patient has a better appetite and can
digest more easily, to give him a good supply of food._ It is also well
to administer _as much nourishing food as possible_ in the beginning of
an illness, which is likely to be lengthy, provided the patient is not
yet wholly under the effects of the febrile disease. The food must then
be gradually reduced in the course of the illness.

As to quality, the diet must be selected from forms II and III (as
below), and will consequently consist of glutinous soups, in some cases
with the addition of a nutritive preparation of egg, meat jelly, milk
and possibly thin gruel and milk.

The quantity of food which the patient may receive can only be given
approximately, as follows:

For adults--(to constitute a sustaining diet). Soup 1/2 pint, milk and
milk gruel 1/3 pint, meat 3 oz., farinaceous food the same, 2 eggs,
potatoes, vegetables, fruit sauces 2 to 2-1/2., pastry and bread 2 oz.

These quantities must be considered as the maximum for each portion. The
quantity of beverage at each meal must also be very limited, not
exceeding 3 to 6 oz., so that the stomach is not overburdened
unnecessarily nor its contents too much diluted.

The reduced meals are harmonized with the object of sufficient general
nourishment by eating more frequently, about five to six times a day.
Patients with fever should have some food in small quantity every 2 to 3
hours. It is important that _the patient be fed regularly at fixed
times_. This will be found advantageous both for the patient and for
nursing.

_Form II_ comprises _purely liquid nourishment, "soup diet."_ Consommé
of pigeon, chicken, veal, mutton, beef, beef-tea, meat jelly, which
becomes liquid under the influence of bodily heat, strained soups or
such as are prepared of the finest flour with water or bouillon, of
barley, oats, rice (glutinous soup), green corn, rye flour, malted milk.
All of these soups, with or without any additions such as raw eggs,
either whole or the yolk only, if well mixed and not coagulated are
easily digested. (Besides albumen preparations, Dech-Manna powders, dry
extract of malt, etc., may be added).

_Form III_ comprises _nourishment which is not purely liquid_. Milk and
milk preparations (belonging to this group on account of their
coagulation in the stomach):

(a)--Cow's milk, diluted and without cream, dilution with 1/2 to 2/3
barley water, rice water, lime water, vichy water, pure water, light
tea.

(b)--Milk without cream, not diluted.

(c)--Full milk, either diluted or undiluted.

(d)--Cream, either diluted or undiluted.

(e)--All of these milk combinations with an addition of yolk of egg,
well mixed, whole egg, cacao, also a combination of egg and cacao.

Milk porridge made of flour for children, arrowroot, cereal flour of
every kind, especially oats, groat soups with tapioca, or sago, and
potato soup.

Egg, raw, stirred, or sucked from the shell, or slightly warmed and
poured into a cup; all either with or without a little sugar or salt.

Biscuit and crackers, well masticated to be taken with milk, porridge,
etc.

As a rule fever is accompanied by an increased thirst, which may be
satisfied without hesitation. It is unnecessary, and detrimental, for
patients suffering from an increased excretion of water through the
fever heat, to be subjected to thirst. Since the mucous membrane of the
digestive channel is usually not very sensitive to weak chemical food
irritations, the cooling drinks, which contain fruit acids, such as
fruit juices and lemonades, are as a rule permissible. Fruit soups may
also be given.

It is different, of course, if an acute catarrh of the stomach or of the
bowels is combined with the fever. In such cases fruit acids must be
avoided. Still it is not necessary to resist the desire of the patient
to take whatever may be given him, at a low temperature. Even ice cream,
vanilla or fruit water ice, may be used in moderate quantity.

Warning against cold drinks is necessary only in case of disease of the
respiratory organs when the cold liquids would cause coughing.

The use of dietetic stimulants such as Dechmann's Tonogen, Eubiogen and
Plasmogen, is the same in these cases as has been mentioned in several
places previously.

       *       *       *       *       *

As soon as the patient has made sufficient progress, he may receive more
solid food.

The salivary digestion being improved, he may now be allowed several
more substantial dishes of rice and groat, cooked partly in milk, partly
in water and eaten with fruit juice. He may also have several kinds of
green vegetables, like spinach, cauliflower, asparagus, comfrey, etc.

With additional increase in his strength, fresh fish, well prepared, is
especially refreshing to a patient with light fever.

As to mental pabulum, in case of severe fever, I recommend for the
patient absolute mental and physical rest; little talking, no noise, no
visits, no disturbance of any kind. Within his system nature has to
accomplish an enormous task to facilitate which complete quiet is
essential. Just as he who has serious preoccupations needs quiet
environment, so that his attention may be devoted to his thoughts, so
also a patient in the throes of fever must relax all external
considerations in deference to the struggle of the vital forces within.
Whatever disturbance of mentality occurs has always prejudicial effects,
such indeed as may in some cases cost the life all are seeking to save.


SCARLET FEVER.

Scarlet fever is an exanthematous form of disease distinguished by a
scarlet eruption of the skin. It produces marked symptoms in three
localities, the skin the throat and the kidneys.

It is doubtful whether it can be conveyed from one person to another; at
least nothing is known concerning the "contagium," or germ of conveyance
of infection,--according to the differential diagnosis of Dr. G.
Kuhnemann, whose work on the subject is held to be authoritative. It is
not to be denied that the disease may be carried by articles of clothing
and by intermediary persons, who themselves are not suffering from it.

The incubation period--the time intervening between infection and
eruption--during which the infected person is "sickening for" disease,
varies from two to as much as eight days.

Chills, feverishness, headache, nausea and actual vomiting are the
initial symptoms, and sore throat with difficulty in swallowing soon
follow.

Inspection reveals the appearance of an acute throat inflammation, and
the tip and sides of the tongue are red as a raspberry. A few hours
later--or at most a day or two--the eruption appears; first in the
throat, then on the face and chest. It begins with minute, bright red,
scattered spots, steadily growing larger until they run together so that
the entire skin becomes scarlet, being completely covered with them.
Frequently the temperature in the evening ranges as high as from 103° to
105° Fahrenheit. Albumen is always found in the urine.

After two or more days the fever mounts gradually, the throat symptoms
increase, the eruption fades away, and from four to eight days later the
patient's condition returns to normal.

At the beginning of the second week desquamation, or scaling, begins,
the skin peeling off in minute flakes. At this stage heavy sweats set in
and the excretion of urine is increased.

In epidemic form the type is sometimes much more malignant, even to the
degree that death occurs on the first day with typhoid and inflammatory
brain symptoms, unconsciousness, convulsions, delirium, excessive
temperature, and rapid pulse. This may happen even without the eruption
becoming fairly recognizable. In such severe epidemics the throat
symptoms are apt to take on the aspect of diphtheria. The renal
discharge exhibits the conditions of a catarrh of the urinary canals
originating from causes we do not understand.

Among the after effects of scarlet fever are inflammation of the ear
with all its consequences, and inflammatory affections of the lungs, air
passages, diaphragm and heart membrane.

The cause, I repeat again, is _dysaemia_--impure blood.

If the patient is predisposed to this form of disease and moreover, a
weakling, the case is a dangerous one.

Every good mother should see to it that there is healthy blood in her
offspring. The task is comparatively an easy one, the method, is simple
and ignorance ceases to be an excuse, for my object is to place the
necessary knowledge within the reach of all.

The treatment of scarlet fever varies according to which symptoms are
most severe.

In the first place prophylactic efforts must be constantly employed to
prevent _possible_ contagion. Healthy children must be strictly
seperated from the sick till the end of desquamation or scaling--a
period of four to six weeks.

If the course of the attack is normal, the patient should be kept in bed
under a light cover with a room temperature of 60° to 65°. The sick room
must be well ventilated and aired daily.

The windows should be hung with transparent _red_ curtains.

The diet may consist of milk, curds, barley soup, oatmeal gruel, flour
gruel, with some cooked fruit and, of drinks, lemonade, soda water, and
raspberry juice; but the most important drink from a scientific point is
Dechmann's "Tonogen," as previously described.

The linen should be changed often

Sponge baths with chilled vinegar-water (1 part cider vinegar diluted
with 2 parts water) are helpful when the temperature rises to 102°. If
the temperature reaches 105° or over, baths must be promptly
administered. The patient may be placed in a bath of 85° or 90°, and the
water allowed to cool gradually down to 70° or 65°.

A sick child may stay in such a bath ten or twenty minutes, while the
time in a bath practically should not be more than three or five
minutes. The bath must be repeated as soon as the fever again reaches
105°.

When the first symptoms of measles, scarlet fever or chicken-pox are
noticed, give the child a three-quarter pack. (See directions under
"packs"). After each pack sponge the patient with cool vinegar-water.

If the fever is high during the night, apply a sponge bath every half
hour or hour.

During the day give the patient 1/4 teaspoonful of Dechmann's Plasmogen,
dissolved in 1/2 pint water, a little every hour.

In the evening and during the night alternate this blood-salt solution
with Tonogen.

Blood plasm contains eight different salts in different composition, and
only when the actual physiological composition is employed can there be
any guarantee against the decomposition of the blood-cells. Plasmogen is
such a composition.

When diphtheria and Bright's disease complicate the case, they must be
dealt with as under ordinary conditions and treated by a competent,
Hygienic dietetic physician.

If recovery is prompt and desquamation (scaling) is in progress, warm
baths may be applied for a few days.

When the temperature and urine continue normal for a few weeks, the
child may be regarded as restored to health.


MEASLES.

Measles or Rubeola is an exanthematous or eruptive contagious form of
children's disease.

In Measles the medium of contagion is the excretion from the air
passages, mucus coughed up and air exhaled; also the saliva, tears,
blood and perspiration of the patient.

In Measles also, as is the case with regard to scarlet fever, the
"contagium," or germ of contagion, is unknown.

The general susceptibility to measles is extraordinarily great the
poison being of a virulent nature.

If the disease attacks one of feeble constitution whose environment is
unfavorable and insanitary,--dwelling in badly ventilated rooms, for
instance, with little attention paid to personal cleanliness, the attack
is likely to assume a malignant form.

A period of from ten to fourteen days may elapse between infection and
the development of the symptoms.

During this period the patient may infect others.

This explains how easily a whole school may become infected.

During the preliminary period children feel tired, relaxed, suffer pain
in the joints and headache; they have chills and are feverish at
evening. Among the symptoms enumerated are catarrhal affections of the
air passages, the larynx, the nose and eyes. Constant sneezing,
nosebleeding, cough, watering eyes, ultra sensitiveness to strong
light, are concurrent conditions. At the same time the fever becomes
pronounced.

These symptoms continue for four or five days and then rapidly abate and
the eruption appears. First a red rash is seen, which spreads over the
surface of the face. Inside the mouth and throat a similar mottled
redness is seen. In the course of a day the eruption spreads over the
whole body. After continuing at their height for a day or two the
symptoms gradually decline, and in a little over a week the child may be
pronounced well. The skin then sheds all the superfluous cuticle left by
the eruption, and in three or four weeks after inception the normal
condition is again reached.

In the malignant form all the symptoms are of a severe type.
Occasionally catarrhal affections of the air passages, croup or
pulmonary inflammation supervene, and the patient succumbs.

Other concurrent forms of disease are whooping cough, diphtheria,
pulmonary consumption, inflammation of the eyes, ear disease, and
swelling of the glands.

Measles demand no distinctive treatment. The room must be well
ventilated, with a temperature of about 60°, and light must be almost
totally excluded. At night no lamp should be allowed.

_Treatment and diet_ should be the same as in scarlet fever.


GERMAN MEASLES.

German Measles (Rubella or Roetheln), is an eruptive form of children's
disease, much more harmless than the disturbances previously depicted.
It is one which occurs in epidemics, but to which children individually
are largely susceptible; the actual contagium thereof, however, is
likewise unknown to science.

Eight days generally intervene between the time of infection and the
breaking out of the rash.

During this period no acute symptom is noticeable. In the majority of
cases the fever that precedes the eruption is not high; headache, cold
and sorethroat accompany the appearances of the rash, which in this case
breaks out at once, and not after several days, as in the case of actual
measles. The spots are about the size of lentils, and are quite deep
red, appearing first upon the face.

After the rash has been out for one or two days, it gradually becomes
paler, the fever goes down, and recovery progresses rapidly, usually
without any after effects.

It is not necessary for the patient to remain in bed longer than three
or four days; nevertheless, the treatment should be just the same as
prescribed in the case of the real measles, so as not to leave any
weakness or subsequent complication.

There are many other forms of disease, besides these, which are likewise
accompanied by fever and a rash, which also appear in epidemics and are
evidently due to a great variety of causes. As they, however, invariably
run the natural course, I shall not dwell upon them here.


CHICKEN-POX.

Chicken-pox, or Varicella, of which the contagium also remains a
mystery, is another infectious eruptive form of disease, peculiar to
children. It begins with the appearance of a number of little pigmented
elevations on the skin which develop into vesicles and pustules. After a
certain period they become encrusted with scabs, which dry up and fall
off. When the pustules are deep-seated, small scars remain There is no
fever, and the illness is over in about fourteen days. The contagion
passes through personal contact, or through clothing and bed linen.

If symptoms are severe enough to require it, treatment should follow the
directions for scarlet fever.


SMALL-POX.

As a matter of fact Chicken-pox is of congeneric origin with small-pox,
with which, in a very much milder degree, it has various features in
common. But small-pox itself is engendered of foul and insanitary
conditions of life, impure blood and bad and insufficient nourishment
and these, together with its risk under unscientific conditions and in
times past of facial disfigurement, have made its name more repugnant to
the layman than perhaps any other form of disease. All that need be said
about it here, however, is that it is largely a terror of the past and
that the sure preventative against it always, and the one reliable
anti-toxin against contagion, under all circumstances, is good healthy
blood and hygienic-dietetic living.

Those readers who may desire a minute description of this form of
disease will find the same in chapt: XII of my greater work
"Regeneration."


TYPHOID FEVER OR TYPHUS ABDOMINALIS.


_(A) General Description._

This description of fever is usually termed typhus or nerve fever. It
characterizes all forms of typhoid disease of which the following
features constitute the prominent symptoms.

To a peculiar degree, chiefly young and strong individuals of from 15 to
30 years of age are attacked by this disease, while those in early youth
and of more advanced years are much less subject to the same.

It is a complaint very dangerous to those who eat and drink to excess
and without discretion. Strong excitement of the mind, such as a shock
or great anguish, will undoubtedly favor the appearance of typhus. The
seasons too have considerable influence upon it, most cases occurring
during the Autumn months--from August to November.

It has been previously indicated to what extent the study of the
hygienic conditions of life will assist in the discovery of the real
causes of so-called contagious disease. One instance may show the
enormous influence of dietetic movements on the outbreak of great
epidemics.

It is reported in the "Journal of the Sanitary Institute," London, that
the English Seaside Resort Brighton, in the period from July, 1893, to
August, 1896, 238 cases of abdominal typhus were observed,--about
equally divided for the different years. In 56 cases the typhus was
caused by the eating of oysters (36 cases) or clams (20 cases). There
was evidence that the water from which these oysters and clams were
taken was badly polluted by the excrement of several thousand people,
brought through sewers to the place were the shell-fish had been
gathered. It was very characteristic in a number of cases that only one
of a number of persons, who were otherwise living under equal
conditions, fell ill with typhus, a short while after having eaten some
of the shell-fish. No other points essential to the spreading of this
contagious disease could be discovered. Brighton is healthily situated
and built; hygienic conditions in general are favourable; much attention
is paid particularly to keeping the soil clean, removing all faeces and
providing good drinking water. Contamination through milk in all of the
56 cases, according to most careful investigations, was out of the
question. They occurred in entirely different streets in various
precincts of the town; 45 of the patients lived on 43 different streets.
Besides the people attacked by typhus, many other persons fell ill from
lighter disease of the intestines, after having eaten of these
crustaceous bivalves, the symptoms being diarrhoea and pains in the
stomach. Measures were taken to remove the noxious causes as soon as the
source of infection was discovered.

The same conditions were some time ago noticed in Berlin. Out of 14
people invited to a dinner, nine fell ill--5 of them very
seriously--under symptoms of typhus, after having eaten oysters from
Heligoland. Part of the personnel of the kitchen and some of the
servants were taken ill with the same critical symptoms.


_B. Essentials._

Abdominal typhus is a general illness of the whole body, and
consequently all organs of the body are more or less altered in a morbid
way while the disease lasts. The main change occurs in the lymphatic
glands of the intestines and in the spleen.

The following are its anatomical symptoms: With the beginning of the
disease the lymphatic glands of the mucous membrane of the intestines
begin to swell; they are constantly growing during the course of the
disease and attain the size of a pea; extended over the level of the
mucous membrane they feel firm, hard and tough. In favourable cases the
swelling may go down at this stage, but generally the formation of
matter begins through the dying of the cells, caused by insufficient
nourishment. This is gradually thrown off, and a loss of substance
remains--the typhoid ulcer. This varies in size and in depth. Light
bleeding in no great quantity ensues. If the ulcer has gone very deep,
the intestines may be perforated and then the faeces and part of the
food enter the abdominal cavity. The result is purulent and ichorous
peritonitis. As a rule, however, the ulcers are purified and heal by
cicatrization. Usually the spleen is enormously enlarged (through a
rapid increase in the number of its cells). The swelling of the spleen
can easily be detected by external touch.


_(C) Symptoms and Course._

During what is termed the earlier stage, which as a rule last about two
weeks and precedes the breaking out of the disease proper, the patient
still feels comparatively well, or only begins to complain of headache,
tired feeling, prostration in all the limbs, dizziness, lack of
appetite. It is thus absolutely impossible to fix a definite date for
its development. In most cases the patient complains of a chill,
followed by feverishness,--symptoms which confine him to bed,--although
no actual shivering takes place. It is expedient, although quite
arbitrary and subject to many modifications, to divide the course of the
illness into three periods:--

(1) The stage of development.

(2) The climax.

(3) The stage of healing.

During the stage of development, which usually lasts about a week, the
symptoms of the disease rapidly increase. The patient gets extremely
weak and faint, has severe headaches and absolutely no appetite. In
consequence of the high fever, he complains of thirst; the skin is dry,
the lips chapped, the tongue coated; the pulse is rapid and full; the
bowels are constipated, but the abdomen is practically not inflated nor
sensitive to pressure. In most cases the spleen is evidently enlarged.

Before the end of the first week the climax is reached. This in the
lighter cases lasts for the second week, or in more severe cases, even
until the third. The fever is constantly high, even 104° and over. The
body is generally benumbed, the patient becomes delirious at night or
lies absolutely indifferent to all surroundings. The abdomen is now
inflated, the buttocks show small, light red spots,--the so-called
"roseola,"--which are characteristic of abdominal typhus. Furthermore,
in most cases, bronchial catarrh of a more or less severe nature
appears. Instead of obstruction of the bowels there is diarrhoea--about
two to six light yellow thin stools, occur within 24 hours. During this
second stage the complications appear.

At the end of the second or the third week respectively, the fever
slackens; in cases which take a favourable turn, the patient becomes
less benumbed and less indifferent, his sleep is quieter; appetite
gradually returns. The bronchial catarrh grows better, the stool once
more becomes normal; in short, the patient enters the stage of
convalescence.

This is a short sketch of the course the illness usually takes.

Of the deviations and complaints accompanying Abdominal Typhus, the
following are the most important details:--

The fever takes its course in strict accordance with the described
anatomical changes in the intestines. It increases gradually during the
first week, and at the end of that period it reaches its maximum of
about 104°. It stays at that point during the second stage, gradually
sinking during the third stage.

In lighter cases the second stage may be extraordinarily short.

If perforation of the intestines, heavier bleeding or general collapse
should ensue, attention is directed thereto through sudden and
considerable decrease in the temperature of the body. Pneumonia,
inflammation of the inner ear and other accompanying complications also
cause sudden access of fever.

Effect upon the digestive organs: The tongue is generally coated while
the fever lasts; the lips are dry and chapped, and look brown from
bleeding. If the patient is not carefully attended to during the extreme
numbness, a fungus growth appears which forms a white coating over the
tongue, the cavity of the mouth and the pharynx, and may extend into the
oesophagus. Later on the tongue loses this coating and becomes red as
before. Few symptoms are shown by the stomach, except occasional
vomiting and lack of appetite. During convalescence there is great
desire for food. The anatomical changes in the intestines have already
been mentioned.

While obstruction prevails during the first week, the second week is
characterized by diarrhoea of a pale and thin consistency.

When general improvement sets in, the stools gradually decrease in
number, they grow more solid and finally reach the normal. The abdomen
is not very sensitive to pressure and is usually intensely inflated with
gas.

In the region of the right groin a cooing sound is often heard, caused
by a liquid substance in the intestines, which can be felt under
pressure of the finger.

Bleeding from the intestines is not infrequent and happens during the
third week of the illness. It usually indicates a bad complication,
since the result may be fatal. The stool assumes a tar-like appearance
through the mixture of the coagulated blood with the faeces. Close
attention must be given to minor hemorrhages, since they often herald
others of a more intense nature.

In such extreme cases of serious complications, however, a cure has
nevertheless been sometimes effected. They are occasionally followed by
the immediate beginning of convalescence.

The perforation of the intestines, which is caused by an ulcer eating
its way through the wall of the intestines, is much more dangerous. It
happens most frequently during the third or the fourth week. The patient
feels a sudden, most intense pain in the abdomen; he collapses rapidly,
the cheeks become hollow, the nose pointed and cool. Vomiting follows,
the pulse becomes weak and extremely rapid. The abdomen is enormously
inflated and painful. In the severest cases death ensues, at latest,
within two or three days, the cause being purulent and ichorous (or
pus-laden) peritonitis.

Such extreme developments as these, however, are infrequent, since the
illness, by timely attention according to the methods herein prescribed,
will, as a rule, respond to the treatment and take a favourable turn.

_Respiratory Organs_:--

In the course of typhus, intense bleeding of the nose is not infrequent.
In the severer cases this is a sign of decomposition of the blood, but
in lighter cases it merely serves to alleviate the intense headache
which is a feature of the case. The throat is liable to be affected;
hoarseness and coughing occur; hardly any case of typhus catarrh. This
sometimes extends into the air-passes without a more or less intense
bronchial cells and causes catarrhal pneumonia, which--if not promptly
treated according to the instructions herein detailed--may become
extremely dangerous.

_Organs of Circulations_:--

With the exception of a strongly accelerated action, no change is
noticeable in the heart. It may, however, suddenly become paralyzed and
cease entirely, owing to the general weakness of the patient and the
intensity of the fever. Weakness of the heart and possible cessation
occur only during the climax or convalescence.

_Nervous System_:--

Disturbances of the nervous system are very frequent, hence the name
"nervous fever."

Consciousness is, in nearly all cases, more or less benumbed, and at
times completely lost. The patient is either lying absolutely
indifferent, or he is delirious, cries, rages, attempts to jump out of
bed and can only be subdued by the strongest efforts.

Patients lose control of urinary and faecal movements and require
feeding.

These disturbances disappear as soon as convalescence sets in and
consciousness returns.

As a rule the patient, on return to consciousness, knows nothing of what
he has gone through, and has no reminiscences of the immediate past.

Sometimes cramps in the masticatory muscles have been observed, which
explains the grinding of teeth apparent in some instances. Convulsions
in the limbs and facial muscles sometimes appear, but most of these
disturbances are of short duration.

_Urinary and Sexual Organs_:--

With high fever albumen appears in the urine. In some instances it may
lead to inflammation of the kidneys, the symptoms of which may at times
completely overshadow the symptoms of typhus. Fortunately this
complication is very rare. Catarrh of the bladder occurs, because the
patient retains the urine too long, while in a state of unconsciousness.
Inflammation of the testicles has been observed with male patients, and
pregnant women have miscarried or given birth prematurely.

_Bones and Joints_:--

Inflammation of the joints is infrequent and in a few cases only,
inflammation of the periosteum has been observed.

_Skin_:--

At the beginning of the second week small rose-like spots of a light
rose colour appear on the buttocks (roseola typhosa), which later on
are also found on the upper legs, upper arms and back. They soon
disappear, however, and leave no traces.

Pustular eczema is so rare in cases of typhus, that as a rule its
appearance is taken to indicate that the disease is not a case of
abdominal typhus. Frequently, however, urticaria, (nettle-rash)
perspiration and other pustules are to be noticed.

The great variety of symptoms indicates that innumerable peculiarities
may occur in the course of typhus. In some cases it is so light and
indistinct (walking typhoid) that it is extremely difficult to diagnose
it. In other cases pneumonia or unconsciousness, headache or stiff neck
are indicated so overwhelmingly, that it is well-nigh impossible to
recognize the underlying illness as typhus. In such cases one speaks of
lung and brain typhus.

_Recurrence_:--

In about 10% of all cases recurrence is observed, mostly caused through
mistakes in diet, leaving bed too soon, and excitement. Usually in such
relapses the fever takes the same course as the original attack, but is
much less intense. Although such secondary attacks are not very
dangerous as a rule, great caution should be observed, especially in
regard to diet, which must be followed in the strictest way until all
danger has passed.

Complications and Subsequent Troubles:--are very frequent and a serious
menace to life.

The most important are hemorrhage of the brain, meningitis, erysipelas,
gangrene of the skin and bones, wasting of the muscles, fibrinous
pneumonia; pericarditis, and frequently weakness of the heart with its
consequences.

Purulent inflammation of the middle ear is one which deserves special
attention.

Loss of hair is a frequent occurrence during convalescence, owing to the
ill-nourished condition of the skin; this, however, is but a temporary
feature soon succeeded by renewed growth.

_The prognosis_ or forecast of typhus is not altogether bad,
notwithstanding the gravity of its symptoms and the dangers of its
course.

Statistics show that the mortality from typhus does not exceed 7% but
each complication makes the result more uncertain and the outlook less
hopeful. In the event of perforation of the intestines and severe
internal hemorrhage supervening, the chances of saving life are slender.


_D. Treatment._

The treatment of typhus requires, in the first place, a correct judgment
of the physical condition of the patient in determining the fever
treatment to be applied. Success in severe cases of typhus will only be
secured by those who understand the correct methods of treating the
skin. Robust patients, with reserve energy and resisting power, may
receive the unrelaxing application of repeated whole packs or cool full
baths. There is, however, a species of endurance, which may prove unable
to endure the sustained and active force of these applications. In such
cases milder applications and more frequent changes are recommended.
Packs, interchanged with baths, clysters or enemas which subdue fever,
alternated with ablutions, and similar methods.

Extremely stout and nervous patients must be treated with the greatest
caution.

As typhus cases gradually develop, care must be exercised to prevent too
violent treatment in case of serious complications. In fact the
physician must not be guided by fixed rules, but must be able to
individualize with prompt discretion.

During the severest stage the diet must be absolutely a fever diet,
prescribed in Form II, while patients suffering from lighter attacks,
and convalescents, may be permitted the milder fever diet, given in Form
III.

_Mental Condition._ Great care and observation is necessary with regard
to the patient's mental state. The observance of a quiet demeanour on
the part of everyone about the sick room should help to keep the patient
quiet and undisturbed and may serve to preserve his consciousness.

I have treated very severe cases of typhus, with extremely high fever,
during which, however, consciousness remained. Inexorable strictness in
this respect is often resented and misunderstood by those surrounding
the patient until they realize the far-reaching importance of the orders
by comparison with other cases.

Cold ablutions on the affected parts, air and water cushions, must be
employed early enough to avert any danger of bed-sores.

This strict treatment of the patient--physically and mentally, will in
most cases be sufficient to render his condition endurable; otherwise
the struggle against the irritation of complications becomes intense,
rendering it imperative, in the first degree, that the brain symptoms
should be carefully watched.

Cold compresses on the head must be used in case such symptoms appear,
but absolute undisturbed rest will conduce more than anything else to
their infrequent occurrence.

Collapse must be contended against with light stimulating food (light
bouillon of veal or chicken with a little condensed substance). Wine
with alcohol might endanger the life of the patient. If the collapse is
protracted, constituting a menace to life, the addition of cold water to
the lukewarm bath and similar procedure may be tried, but only by a
skilled expert.

Diarrhoea must be resisted by means of diet and clysters (enemas) with
rice-water, if necessary; the enemas must be given _cautiously_. They
are dangerous on account of possible violations and consequently rupture
of the ulcerated intestines. These and other points, however, such as
threatening paralysis etc., are entirely in the hands of the physician.

The contest against all the complications of typhus must be directed by
absolutely skilled and experienced persons only, since in this disease
particularly every mistake of any importance whatsoever, may cost the
life of the patient.

Besides this specific form of typhus which commands general attention,
the others are of merely theoretical interest. One, however, I wish to
mention in passing; namely:


_E. Relapsing Fever (Typhus Recurrens)._

This also begins with chills and shivering, and a general tired feeling,
and is immediately followed by high fever, up to a temperature of 104°.
The skin is covered with excretory perspiration. The brain symptoms are
lacking. The illness reaches its climax very quickly; but suddenly the
patient feels much better, after extremely free perspiration. He
continues remarkably well for about a week, when a new attack of the
illness, a relapse, occurs. There are frequently from three to four
relapses of this kind, which severely tax the strength of the patient.

The number and the intensity of these relapses determines the degree of
the illness.

The treatment is regulated in accordance with the principles to be
applied in abdominal typhus. The relapses may be averted or at any rate
reduced to a great degree, by strict observance of the methods herein
prescribed, especially in regard to diet.


_F. Diet in Cases of Typhus._

Typhus abdominalis is a form of disease which requires the most careful
dietetic treatment, since it combines high fever, which lasts for
several weeks, with a severe ulcerous process in the small and large
intestines.

Nutrition is seriously hampered by the long duration of the illness,
usually considerable lack of appetite and the absolute necessity of
nursing the ulcerous intestines in the most studiously careful way.

In cases which develop to the highest degree, it naturally follows that
the patient wastes away to a great extent.

_In the first place, all solid food must be strictly avoided. Too great
stress cannot be laid on this point_, since the patient, especially in
lighter cases, frequently shows a strong desire for food--especially
fruit.

Any lack of firmness and caution in this respect may have the most
disastrous consequences. Many a patient suffering from typhus has lost
his life or experienced a bad relapse and hemorrhages of the intestines
through a mistake in diet,--through taking too much or unsuitable food.

The most critical period for the liability to hemorrhage, which in some
cases is very profuse, is the third, and in lighter cases, the second
week, when the crust of the intestinal ulcers begins to scale off.

The diet list, as in cases of typhus, consists of Form II, and milk;
and it should be made a rule to confine it strictly to the most simple
food, bouillon, mucilaginous soups, milk, undiluted or with tea,
everything prepared with a little egg. Cream will sometimes agree with
the patient.

The stools will indicate the digestion or otherwise of the milk. If
there are many morsels of casein apparent in the same, the quantity of
milk must be reduced and given in diluted form. The use of meat juice,
liquid or frozen, and meat jelly, is quite permissible. Although neither
of these preparations are very strong, they must be considered as
important building-stones for the nourishment of the patient, and they
offer a little variety, which is often most desirable.

_Drinks._ For drinking, usually fresh water is used, also bread and
albumen water, especially Dechmann's Plasmogen, 15 grains in one pint of
water, a mouthful from time to time alternating with Dechmann's Tonogen.

Great caution must be used in regard to fruit juices and lemonade on
account of the danger of irritation of the intestines.

Carbonated and other mineral waters must be strictly avoided, since they
only add to the usually prevailing meteorism, or gas in the abdominal
cavity.

Albumen water, which is occasionally used in case of febrile disease and
intestinal catarrh of children, is prepared by mixing the white of an
egg and two to four spoonfuls of sugar in a tumbler of water. This is
strained and cooled before being used. It is easily understood that by
this we generate new life in the patient, so to speak, through the
albumen, since it contains a large quantity of tissue building
material, which in turn prevents catabolism or destruction of the
organism, this as contrasted with the methods of the old regime which
dooms the patient to certain death by opiates,--a course frequently
resorted to by inexperienced practitioners.

If, by attention and care, the treatment has succeeded in strengthening
the energy of the resisting organism to a certain degree during the
fever, it becomes necessary in due course to regulate the desire for
food, which sometimes grows and asserts itself in a rapid and energetic
manner, while the fever is receding.

The cessation of fever by no means indicates that the ulcers are
completely healed, and any mistake as to quantity and quality of food
may cause a relapse. Liquid diet must, therefore, be given exclusively
for at least, another eight days after the fever has ceased. After this,
from week to week, gradually, the use of Form III, may be employed and
thereafter more solid food, as given anon, under Form IV.

_These cautions must be strictly heeded, especially in case of typhus
recurrens._

If in the course of typhus severe complications, such as hemorrhage of
the intestines or perforation thereof, should supervene, nourishment
must immediately be reduced to a minimum. In such instances it is best
to confine the diet to mucilaginous soup and to forbid everything else,
as long as hemorrhages have not ceased, or the other dangerous
peritonitic symptoms have not disappeared. Gradually, Form V and lastly,
Form VI, may be followed.


_Form IV. Diet of the lightest kind, containing meat, but only in
scraped or shredded form._ Noodle soup, rice soup.

    Mashed boiled brains or sweetbread, or puree of white or red
    roasted meat, in soup.

    Brains and sweetbread boiled.

    Raw scraped meat (beef, ham, etc.)

    Lean veal sausages, boiled.

    Mashed potatoes prepared with milk.

    Rice with bouillon or with milk.

    Toasted rolls and toast.


_Form V. Light diet, containing meat in more solid form_.

    Pigeon, chicken boiled.

    Small fish, with little oil, such as brook or lake trout, boiled.

    Scraped beefsteak, raw ham, boiled tongue.

    As delicacies: small quantities of caviar, frogs' legs, oysters,
    sardelle softened in milk.

    Potatoes mashed and salted, spinach, young peas mashed, cauliflower,
    asparagues tips, mashed chestnuts, mashed turnips, fruit sauces.

    Groat or sago puddings.

    Rolls, white bread.


_Form VI. Somewhat heavier meat diet. (Gradually returning to ordinary
food.)_

    Pigeon, chicken, young deer-meat, hare, everything roasted.

    Beef tenderloin, tender roast beef, roast veal.

    Boiled pike or carp.

    Young turnips.

All dishes to be prepared with very little fat, butter to be used
exclusively. All strong spices to be avoided. Regarding drinks to be
taken with these forms of diet, as a rule good drinking water takes the
first place. This is allowed under all circumstances. Still less
irritating are weak decoctions of cereals, such as barley and rice
water. Other light nutritive non-irritating drinks are bread water and
albumen water.

Only natural waters, such as Vichy, Apollinaris with half milk or the
like are to be used. Drinks containing fruit acid, like lemonade and
fruit juices, are somewhat stimulating; however, in a general way, they
may be given during fever, but not in typhus.

Of alcoholic drinks the best is light wine (bordeaux), first diluted and
later in its natural state. As a rule it should not be used before Form
IV has been followed and Form V commenced. Occasionally, mild white wine
or well fermented beer, may be permitted. Coffee is absolutely forbidden
during any of the foregoing forms of diet, but light teas with milk are
allowed in most cases.

The main point in the different forms of diet as enumerated herein is to
be found in the mechanical gradation of the substances in accordance
with the progressive condition of the patient.

The diet in a certain individual case of the kind will not, however,
always be necessarily identical with one or any of the foregoing forms,
but must depend upon the individual condition.

In the first place, under each form there are easily discernible
gradations, according to relative points of view which are all familiar
to the physician and to which attention must be paid under similar
circumstances. On the other hand, very often one of the items of a later
form may be allowed while, in general, one of the previous forms is
applied. Thus the transition from Form II to the first items of Form
III is hardly perceptible.

Of course every form comprises all previous ones, so that each
consecutive form affords a greater range than the last.

Occasionally other points than those I have mentioned may have to be
taken into consideration. It is obviously impossible as the reader will
observe, to formulate an absolutely uniform scheme applicable to every
case.

Next to the description and quality of food, the quantity to be
introduced into the stomach at one time, is a matter of the utmost vital
importance.


DECH-MANNA-COMPOSITIONS.

(Only main compositions, specialities to Doctor's order.)

In all forms of Typhoid fever: =Neurogen=, =Plasmogen=, =Tonogen=,
Eubiogen.

_Physical: Partial Packs._


SO-CALLED "NEGATIVE CHILDREN'S DISEASE".

In strong contrast to the conditions of "positive" disease amongst
children, due, as I have explained, to over-vitality and too rapid
vibrations, we have to consider the opposite condition of Negative
disease, comprising all physical disturbances wherein cold negative
electrical forces and reduced vibrations produce unhealthy action of the
mucous membranes, resulting in degeneration of the tissues known as
Catarrh in various forms. Bronchitis, Grippe, Influenza and light
catarrhal inflammation of the respective organs. One of the most serious
in this chapter is summer-complaint (Cholera infantum). This disease,
which causes the death of so many, is due to the bringing up of infants
on artificial food instead of on the mother's breast. It is one of the
negative diseases caused by diminished vitality. The disease is similar
to Asiatic cholera. An extensive description of the same is given in
Chapter XI A of my book, "Regeneration or Dare To Be Healthy." Frequent
vomiting and diarrhoea, with rapid collapse of all vitality, and severe
brain disturbances manifest themselves, and death frequently occurs
after 36 hours. During hot weather bacterial germs impregnating the air,
frequently enter the milk, and many children succumb to the disease at
the same time, until wind and rain improve the general conditions. This
is the explanation of the occasional epidemic appearance of Cholera
Infantum--and its established cause.

_Therapy._

_Diet_: The mother's breast or the breast of a healthy wet nurse is the
very best remedy for this complaint, if applied at an early stage. If
this is impossible, a gruel of barley, oats or mucilaginous rice-water,
a decoction of salep (1 teaspoonful to 1 pint of water), or rice water
(1 teaspoonful of crushed toasted rice to 1/2 pint water) are
recommended. The missing nutritive substance is best supplied by
calcareous earth (calcium carbonate), giving 1/4 teaspoonful in a
tablespoonful of sweetened water every 3 to 4 hours, for a day or two.
It is the simplest, yet most wonderful remedy ever discovered. It is in
cases like this that physiological chemistry celebrates its victory. Try
it and you will be convinced. For more vigorous means the physician must
be consulted, as he should be in any case of this kind, and that as
quickly as possible.

_Physical_: Sponging the entire body of the child with lukewarm vinegar
and water, using one-half vinegar and one-half water, may prove very
successful. Warm packs around the abdomen and extending down to the
soles of the feet, often prove very effective. The abdomen must be kept
warm. The employment of coloured light for curative purposes has been
already explained in the preceding pages. The use of _blue_ curtains is,
accordingly enjoined here on account of the invigorating influence of
the more violent vibrations of _blue light_ upon an organism suffering
under the reduced vibration of a "negative disease."


=The Contagious Character of Children's Diseases.=

In strict adherence to the biological standpoint, it is recommended that
a child be separated from the other children in the house as soon as it
becomes ill, and if it is not convenient to send the other children away
to be taken care of by friends, they must at least be excluded from the
sick-chamber. _Each one of these diseases develops some sort of bacillus
in its first appearance, and this leaves the body and may fall on
receptive soil in the body of another child._ Since all the children in
one family live in the same environment and receive practically the same
nourishment, and are of the same parentage, the presumption prevails
that each one of them is equally susceptible to the disease with which
one of the children has been affected. It is, therefore, advisable to
adopt preventive and protective measures with them all, by applying
abdominal packs and giving them Dechmann's Plasmogen, which will
strengthen the white corpuscles of the blood in their fight against
possibly intruding bacilli; also Dechmann's Tonogen, in order to give
the red corpuscles and the heart the power to endure the greater efforts
which the demand for increased vitality will necessitate. The
application of these measures will in many cases entirely prevent an
impending attack of the disease, and if not, will at least make it
easier to control.

_The golden rule_: Keep the head cool, the feet warm and the bowels
open; that is the golden rule to be followed in the treatment of all
children's diseases. All means that are applied must have but the one
object, that of making the condition of the blood as good as possible,
so that it will maintain a fluid form and circulate readily, richly
supplied with all the necessary upbuilding substances. This, and not the
use of anti-toxins, will guarantee a speedy return to normal conditions.

_Diet_: The importance of the diet in all of these diseases has been
indicated on several occasions. Its application is treated extensively
under the fever diet; exceptions to be determined by the physician.

_Dech-manna-Compositions_: The compositions to be used in case of
children's diseases will, as indicated above, consist mainly of
Plasmogen and Tonogen. Small doses of Eubiogen will be of great
advantage in promoting the general condition of the patient. These three
compositions should always be available in a family where there are
children, as their application will prove very beneficial in any case,
even before the arrival of the physician.

_Physical_: The correct application of ablutions of vinegar and water,
of partial and other packs and various baths, must be left to the
prescription of the physician, depending on the nature of the individual
case, and the effect on the patient, with the exception of the abdominal
pack. This should always be applied immediately: cold in positive, and
warm in negative diseases.


THE TONSURE OF THE TONSILS.

Though not strictly within the scope of my intention in the present
booklet, I feel that no treatise, however brief, which purports to be a
free and candid expression of the ills that child-life is heir to, could
afford to ignore the burning and much debated question of the tonsils
and their significance, present and future, to the well-being of the
child, or could deem the task accomplished without raising a warning and
protesting voice on behalf of the helpless victims, whose recurrent name
is legion, against the callous and persistent violation and destruction
of the functions of vital organs, the only shadow of justification of
which is, on the one hand, a fashionable popular delusion on the part of
parents and, on the other, interested complacency on the part of their
medical advisers, accentuated by a strong and dangerous tendency towards
operation and empiric surgery generally.

This is a strong and sweeping indictment, perhaps. Let us therefore
pause for a moment whilst we consult other sources of opinion for
confirmation or refutal.

And, in the wide range of American and English criteria, what
corroboration do we find? We find, as regards America, the venerable
Professor Alexander H. Stevens, M.D., a member of the New York College
of Physicians, writing as follows:

     "The reason medicine has advanced so slowly is because physicians
     have studied the writings of their predecessors instead of nature."

From England the verdict comes to this effect:

Professor Evans, Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons,
of London, says, in part:

     "The Medical Practice of our day is, at the best, a most uncertain
     and unsatisfactory system: it has neither philosophy nor common
     sense to recommend it to confidence."

If such opinions prevail _within_ the sacred, State-protected precincts
of the profession, how long, revolted confidence exclaims--how long
before a credulous, deluded public awakens from its deep hypnotic
trance.

Against Tonsil destruction three arguments stand:

(1) That the primal intention of Universal Mind--(sometimes termed the
Soul of Being; the Spirit of All Good or, in simple reverence,
"God")--was obviously no malign intention, but an intention for _good_,
is an axiom which will be rationally accepted, I presume, as logically
and conclusively assured.

(2) That the functions of the tonsils are, in the present state of
medical knowledge, practically still unknown is the deliberate and final
statement made within the past few years by one of the greatest reputed
authorities on the subject.

(3) That the tonsil has some important mission to fulfill is clearly
demonstrated by the fact of its frequent recrudescence, or rather, the
natural renewal of the organ after surgical removal--a spontaneous
physiological organic mutiny, as it were, supported by its lymphatic
glandular dependents, against the reckless ignorance of medical
practitioners and the perversity of the medico-cum-parental fashion of
the day.

For the fact that it is a fashion, and nothing more, is unhappily fully
established on ample and high authority within the medical prescriptive
pale. And, in fact, even as "The Tonsure" or shaving of the crown,
became by fashion and mendicity a feature of priesthood and monastic
piety, so has the slaughter of the Tonsils come to be regarded by
fashion and mendacity as a feature of childhood and medical expediency
and ineptitude.

Professor John D. Mackenzie, M.D., of Baltimore, a distinguished leader
of the advanced school of medical science, in the course of a brilliant
and exhaustive treatise on the subject written as he says, reluctantly,
in the interest of the public health and safety, quotes the deliberate
opinion of an equally eminent medical friend to the effect that:

     "Of all the surgical insanities within his recollection this
     onslaught on the tonsils was the worst--not excepting the operation
     on the appendix."

Dr. Mackenzie then proceeds to show how abysmal has been the ignorance
of the functions of these organs from the earliest times, (including a
distinguished English medical luminary who went to far as to say: "were
I attempting the artificial construction of a man I would leave out the
tonsils,") adding that the tonsil was regarded as a useless appendage
and "like its little neighbour, the uvula, was sacrificed on every
possible pretext or when the surgeon did not know what else to do."

"Never," he says, "in the history of medicine has the lust for operation
on the tonsils been as passionate as it is at the present time. It is
not simply a surgical thirst, it is a mania, a madness, an obsession. It
has infected not only the general profession, but also the laity." In
proof of this he adds: "A leading laryngologist in one of the largest
cities came to me with the humiliating confession that although holding
views hostile to such operations he had been forced to perform
tonsillectomy in every case in order to satisfy the popular craze and to
save his practice from destruction." He cites an instance in which a
mother brought her little six-year-old daughter to him, "to know whether
her tonsils ought to come out;"--and in answer to the assurance: "your
baby is perfectly well, why do you want her tonsils out?" the fond
mother's reply was: "Because she sometimes wets the bed!"

Recent universal inspection of the throats of school children has
revealed the fact that nearly all children at some time of life have
more or less enlarged tonsils. And the reports maintain that this, for
the most part, is harmless if not actually physiologic--natural--and
that their removal in these cases is not only unnecessary but injurious
to the proper development of the child.

Nevertheless, the reports of the special hospitals for diseases of the
nose and throat show to what an appalling extent this destructive
operation is perpetrated throughout the land.

"Much wild and incontinent talk," Dr. Mackenzie continues, "for which
their teachers are sometimes largely to blame, has poisoned the minds of
the younger generation of operators and thrown the public into hysteria.
They are told that with the disappearance of the tonsils in man, certain
diseases will cease to exist and parents nowadays bring their perfectly
sound children for tonsil removal in order to head off these affections.
Summing up the writer demonstrates that the functions of the tonsils
are, at present unknown and that until known nothing authoritative can
be said definitely on the subject, whether they be portals for the
entrance of disease or the exit for the very purpose of germs of
infection; common sense must decide;--whether they protect the organism
from danger or invite the presence of disease."

I, for my own part, am of Dr. Mackenzie's opinion: that there is an
endless flow of lymph from their interior to the free surface, which
unchecked, _prevents the entrance of germs from the surface and washes
out impurities from within_. That in any case, one of the functions
undoubtedly is the production of leucocytes or protective white blood
corpuscles and that the tonsil is not, as generally understood, a
lymphatic gland; that the general ignorance of this fact has led to the
useless sacrifice of thousands of tonsils, on the fallacious assumption
that their functional activities may be vicariously undertaken by other
lymphatic glands; and finally, that the physiologic integrity of the
tonsil is of the utmost importance in infant and child life.

The consensus of advanced scientific opinion is now to the effect that
the activity of the tonsils as possible accessories of disease has been
vastly exaggerated, that like the thousand and one successive
misleading theories which in turn, from time to time, have seized upon
the imagination and obsessed the minds of the medical fraternity for
brief and passing periods, this pernicious craze too, has about run its
course. The causes from which this peculiar lust for operation emanates
would be perhaps a difficult psychological puzzle to determine; the
malign impulse, as regards some special function, seems to spring, as it
were, by intuition, unbidden into being from the illusive depths of some
perverted intellect, to rage for a while through the medical world with
a death roll deadly as the plague and as suddenly to pass into desuetude
and disappear behind the impregnable ramparts of "prescriptive right"
and "privilege"--terms which in plain parlance mean to the masses in
cold actual fact, the absolute negation of all right--the domination of
arbitrary, irresponsible and State protected wrong.

Between facts and fables, the evidence with regard to the tonsils and
their functions seems to establish the conclusion that they have been
wrongfully and foolishly held responsible for "an iliad of ills." The
region of the nose and mouth is obviously the happy hunting-ground of
myriads of pathogenic bacteria. It is likewise continually the scene of
innumerable surgical operations, performed necessarily without
antiseptic precautions, thus extending the area of possible infection
indefinitely to the entire upper air tract which medical incompetence so
often fails to explore. And indeed, as Dr. Mackenzie freely remarks: "Of
far graver, far-reaching and deeper significance are cases of infection
in which life has doubtless been sacrificed by clinging to the lazy and
stupefying delusion that the tonsil is the sole portal of poisoning."

The mere size of the tonsil, it is shown, is no indication for removal
except it be large enough or diseased enough to interfere with
respiration, speech or deglutition--that is, swallowing; in which case
only a sufficient portion should be taken away, and that without delay.
The tonsil may be greatly enlarged or buried deeply in the palatine
arcade and yet not interfere with the well-being of the individual. Such
tonsils are the special prey of the tonsillectomist. If they are not
interrupting function they are best left alone. Moreover, it
occasionally happens that the resurrection of a "buried" tonsil is
followed shortly by the _burial of the patient_.

The practical illuminating lesson to be gleamed is this: That if in
infancy and childhood, we pay more attention to the neglected nasal
cavities and to the hygiene of the mouth and teeth, we will have less
tonsil disease and fewer tonsil operations.

"The partial enucleation of the tonsil," the writer asserts, "with even
the removal of its capsule if desired, is complete enough for all
necessary purposes and practically free from danger; moreover, it
produces equal or better results than complete enucleation with its many
accidents and complications, to say nothing of its long roll of
_unrecorded death_."

Another point: From the professional vocalist's point of view. The
tonsils are phonatory or vocal organs and play an important part in the
mechanism of speech and song. They influence the surrounding muscles and
modify the resonance of the mouth. Enlarged by disease, they may cripple
these functions and if so, their removal may increase the compass of
the voice by one or more octaves; but it is a capital operation and a
dangerous one in which a fatal result is by no means a remote
possibility.

The object of this interesting paper, it is pointed out, is not to
assail operation for definite and legitimate cause, but to warn against
the "busy internist"--the hospital surgeon--too busy for careful
differential diagnosis--and his "accommodating tonsillectomist" who is
"in the business for revenue only." But the onus for the existing
deplorable state of affairs he lays frankly upon the shoulders of the
teachers and insists that the cure of the evil is largely educational.
"When," says he, "_pre-eminent authority proclaims in lecture and text
book as indisputable truth the relationship between a host of diseases
and the tonsils of the child and advises the removal of the glands as a
routine method of procedure, what can we expect of the student whose
mind is thus poisoned at the very fountainhead of his medical education
by ephemeral theory that masquerades so cheerily in the garb of
indestructible fact_?" "How," he exclaims, "are we to offset the
irresponsibility of the responsible?" But we hear on all sides--"Look at
the results." Results? Here is a partial list from the practice--not of
the ignorant, but of the most experienced and skilled: Death from
hemorrhage and shock, development of latent tuberculosis, laceration and
other serious injuries of the palate and pharyngeal muscles, great
contraction of the parts, removal of one barrier of infection, severe
infection of wound, septicemia, or bacterial infection, troublesome
cicatrices, suppurative otitis media and other ear affections, troubles
of voice and vision, ruin of singing voice, emphysemia, or destruction
of the tissues, septic infarct,--infected arterial obstruction,
pneumonia, increased susceptibility to throat disease, pharyngeal quinsy
and last, but not least tonsillitis!

The trenchant and tragic article concludes with the expression of the
hope that the day is not far distant when not only the profession but
the public shall demand that this senseless slaughter be stopped. "Is
not this day of medical and moral preaching and uplifting," it is asked,
"a fitting one in which to lift the public out of the atmosphere into
which it has been drugged, and as to the reckless tonsillectomist, a
proper time to apply the remedy of the _referendum_ and _recall_. It has
come to a point when it is not only a burning question to the
profession, but also to the public. This senseless, ruthless destruction
of the tonsil is often so far reaching and enduring in its evil results
that it is becoming each day a greater menace to the public good."

  Such is the wisdom of these world-wide sages,
    They wildly yearn to learn its innermost
  And break the organ's wondrous works with sledges--
    Though music, its sweet soul, for aye is lost;
  That they have reached the goal, such is their dreaming,
    When tissues, nerves, and veins reveal their knife--
  When in the very core their steel is gleaming--
    But, one thing they forget--_and that is life_!

This matter of the functions of the tonsils is fully dealt with in my
greater work "Regeneration or Dare to be Healthy"--Chapters VII. and
VIII., in which I show on the best authority that _the tonsils have a
great mission to fulfill_--so great indeed that their treatment
according to the present methods of the medical faculty can, in my
estimation, only be stigmatized as the equivalent of a crime.

It is the conclusion arrived at scientifically by the greatest
authorities that the Tonsils secrete a very potent anti-toxic fluid
which is excreted whenever dangerous pathogenic bacilli attempt to enter
the pharynx or larynx, constituting in fact the ever watchful sentinels
of the oral and nasal portals through which an entrance into the human
organism might be surprised by its ever active surreptitious
enemies--the bacteria of infection and disease.


PRE-NATAL CARE.

It would be improper to close this section, touching child-life, without
some special reference to pre-natal care. It has been well said by
eminent authorities that a child's "_education should begin long before
its birth_." This to many may seem mysterious or even foolish, according
to their advancement on the plane of knowledge. But America has long ago
awakened to the truth of it, and pre-natal clinics have been established
on a large scale--notably in New York--for the scientific supervision
and comfort of expectant mothers who may need it. The natural right of
every child to be born in health and happiness, is at length recognized.

Human magnetism, or nerve force, is beginning to be understood and
utilized as a great vital, health-compelling, harmonizing factor of vast
significance to the future of the race.

The real and practical alliance between the physical and the
psychic--between body and mind--is better realized; as for instance: You
may be seized with _an idea_, or a passion, and it disturbs your _health
of body_; you may take indigestible food, or suffer injury or fatigue,
and it disturbs your _health of mind_.

But beyond and behind all else are all those seemingly occult and
sinister, pre-natal influences centered in hereditary and kindred
considerations which are still more significant and difficult to locate
and overcome.

These problems have been thought out and solved long before the dawn of
the present social awakening and the conclusions have been tabulated in
the closest detail from the first moment of embryonic life, faithfully
defining the paths that inevitably lead to the desired goal of Hygienic
Birth, of Physical Perfection and the Mental State termed Happiness, in
Infancy.

All these things will be found minutely focussed in picturesque relief,
in my previous work entitled: "Within the Bud."


ENDEMIC AND EPIDEMIC DISEASE.

Among the most deadly menaces that beset human life upon this planet are
those forms of disease classed under the head of so-called Endemic and
Epidemic disease and including in its baleful limits Yellow fever,
Cholera, Pellagra--otherwise known as Hook-worm, Plague and so-called
Spanish Influenza.

Based upon Physiological Chemistry and explained from the Biological
standpoint, the explanation of these covers a wide scientific area and
geographically treated embraces the globe.

The various problems of their cause and prevention have exercised the
mind of science and research to an enormous degree and heavy premiums
have been placed upon their solution, with more or less success and much
expenditure has been incurred in the examination of local conditions.

As far as this Continent is concerned, perhaps the most troublesome has
been Climatic Fever which varies greatly in form and intensity according
to temperature and location.

"Yellow Fever," as it is named, has swept some Southern localities from
time to time, but Science, Sanitation and Hygiene have curbed its
virulence and spread, as in the case of outbreaks of epidemics such as
small-pox--for the control of which, by the way, the advocates of the
vile and pernicious practice of vaccination, fraudulently claim the
credit, even in these advancing times, when the wiles of self interest
are disclosed, the worship of the "Putrid Calf" exposed and the days of
the vaccine vendor numbered.

Yellow Fever occurs on the Coast of tropical countries and, as a rule,
is fatal, after a rapid development of from 3 to 7 days.

The explanation of the cause of the disease is comparatively simple: The
air on the hot coast lands is highly charged with evaporated water. Heat
and humidity have the effect of diverting from the human organism the
electricity which, as already shown, constitutes its vital cohesion and
the same influences likewise reduce the oxygen in the atmosphere. These
are the two primary causes of Yellow Fever.

Pellagra (hook-worm or Lombardy Leprosy) is, according to the tenets of
the Regular School, an endemic skin and spinal disease of Southern
Europe. It is said to be due to eating damaged corn but dependent also
upon bad hygienic conditions, poor food and exposure to the sun. Its
salient features are weakness, debility, digestive disturbance, spinal
pain, convulsions, melancholia and idiocy.

More recent investigation has judged it to be a deficiency disease, due
to low and unvaried diet and consequent failure of metabolism.

In every case these climatic disease forms are caused by a combination
of hot air, lacking oxygen, and evaporated water, including Cholera
which also varies in intensity according to heat conditions.

Cholera and Plague originate on the coast of Bengal, India, where
conditions are bad enough of themselves without the apology of the
illusive bacillus as a causative agent.

That Cholera is contagious cannot be doubted and it is no superstition
that fear predisposes thereto. For all emotions consume electrical power
in the body and thus break down its power of resistance.

Infantile paralysis, Typhoid-fever, Small-pox, etc., are dealt with
elsewhere and therefore need no mention here.

It is impossible to deal adequately with so wide a subject within the
narrow limits at my disposal; but the full details and environment of
each, together with the respective methods of treatment will be found in
detail in the parent work "Regeneration or Dare to be Healthy."


THE SPANISH INFLUENZA.

In any attempt to unravel the tangled skein of cause and circumstance
which surrounds the subject of the world-sweeping pandemic which
masquerades under the misleading title of the "Spanish Influenza," the
first and most important initial step must be a keen and careful sifting
of the facts and forces, natural and artificial, which control or
dominate the situation.

The debatable questions appear to be chiefly the following:

     (1) The fundamental causes that underlie the great-epidemics or
     pandemics that the world experiences from time to time--the present
     one in particular.

     (2) The fact or fallacy of the germ as a causative factor or merely
     an effect or product of disease conditions.

     (3) The alternative course, origin and medium of transmission and
     finally

     (4) The soundness and efficiency or otherwise of the preventive and
     curative measures with which the combined intelligence of the
     Medical Faculty has risen to the dire emergency of the moment for
     the protection of the people who have relied so confidently, as by
     law compelled, upon the standard of their acumen and official aid
     as competent guardians of public safety.

The findings, as to the first question, are to the effect that it
appears, from the earliest recorded annals of disease, that epidemics
corresponding to the present outbreak have occurred at irregular periods
all up the centuries under names and conditions peculiar to the times,
and following usually in the wake of some great social cataclysm, strain
or upheaval, the result of wars, persecutions, famines and
distress--causes which clearly illustrate the close reactive connection
between the mental and physical action of disease.

The great pandemics seem to have originated largely in the Orient--the
region of vast congested populations and racial struggles and
starvation--the advent of their apparent influence upon the western
world depending chiefly upon the rate of commercial or popular
intercourse, the movements of armies or the ingress or egress of
peoples. The logical establishment of direct proof of the connection
between these visitations and local epidemics in distant lands is a
problem as yet unsolved. The weight of evidence, at first sight, would
seem to lie rather in the other direction--to indicate that such
epidemics are the direct outcome of existing local conditions, mental
and physical.

For example: At the end of that strenuous period in England's history,
between the reign of the first Charles and the fall of the Commonwealth,
an epidemic broke out which, as the historian tells us, converted the
country into "one vast hospital." The malady--which by the way was fatal
to Cromwell--the Lord Protector himself--was then termed "the ague." The
term "Influenza" was first given to the epidemic of 1743 in accordance
with the Italianizing fashion of the day, but was eventually superseded
by the French expression "La Grippe," usually held to represent a more
modified form of the disease which appears to vary in intensity and
virulence according lo its provocation and derivation.

The old school hypothesis and the deductions therefrom would seem
therefore, to be this: That a super-malignant contagium imported from
some foreign source falls upon organisms predisposed to infection by
mental stress or physical privation and over-strain or both combined;
and the contagion thus generated through the medium of some unsuspected
"carrier" seizes upon and sweeps through that portion of the community
so predisposed, in the form of a great, general epidemic with a maximum
of mortality. At later intervals the same repeats itself with less violence
and reduced mortality, because a great proportion,--representing the
sufferers in the original epidemic,--being now thereby immune, the onus
falls upon that section of the younger generation unprotected by individual
resistant force who consequently become the chief sufferers--as in the case
of the present epidemic, the pandemic form of which is obviously due to the
fact that equal conditions of unrest, privation and distress prevail
universally throughout the entire nerve plains of the Planet.

The first recorded outbreak in America occurred in the year 1647,
followed by a second in 1655 and again in 1789 and 1807. In these the
mortality appears to have been confined, after the first outbreak, to a
few mere modest thousands whereas in the present visitation a
conservative estimate places the figures of the horrible world-holocaust
at no less a sum than 18 _million lives_ in all.[D] The ravages in
America have been appalling including many of the medical profession.

We pass on then to the second item--the question of the germ.

The illusive germ has come to be regarded by the layman with
reserve--nay more--with suspicion. The part of the bacteriologist has
been somewhat overdone. The conditions of popular credence are not what
they were. A great change has awakened the masses of the people and a
new intelligence is born which now discerns that disease is one great
Unity just as the body is one inseparable interdependent whole--that
_the cause of disease is in the blood_ and dependent upon its
nourishment and moreover, that the _physical forces of the body can be
exhausted as much by mental strain,--causing the too rapid burning up of
nerve fat (lecithin),--as by excessive physical exertion_. For example.
Mental disturbance--grief, worry, excitement--produce immediate physical
effect in headache, palpitations and the like. Physical
exhaustion--privation, hunger and over-work--on the other hand produce
mental depression and collapse. The inevitable law of compensation
rules.

Thus the germ, bacillus, or microbe, as a direct _cause_ of disease is
an exploded fallacy. They are now recognized as the _result_ of
disease--_not the cause_: releasing irritants perhaps and possibly
carriers or transmitting mediums to other diseased or predisposed
organisms.

It follows accordingly that Sero-Therapy or Inoculation with specific
serums derived from such germs, as a preventative of disease is simply a
pernicious farce; "pernicious," since the introduction of such poisons
by inocculation into the blood constitutes in itself a serious menace to
life and health.

This has never been more clearly demonstrated than in the present
singularly futile efforts of the Regular Medical Faculty to stay the
on-rush of the Influenza Epidemic or to save or safeguard its victims--a
fact which compels the people in their thousands to turn to the less
pretentious but more successful members of the eclectic or Irregular
schools among whom both help and healing may be found.

And this is the history of the Influenza germ:

The bacterial criminal was located. We know it, for the discovery was
officially proclaimed and vouched for by the press with all due pomp and
circumstance. True, it was "so minute as to be _invisible to the most
powerful microscope_;"--but it was sensed by science, none the less, and
handed over captive, for "culture" to the _manufacturing chemist_.
Inoculation followed freely--the people in their thousands and our
gallant troops alike submitted to the mandate of the powers that be--the
soldiers voiceless and under penalty.

America breathless, awaited the result. There was none.

Finally scare-heads in the Press astonished the land. They were these:
"_Medical World is Baffled by the 'Flu'._"--"_Exhaustive Experiments
Leave Doctors Mystified._"--"_Every Test a Failure._"--"_Explosion of
Accepted Theories Causes Science to Grope for Light._"

It appears that, through the heroism of a _hundred_ of our naval men who
volunteered for the purpose at the risk of life, the Medical Authorities
in desperation were enabled to try every possible method of infection
with the alleged Influenza Germs, our boys submitting to inoculation and
even to the repulsive ordeal of introduction into the nose and throat of
diseased mucous from and close contact with coughing and spitting bed
patients in the severest forms of the disease. The experiments were made
simultaneously at San Francisco and Boston under the direction of
Surgeons McCoy and Goldberger of the U.S. Health Department and the
Naval Authorities.

The astounding negative result as indicated by the press, was described
as "The Sensation of the day," for the fact was revealed that _Not one,
of the hundred who underwent these drastic and determined tests,
developed any symptoms of Influenza._ This picture of failure was
surmounted by the summing up of the situation on the part of the highest
Medical Authority; to this effect:

"These new experiments in the transmission of Influenza," said Surgeon
General Blue, "show how difficult is the Influenza Problem."

The result points clearly to a state of natural immunity enjoyed by
those who, like these men of the Naval Service, lead an hygienic,
contented well regulated life with the simple accessories of good and
sufficient food, fresh air and regular exercise.

The same principle has been recently demonstrated in England in the same
connection by the annual report of one of the great public schools
celebrated for hygienic methods, where amongst a total of 800 students
not a single case of influenza appeared--although no preventive measures
were employed beyond the simple rules of health and cleanliness.

Finally, as regards serums and specifics, the judgment of Dr. Karl F.
Meyer, of the Hooper Institute of Medical Research of the University of
California, may be accepted as focusing the consensus of unbiased
opinion on the subject. It was as follows: "Serums have not yet been
introduced which produce immunity from Spanish Influenza. The serums now
employed are of no use whatsoever. You have no idea how really and truly
helpless we are. As an example, take the advice given us by the Public
Health Department when we asked what should be done if the epidemic
struck West. They said: '_Organise your hospitals and undertakers_.'" In
the same statement Dr. Meyer declared that the Medical fraternity _is in
total darkness as to the cause and nature of the epidemic_.

Of other preventive measures resorted to--Masks, Quarantine and the veto
upon public gatherings--proved equally mistaken and futile. Masks of a
texture calculated to baffle the most determined attempts of the minute
invisible homicide were made compulsory, and in the great cities
masquerading millions became a constant feature of the streets, until an
idea of the danger of masks, _as microbe preservers and carriers_,
dawned upon the official mind. Thus, beyond fostering fear and
depression amongst the citizens nothing was achieved in the direction
desired, but rather the reverse; since it is now very generally
recognized that such mental conditions with their consequently lowered
vitality are a common prelude to disease.

At the annual meeting of the American Public Health Association in
Chicago, following a two days' discussion of preventive measures against
Influenza and Pneumonia, Dr. Chas. J. Hastings, president of the
organization said: "A tremendous amount of damage is done by interfering
with nature, when nature would have done better had she been left alone.
We have very little power over pneumonia. I am convinced that as many
patients have been _killed_ by physicians as have been _cured_."

The talented "Health" editor of the Los Angeles Times, commenting upon
these matters, writes: "The handling of this epidemic by 'health boards'
and doctors who have been running around like wet chickens--their eyes,
however, fastened on the feed box--has furnished another striking
evidence of the futility of what is misnamed 'Medical Science.'"

All this carries one back 50 years to the memory of Sir John Forbes,
Court Physician to the late Queen Victoria of England, and the eminent
Editor of the British and Foreign Medical Review, who thus tersely
recorded the scientific conclusions arrived at in the course of his
long, professional experience, in connection with drugs, drug medication
and allopathy, under the title of "Why we should not be poisoned because
we are sick:" "Firstly,--that in a large proportion of cases treated by
allopathic physicians, the disease is cured by nature and not by them.
Secondly,--that in not a small proportion, the disease is cured by
nature in spite of them. Thirdly,--that consequently, in a considerable
proportion of diseases it would fare as well or better with patients if
all remedies, especially drugs, were abandoned;" and he emphatically
adds: "Things have come to such a pass that they must either mend or
end." This, be it remembered, was in 1868,--50 years ago--and such
frankness would not have been tolerated from other than "Sir John"--for,
as was said by an inspired American: "He who dares to see a truth not
recognized in creed must die the death." And now indeed is revealed the
wisdom of Shakespeare when he said: "Ignorance is the Curse of God;" or
of Bolinbroke's bitter assertion: "Plain truth will influence half a
score men at most in a nation or an age, while _mystery will lead
millions by the nose_."

I am not prepared to endorse the cynical saying of Voltaire: "Regimen is
superior to medicine--especially as from time immemorial out of every
hundred physicians ninety-eight are charlatans." But this much is
certain, that they have found the needs of nature too laborious--the
pathway of their leader--the Great Hippocrates--of Galen, Sydenham,
Boerhaave, too tame, and have listened to the lure of Paracelsus, and
adopted, with its high pontificial manner and medication, the more
luxurious empiricism of the medicasters of five centuries ago.

But the time has come when the reign of bigotry, drugs and mystery must
have an end--the chartered lien on human life must cease and the antique
secret consistories so long omnipotent, must be brought to the
enlightened level of the day.

We have come to the parting of the ways, where it becomes the bounden
duty of every earnest, fair-minded physician to cast off the manacles of
professional caste and secret obligation and to advance with open mind
across the wholesome confines of eternal truth. This as much in their
own interest as in that of their patients. For there is disaffection in
the once solid phalanx, and we find strictures such as these in the
standard works of the profession: "It cannot be denied that
practitioners in medicine stand too low in the scale of public
estimation and, something is rotten in the State of Denmark."

A series of articles appearing recently, in the English Review, from
the daring and masterly pen of George Bernard Shaw, deals with the
subject with an ungloved hand, taking as opportunity a vitriolic
controversy recently raging between exalted lights of the medical
profession in London, which raises abruptly the long-drawn curtain of
mystery and exposes the secret skeleton to the view of a wondering
world. Speaking of the absolute, autocratic powers of the medical
monopoly and the superstitious, hopeless complacency of the public, the
writer says: "The assumption is that the 'registered doctor' or surgeon
knows everything that is known, and can do everything that is to be
done. This means that the dogmas of omniscience, omnipotence and
infallibility, and something very like the theory of the apostolic
succession and kingship by anointment, have recovered in medicine the
grip they have lost in theology and politics. This would not matter if
the 'legally qualified doctor' was a _completely qualified healer_: but
this is not the case; far from it. Dissatisfaction with the orthodox
methods and technique is so widespread that the supply of technically
qualified _unregistered_ practitioners is insufficient for the
demand.... The reputation of the unregistered specialist is usually well
founded. _He must deliver the goods._ He cannot live by the faith of his
patients in a string of letters after his name."

From all sides the same dissatisfaction is told showing that, with the
sick and simple majority, what is termed "the attractive bed-side
manner" of the polished practitioner has vastly out-weighed--in the
past--the more vital advantage of superior skill on the part of
practitioners of the drugless and natural systems which are winning
their way to favour, in spite of the organized opposition of the
orthodox profession and the powerful "vested interests" of the
medicine-men.

To return to the subject proper: The summing up as to the efficacy of
inoculation, drugs, serums and specifics for Influenza may best be found
in the supplements to the U.S. Public Health reports, and vouched for by
Surgeon-General Rupert Blue and the Government experts:

"Since we are uncertain of the primary cause of Influenza, no form of
inoculation can be guaranteed to protect against the disease itself."
"No drug has as yet been proved to have any specific influence as a
_preventive_ of influenza.

"No drug has as yet been proved to have any specific _curative_ effect
on influenza--though many are useful in guiding its course and
mitigating _is symptoms_.

"In the uncertainty of our present knowledge considerable hesitation
must be felt in advising vaccine treatment as a curative measure.

"The chief dangers of influenza lie in its complications, and it is
probable that much may be done to mitigate the severity of the affection
and to diminish its mortality _by raising the resistance of the
body_...."

It is not my purpose in adducing these startling facts to impugn the
Allopathic system or to disparage the elder branch of the Profession of
Healing. They are simply assembled for the purpose of proving a case in
favour of the newer or Hygieo-Dietetic System.

But here in consecutive order of testimony is a truly terrible
denouncement--the testimony, as it were, of two hemispheres of the
terrestrial globe proclaiming the positive failure of the section of
science upon which, for very existence, their inhabitants have been
accustomed to rely!

Now Health and Disease are dependent upon degrees of positive and
negative vibrations, as is every form of life in the great Cosmic Unity
of the Universe. Both are tones with endless modulation, but the
integral fact, in either case, _is one_. Disease, then, is a Unit--a
degenerate function of the blood--and, such being the case, the failure
of any curative principle or system aspiring to remedy that degenerate
functioning, in any degree, is a failure of that principle or system as
a whole.

The sensational admission, therefore, of the chiefs of the Profession in
America and England, as herein cited, amounts in plain language to the
tacit admission that drugs and serums are powerless to produce any
"preventive influence" or any "curative" effect upon Influenza, (or as
it rationally and logically follows, upon any other disease) although,
as openly stated in this official proclamation, they may influence the
"symptoms."

But, finally--And here is the supreme announcement, wherein at length
the Truth comes out triumphant--"The severity of the disease may be
mitigated and its mortality diminished _by raising the resistance of the
body_."

This in one single sentence is the sum total of the teachings of the
eclectic, independent and legally debarred and officially unrecognized
Physiologico-Chemical, Hygieo-Dietetic School of Natural Science which I
have the honor to represent.

The true teaching of Hippocrates, surnamed "The Father of
Medicine"--the ostensible leader, for all time, of the "regular school"
of Medicine was comprised in one phrase: the _Vis Medicatrix
Naturae_--The Healing Power of Nature.

The teaching of our New, Independent School is identically the
same--plus the physiologico-chemical discoveries of the intervening
centuries. They are plain and natural precepts, surrounded by no
fearsome atmosphere of mystery. They are to this effect:

That the human organism, together with all its interdependent parts,
organs and functions, is an inseparable whole--a Unit--subject
absolutely to Natural Laws. As said St. Paul: "And whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it." (Cor. 12-26.)

That disease, therefore, is likewise a unit with a diversity of
manifestations which, like all conflicting elements, develop in the
individual organism along the lines of least resistance, according to
the weakness--hereditary or acquired--of the individual. This we term
predisposition.

The cause of predisposition to disease, centres absolutely and entirely
in the blood, causing obstructions to normal circulation, the
obstructing materials being poisons and impurities, either hereditary or
acquired through malnutrition or the introduction of unassimilable
matter into the system in the form of improper food, drugs, medicines or
vaccines which remain as poisons in the blood.

Disease is the remedial effort of Nature to throw off such
obstructions--a process of purification and regeneration--and its
symptoms should be assisted and regulated rather than resisted and
suppressed.

"Doctors prescribe--but only Nature cures," is an ancient axiom, but it
faithfully represents the "_vis medicatrix naturae_."

The question has recently been publicly propounded "Is sickness
criminal?" Very certainly, disease is the outcome of personal neglect,
in past or present; but the nature of the question is a sign significant
that the laity are awakening to the truth that the healing power of
nature rests wholly in the generation and conservation of latent reserve
energy.

As regards the influenza controversy the Official verdict is, as we have
seen, that the Regular Medical Profession as a whole, has failed in its
endeavor to fathom the mystery and is at present "_really and truly
helpless_." Let us therefore, seek the cause of this disastrous failure
and strive to solve the problem along other lines.

If so poor be the harvest, what of the soil? is the natural enquiry. And
it must be generally admitted that this spectacular failure lies in the
superficial teaching of the medical schools--its search for causes in
the mature, and "specialized," anatomical organs in place of the
fundamental physiological, chemical and embryonic causes from which, in
their appointed order those various organs are evolved;--first the brain
and nervous system, afterwards the tissues and the bones. Thus, unversed
in the deeper phases of causation, men are hurried unprepared into ranks
of a noble profession to struggle as best they may, through lack of
deeper knowledge, with the serious symptoms of disease--at first by
rote but later, are tempted to tamper empirically with its issues.

It has been said by a great scientific authority that, in order to
thoroughly comprehend and cure any form of disease it is necessary, in
the first place, to mentally map out and visualize the course of its
growth and to follow it backward, step by step, to its source before it
is possible to formulate curative treatment adapted to its cause and
phases.

To commence then at the initial stage, let us bring upon the scene one
of the greatest chemists of the age: Justus von Liebig, the discoverer
of "The Law of the Minimum," which is this: That of the sixteen known
constituents of the blood essential to the healthy growth and
maintenance of the organs and tissues of the body, the absence of any
proportional ingredient, however small, will cause degeneration in the
organism and interfere with the proper functioning of one or more of the
activities concerned.

_Upon this Law is based the attested, dominant fact that all our mental
and physical activities--powers of thinking, feeling, motion and every
action, including the reproduction of species are equally dependent upon
our blood--and our blood, in turn, depends upon proper nutrition._ The
ancient aphorism: "Man is as man eats," is therefore true in theory and
in fact.

Human diet and human life being thus closely allied, it becomes a
consideration of the first magnitude to see that all food contains in
well balanced degree a correct proportion of the sixteen essentials:
carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, iron, sulphur, phosphorus, chlorine,
potassium, sodium, magnesium, calcium, manganese, fluorine, silicon and
iodine.

Amongst the chemical salts of such scientific nutrition may, or may not,
be found the famous "Vitamines," long sought of science; but what they
certainly do supply is the electro-magnetic energy, the impulse of
growth and vital function, the secret of bactericide blood and its power
of circulation.

It is the magnetic iron in the blood which promotes nerve function in
both the brain and the intestinal tract, producing on the one hand
intellectual activity and on the other, breathing digestion and
excretion. Similar causal action in corelation to the integral elements
of food prevails throughout the organs of the body, demonstrating the
vital importance of the quality of our daily food for the renewal of
tissue and the maintenance of healthy metabolism.

In an attempt to define the _primary cause of Influenza_, Prof.
Kuhnemann, a well known authority on practical and differential
diagnosis, gives a minute description of its various _symptoms_,
terminating with a weak suggestion that the already discredited bacillus
_may be regarded as the cause_.

This is, in detail, as follows: "Fever is always present," Prof.
Kuhnemann says, "but not of any certain type. At times, after short
periods of Apyrexie there is a rise in temperature sometimes swelling of
the spleen. There is no characteristic change in the urine; sometimes
Albuminuria. There is an inclination to perspire freely; consequently
Miliaria is often present; also Herpes, less frequently other Exanthema,
Petechien. The mucous membranes are inclined to hemorrhage (Epistaxis,
Hematemesis, Menorrhagia, Abortion).

     "Complications and after effects:

     (1) Of the respiratory system:--Croupose and Broncho-pneumonia of
     atypical progress (atypical fever of protracted course, relatively
     strong Dyspnoe, Cyanosis, feeble pulse) and high mortality; after
     effects serous or mattery Pleuritis, Lung abscesses, Phthisis.

     (2) Of the circulatory system:--Myocarditis, Endocarditis,
     Thrombosis.

     (3) Of the digestive tract:--Chronic stomach and intestinal
     catarrh, Dyspepsia.

     (4) Of the nervous system:--Any form of Neuralgia, Paralysis,
     Neuritis, Psychosis, etc.

     (5) Of the sense organs:--Otitis media; Nephritis and Muscular
     Rheumatism are also observed. Influenza aggravates any case of
     sickness, especially lung trouble."

All this seems to constitute a very formidable and perplexing
indictment, sparkling with learning and bristling with difficulties. But
when these mellifluous mysticisms are once translated into "the vulgar
tongue" they prove to be, strange to say, easily within the
comprehension of the ordinary layman.

For instance, "Apyrexie" means Free from fever; Albuminuria--Albumen
present; Miliaria--an acute inflammation of the sweat-glands
(Abnormal sweating); Herpes--an inflammatory skin disease
characterized by the formation of small vesicles in clusters (Fever rash);
Exanthema--Skin eruption; Petechien--Spots; Epistaxis--Nose-bleeding;
Hematemesis--vomiting blood; Menorrhagia--Excessive menstruation;
Croupose--resembling croup; Broncho-pneumonia--Inflammation of the
lungs; Atypical fever--irregular fever; Dyspnoe--Hard breathing;
Cyanosis--Blue discoloration of the skin from non-oxidation of
the blood; Pleuritis--Pleurisy; Phthisis--consumption; Myocarditis
and Endocarditis--Inflammations of the heart; Thrombosis--coagulation
of blood; Intestinal Catarrh--Inflammation of the bowels;
Dyspepsia--Indigestion; Neuritis--Nerve inflammation; Psychosis--Mental
derangement; Otitis media--Inflammation of the ear; and
Nephritis--Inflammation of the kidneys.

"Aetiology:--The influenza bacillus (found in blood and excrement) is to
be regarded as the cause. The malady is highly contagious. Period of
incubation given as, from two to seven days. Runs its course in one or
two weeks, recovery as a rule favorable; though convalescence is often
protracted. Unfavorable results are brought on through complications,
most often by Pneumonia.

"Diagnosis:--Easily determined during an epidemic or marked symptoms.
The catarrhal form of influenza differs from simple catarrh of the
mucous membranes of the respiratory tract through the presence of
nervous symptoms and a more abrupt beginning. The symptoms may be
similar to those of Measles or Abdominal typhus. In each case,
complications with Pneumonia must be considered.

"The proof of the presence of the Influenza bacillus," he concludes, "is
of little value in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis in medical
practice as the bacillus cannot be distinguished with enough accuracy
through the microscopic examination, which must be a very minute
culture proceeding."

This is the final dictum of medical Science on the subject--Science
which however, adds nothing to our knowledge and leaves us still in
darkness and uncertainty, while memory brings a well known couplet to
the mind:

  He holds the threads of Wisdom's way
      Loosely, with palsied hand.
  Why lacks he now, for pity's sake,
  The grace to understand?

  M.B.

  (After Goethe.)

But let us weigh this long list of symptoms and estimate their
respective significance by the light of physiological perception.

The ever present fever is due to stagnation of the blood. Swelling of
the spleen is caused by catabolism of the Malpighian bodies. Albuminuria
is the result of cold in the Plexus renalis; Perspiration is due to
numbness in the nerve fibrils. The inclination of the mucous membranes
to Hemorrhage is explained by congestion of blood in the capillaries,
due to lack of vigor in the nerve fibrils. When the nerve fibrils fail
to act, the capillary circulation stops and the blood overloaded with
carbonic acid presses against the walls until they burst.

The complications and after effects are explained in the following
manner:

Complications in the respiratory system are all due to failure to
properly treat the acute stage of the disease, and where the resistance
of the patient has been sapped they usually end fatally. Complications
in the circulatory system are subject to the same explanation as fever.
Digestive complications are due to impaired metabolism brought on by
loss of energy in the Vagus nerve. Complications in the nervous system
are consequent upon the degeneration of the whole Vagus tract. Sensory
complications are due to the disease attacking the "minoris
resistentia," the point of least resistance in the patient.

This explanation of the real significance of the symptoms of Influenza
should make it sufficiently apparent that its cause is fundamental,
widespread and deeply rooted in the organism--a menace not to be lightly
and tentatively treated with impunity. That the disease is not one that
may be met--with any prospect of success--with febrifuges, drugs, serums
and specifics--to say nothing of whisky and the like futilities, to use
no harsher term, such as are said to have characterized the
prescriptions of a very considerable proportion of the Regular Medical
Profession and with such terribly disastrous results. What the liquor
statistics show on our side of the line I am at the moment unable to
say, but I see it reported in the press of an adjoining province that
under nominally strict "Prohibition" the sale of liquor had increased no
less than 900 per cent, largely upon doctors orders, and that the sales
from the Government stores in one city, during the past month had
totaled $50,000--as compared with $6,000 for the corresponding period of
the previous year.

The Professor's elaborate diagnosis, from a physiologico-chemical point
of view seems rather to point to a meaning which he has missed--to
indicate a latent, more remote possibility behind the shy bacillus, as
the primary cause of the disease.

Let us endeavor to read the riddle rightly. On scientific contemplation
it at once becomes apparent that the symptoms as defined by
Kuhnemann--and indeed all other observers--are confined to the regions
traversed by the _Vagus_ (wandering) or _Pneumogastric_ nerve--a nerve
of comprehensive scope and bi-functional activity, _physical and
psychic_ and in operation, remarkably in accord with the manifestations
of Influenza.

Concisely stated, the physiological function of the _Vagus nerve_ is to
regulate the process of breathing, tasting, swallowing, appetite,
digestion, etc.; and the result of its failure to function would create
coughing, choking, indigestion--separately or in combination. Its mental
functions include the expression of shame, desire, disgust, grief,
torture, depression and despair.

The following is its academic description:

_Vagus_ or Pneumogastric nerve (tenth cranial); function--sensation and
motion; originates in the floor of the fourth ventricle (the space which
represents the primitive cavity of the hind-brain; it has the pons and
oblongata in front, while the cerebellum lies dorsal), and is
distributed through the ear, pharynx, larynx, lungs, esophagus, and
stomach; possesses the following branches--auricular, pharyngeal,
superior and inferior laryngeal, cardiac, pulmonary, esophageal,
gastric, hepatic, communicating, meningeal.

It is interesting to compare the scope and characteristics of the Vagus,
as here defined with the details of Prof. Kuhnemann's diagnosis of
Influenza and to draw conclusions.

In order to establish more unmistakably the symptomatic sympathetic
connection between the Vagus and Influenza, it may be well to touch
briefly upon the initial processes of metabolism and nerve production.

An inherent impulse in the ovum (protoplasm or egg cell) serves to
separate the albuminous substance into groups of an opposite nature.
Water is chemically separated from one portion, which results in
thickening the albumen from which it was extracted, while the liberated
water aids in liquifying another portion of the albuminous matter. Thus,
on one side slender threads arise, termed fibrine or filaments, and on
the other lymph fluid appears, which receives the particles of salts
freed from the filaments during their chemical separation. When the
fibrine and lymph are organized from the protoplasm, the remaining
albumen is absolutely unchanged and ready to furnish material for the
growth of either.

It is the function of salts to increase the electrical tension of the
lymph. All salts possess the property of being electrically positive or
negative. The more concentrated a saline solution, the greater its
electrical energy.

That the function of the lymph is to assist in the formation and
nutrition of the nerves is apparent when the nature of lymph and the
composition of nerve substances are compared. The contrast which exists
between fibrine and lymph, and the similarity of lymph to nerve fat when
taken together, justify the conclusion that the nerve substance
lecithin, was formed from lymph in the first instance.

The whole process of life consists of an electro-chemical combustion.
This is clearly shown in the case of lecithin, which serves to control
both motion and sensation. In the presence of oxygen it burns up,
forming a new chemical combination, and throwing off minute quantities
of carbonic acid and water in the process. _Every movement and process,
both voluntary and involuntary, and every thought and emotion, depends
upon oxidation, which consumes muscular tissue and nerve substance._

The greater our physical exertion the more muscular tissue must be
consumed. The higher our emotional state, the more we think or agitate
ourselves, the greater must be the quantity of nerve substance burned
up. All of the substance burned up in labour, in worry and in thought,
must be replaced or the flame will flicker out!

The metabolism of muscular tissue is not in question at the moment. We
are concerned here with nerve metabolism alone.

This occurs in the following manner: In response to the demand for new
material created by the chemical combustion of lecithin, new oil flows
down the axis cylinders of the nerve fibrils, which are arranged
somewhat in the manner of lamp wicks. The average duration of the flow
of this oil is about eighteen hours. When the cerebro-spinal nerves
refuse to perform their function any longer, because the supply of oil
is running low, fatigue and sleep ensue, and the blood descends from the
brain to the intestines. Thus the cerebro-spinal system is permitted to
relax and rest. In the meantime the sympathetic nervous system has taken
up the task of directing the renewal of worn tissues, which draw their
supply of necessary materials from the digestive canal, with a new
supply of phosphatic oil. For the carrying out of these processes, which
prepare the brain and spinal nerve system for the demands of another
day, the magnetic blood current acts as distributor of supplies.

Through the fact that this supply is directly dependent upon nutrition,
three possibilities inevitably present themselves:

     (1) That any radical change of diet may result in an insufficient
     supply of the various elements necessary for the production of
     lecithin in the requisite quantities.

     (2) That strenuous and unaccustomed physical and mental exertion
     may involve a consumption both of nerve substance and muscular
     tissue, greater than the outcome of the ordinary diet is able to
     compensate.

     (3) That a protracted term of emotional strain and agitation may
     adversely affect both appetite and digestion while rapidly
     consuming the substance of the nerves.

In discussing the causes of disease Julius Hensel lays great stress upon
the emotions. He goes so far as to say that they "_undoubtedly occupy
the first place amongst the factors causing disease_, and we must not
evade the consideration of them. _We shall find that their action also
amounts to an electro-chemical process._" I would not for an instant be
understood to contend that the emotions alone are sufficient to explain
the origin of disease--not at all. There are other factors--jointly or
severally dominant--diet, occupation, changes of weather, climate, or
conditions.

In the matter immediately under review, however, the world-wide pandemic
of "Spanish Influenza," there can remain no shadow of doubt in the mind
of any unbiased observer who follows the question fairly along the lines
of electro-chemical biology, but that the general emotional
disturbances incident upon the war conditions of the world, combined
with the chaotic dietetic position with its anxieties and privations
under strenuous and unwonted physical demands, do undoubtedly afford a
sound and reasonable explanation of the cataclysmal outbreak which has
recently fallen upon the nations.

The brazen blast of war, in 1914, with all its ruthless wreck and
carnage, shook the universal fabric of the sphere. Fear, fraud and
famine were met together, duplicity and greed had kissed each other.
Short rations and with some, starvation, were soon the order of the day.
The corners of the earth were swept of stale forgotten stores and
profiteers waxed fat and prices soared, whilst the vitals of the working
world were vastly underfed. The ranks of labour, depleted of its men,
were filled by females uninured to toil and dangerous nerve racking
environments. Relentless time brings its revenges fast; but still they
worked and suffered while malnutrition sapped the life-blood of the
race. In the homes of the fighting men fear reigned supreme--ever the
sword of Damocles suspended at the hearth. And then the death lists came
and the world was wet with human tears and all the furies flew the
earth--grief, hatred, revenge, love, pity and remorse, but the wail of
mourning was throughout all lands in all the "sable panoply of woe"
attending fast lowering vitality, bred by force of pain and hope
deferred. Pliny well said: "Dolendi modus, non est timendi"--Pain has
its limits, _apprehension none_--and now as in his day, the latter bore
the palm.

Such was the position when two years ago the world first felt the impact
of the pestilence and millions withered up like blighted corn.

The Vagus nerve with which we have been dealing, is concerned with the
expression of emotions such as these; and being so, was burned up
rapidly with fervent heat--the flames of sorrow still with fasting fed.
In the majority of human lives such was the case, while the sources of
nutritive reserve force were depleted by lack of things of universal use
and foreign substitutes for normal food. Small wonder then the once
steady nerves soon buckled with the strain; that sickness followed
swiftly with disaster in its train and that the death rate rose
enormously, beyond recorded precedent. And then when seeming good
succeeds the storm of ills a plethora of new-born cares arose and worse,
more fatal still, reaction from the strain which with relaxing energy
demands its deadly share. Here in America we meet our troubles with
serener front, unawed by State-fed sacerdotal superstitions; but in
England how the scourge has wrung from dire depression its full toll of
death. There for the first time deaths exceed the births and for the
final quarter of 1918, the deaths exceed those of the former term by
127,000 of which Influenza claimed one hundred Thousand dead. Similar
conditions, it would appear, have been more or less general throughout
the European and indeed all other Continents and the title "Pandemic"
has been richly earned; but the term which would seem to me more
descriptive still would be _"Panasthenia"--the general loss of
vitality_.

The human organism is, as we know, electro-magnetic. The effect upon the
fabric of abnormal disturbance is registered with infinite exactitude by
electrons--atoms of electricity--which rise and fall in numerical
vibration according to the positive or negative tone of the whole; and
excessive manifestations in one direction or the other, indicate
respectively, a condition of positive or negative disease.

When the slowly vibrating negative electrons outnumber the rapidly
vibrating positive atoms the electronic vibration of the whole body is
lowered. As a result, we become depressed, weak, tired and retain little
bodily warmth. Digestion is upset, metabolism falls far below normal,
and the skin becomes pale, because of the morbid action set up in the
mucous membrane by the excess of negative electrons. Catarrh supervenes.
This is the condition in which negative disease thrives best: Influenza,
nervous debility, anaemia, sleeping disease, cholera, diphtheria and the
rest, in all varied forms of negative disease.

The Vagus, or Wandering Nerve, permeates every vital section of the
body, as the accompanying plate will show. It controls, as has been
shown, all the highest functions, both mental and physical of human
life--that life which depends for its well-being upon electro-chemical
combustion, metabolism, and the fuel supply we designate as food. It is
the first postulate of healthy vitality in the human frame that
metabolism and catabolism--intake and output--shall go hand in
hand--that the body must receive continually such fresh nutrition as may
replace what it consumes in the process of muscular action and the
exercise of mental and emotional activity, and we are consequently
brought to the conclusion that such bonds of safety and provision being
rudely and suddenly severed, all physical resistance must be quickly
broken down, the latent reserve energy is used and disappears, psychic
resolution--the immunity of mind--soon abdicates its throne and the
depleted organism, robbed of all defense, falls victim to contagion when
it comes to kill.

_Treatment._

As regards the treatment, actual and preventive, applicable to Spanish
Influenza, the methods employed under the Hygienic-Dietetic System of
Healing have been already defined in a previous chapter on the subject
of negative disease in general. Instruction, however, devoted to
Influenza alone may be found in Chapter VI of the special pamphlet
issued in that connection under the title: "Influenza, Cause and
Cure,"[E] and also in my greater work: "Regeneration or Dare to be
Healthy," now in course of completion.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, one final word in conclusion, for the purpose of drawing
together, as it were, the multiplicity of threads which constitute the
complex skein of causes and effects, with their remedial measures which
cover the wide range of human life's vicissitudes--the interruptions of
its would-be harmonies--which take the forms, all too common in these
times of stress, of physical disturbance and of mental strain which
come to us in the combined and threatening guise of suffering and
disease.

That these forms are more pronounced, more virulent today than ever
before in the records of the race, is surely great Nature's manner,
crude and masterful, of pressing her mandate home--right home upon the
plastic film of evanescent shadows and ephemeral shades we proudly call
our consciousness.

How many, let me ask, how many of us, in the absorbing round of life's
futilities, have paused to really recognize the sinister "hand writing
on the wall?"

The phase of the world's history through which we pass complacently is
of no light portent, its happenings no casual concern, but, in point of
crucial fact, a virtual "rending of the sphere"--a cosmic upheaval such
as never yet before has racked the tense life sinews of the world,
confounding the wisdom of the wise and wrecking in one fell climax of
contempt the moral precepts of two thousand years.

The greatest human struggle the world has ever known synchronizes
strangely, yet logically with the world's greatest pestilence which has
swept successive millions to their doom without exacting from the
residue even the sentimental tribute of a tear.

The official brains of the entire globe are leagued in self-protective
unison "to make the world safe for democracy;" but Demos dies, by
violence and disease, ere yet salvation comes. It appeals to its
old-time standards for relief,--they are gone; to its pastors--they are
mute; to its masters--they are impotent; to its doctors--they are
baffled, helpless and aghast, whilst vainly searching earth and air for
some frail pretext of unreal enlightenment, some fragile figment of
belief. And yet in hypnotized complacency the masses stand; for
meanwhile commerce reaps its costly gains and labour draws in enhanced
increment the wages of the living and the dead.

Less serious visitations have, in former times, left their eternal
imprint on the age. They served to point the moral of widespread
reform--to emphasize the practice of hygiene and sanity. For all such
scourges are but signs of Nature's trust betrayed, her sacred laws
defied in the wild rush for gain, oblivious of the Law of Compensation's
cost, with its inevitable reckoning.

Thus, to the discoverer of the lost initiative, what prospect does the
future hold in store?

Pandemics, such as this, repeat themselves; and other forms of dread
disease are following the footsteps of mankind. Arterio sclerosis,
(hardening of the arteries), with its kindred complaints, for instance,
now threatens to become a standing feature of the race through ignorance
of the physiological functions of the nerves, their tissue exhaustion
and supply.

With such impending dangers are our men distressed; and yet there seems
but grudging, slight encouragement for those who seek to stay the
onslaught of the foe, by scientific measures of precaution and hygiene.

What the nation needs is now a practical and nation-wide awakening. Let
the people realize the danger of their risk; let them rally to the call
and loyally support those who thus offer them the safeguard of knowledge
as a refuge from the impending storm. Then will so-called "incurable
disease" be relegated to the limbo of the past and, among other
prophylactic means, this, my latest great discovery--the cause of
Influenza, its prevention and its cure, a discovery which must rank
amongst the great scientific achievements of the day--will mitigate the
force of epidemics on mankind. It should also give to the reader of this
little book a fair assurance of what immunity it is possible to secure
by careful study and practice of its truths and should prove to the
thinker the nucleus of a lesson which can nowhere be better learned than
in the teachings and the precepts of the Hygienic-Dietetic School.

  "But to the hero, when his sword
    Has won the battle for the free,
  Thy voice sounds like a prophet's word
    And in its hollow tones are heard
  The thanks of millions yet to be"




FINIS.

Wide and unlimited as the field of biology and the hygienic-dietetic
method of healing is, I have in the foregoing pages tried to devise a
guide that will indicate the points that are most necessary to the
confidence of the patient, based upon knowledge.

If I have enlightened my readers sufficiently regarding the most modern
results of biological research, if I have succeeded in showing them the
ray of hope, in the midst of their suffering, that will give them
courage to live, and live as healthy human beings, I shall feel amply
rewarded for the hard work that had necessarily to be done before the
present pinnacle in the art of healing could be reached.

Let me repeat: this brochure is not designed to lead any one away from
the man who knows, who has gone to the sources of wisdom, to bring
salvation to those who demand the right to live in health and vigor. Far
otherwise; for my deliberate injunction is that the cure of disease, in
any form, should not be undertaken except under the guidance of an
hygienic physician who may indicate to them the path, so that they may
not tread it blindly, but in the light of knowledge.

The outlines of a great and wonderful science are presented. Another
wall between the layman and the professional has been torn down. If, my
readers, you can one day say this booklet has guided you to the right
path, back to the enjoyment of life in youthful health and vigor, then
join with me and others in propagating these sane and safe principles,
and make others "Dare to be Healthy," as you have dared yourself.

FOOTNOTES:

[D] This amount is given by the Seattle Post-Intelligencer, in an
editorial devoted to the terrible plague on March 16th, 1919.

[E] The pamphlet, which also contains a chart of the Vagus in 2 colors,
may be obtained either from the author or through any bookseller. The
price is 50 cents.





INDEX


  Dedication, 5

  Foreword, 13

  Introduction, 15

  The Hygienic-Dietetic method of Healing, 19
    Physiologico-Chemical Research, 20
    The Natural Method of Healing, 20
    Prophylactic Therapy or Prevention of Disease, 21
    The New-School of Healing, 22
    "Regeneration" or "Dare to be Healthy", 24
    Distrust of the Medical Fraternity, 25-6
    Johannes Müller and his followers, 26-7
    The Medical Impasse, 28-9

  The Regeneration of the Race, 31
    Dysaemia--the cause of disease, 31
    The process of Natural Healing, 31
    The Human Body a Microcosm, 32
    The body an indivisible Unity, 33
    The Bacteria craze, 33
    Predisposition, 34
    The Allopathic failure, 35-36
    Choosing a Physician, 37
    Cell-food Therapy, 37
    Medical Literature, 38
    Chemical elements of the blood, 39
    Dech-Manna, or "Organic Nutritive salts or cell-food Therapy", 39
    "As a man eats, so is he", 46
    Humanity the product of the exhausted fields, 46
    The remedy, the question and the reply, 47
    No "business" in healthy blood, 47
    Truth versus Creeds and Capital, 49

  Health: Hymn of Health, 51
    The Health ideal by Nature set, 52
    Ignorance the basis of disease, 54
    A Means of Enlightenment, 55

  The Dare to be Healthy Club, 57
    The purpose of the Club, 58

  The Teachings of the Club, 58
    Two years' course in Biology, 58
    Physiology, Anatomy, Hygiene,
    Physiological Chemistry, Pathology,
    according to Biological facts, 58
    Therapy, in accordance with Biological and
      Physical Laws and Precepts, 58
    Its comprehensive aim, 58
    The Course of Instruction, 58
    Its Precepts, 59
    Graduates as Teachers, 59

  The Method of Regeneration, 59

  Dr W.C. Rucker Assistant Surgeon Gen.
    US Public Health Service on Physiological Chemistry, 60

  The Boerhaave Incident, 62
    The Secret of Disease and Health, 62
    The eternal Lesson Nature Teaches, 64

  Simplicity the Essence of the System, 64

  A Life's Legacy, 65

  The Physician, 66

  Fair Minded Physicians, 66

  Behind the Veil, 66

  Disease the Heritage of the Ages, 67

  The Moment of Release, 67

  Disease a Unit, 68

  The Part of the Physician, 69

  The Teachings of Great Masters, 69
    Hippocrates, 70
    Galen, 71
    Thomas Sydenham, 73
    Boerhaave, 74

  System of Regeneration, 77
    Man as a Unit, 77
    Perpetual Existence, 77
    Functions, 77
    Cell life, 78
    Specialists, 78
    Cause of Disease, 79

  Metabolism, 79
    Creative Matter, 79
    Functions of the Blood, 79
    Foreign Formations, 80
    Nature's Curative Powers, 80
    The Blood as Universal Medium, 80
    The Oneness of Disease, 80
    All Powers Dependent on Nutrition, 80
    Diversity of Construction, 81
    Adaptivity of Cells, 81
    Medical Misconception, 81
    Resultant Errors, 82
    Diagnosis, 82

  Chemical Analysis of Human Body, 82
    The Twelve Tissues, 82
    Secret of Healing, 82
    Tissues Depend Upon the Blood, 82
    The 16 Elements of the Blood, 83
    Dominant Features, 83
    Von Liebig's Law of the Mirimuin, 83
    The Law of Chemotaxis, 84
    Cell Attraction, 84
    Process of Healing, 84

  Constitutional Disease, 84
    New Cell food Treatment, 85
    Old System Superseded, 85
    Dysarmia, 85
    The Bacillus Fallacy, 85
    Predisposition, 86
    Hereditary Disease, 86
    Heredity Not Invincible, 87
    The Dechmann Law of the Cross transmission of Characteristics, 87
    The Theory of Pangenesis, 88
    The Dechmann Law of the Determination of Sex at Will, 89
    Latent Reserve Energy, 89
    Law of the Dominant, 90
    Heredity and Predisposition, 90
    Prevention of Disease, 91
    Terrible Responsibility, 91
    Alternative Betterment, 92
    The "Incurable," Curable, 92
    Chemical Elements Missing, 92
    Three Methods of Supply, 92
      Diet, 92
      Nutritive Preparations, 93
      Physical Treatment, 93

  Nature a Unit, 94
    Natural Elements, 94
    Importance of Minerals, 94

  Testimonials, 95

  Dech-Manna Nutritive Preparations, 97

  The Means of Health and Safety, 98

  The Dare to be Healthy Club, 99
    Business Proposition, 99
    Membership, 99
    Terms and Literature etc., 100
    "Within the Bud", 101
    Cell Foods Special Rates to Members, 102
    The Basis of Proceedings, 103
    Life, Health, Happiness, 104

  Man as a Unit, 105

  Metabolism, 106

  Variety of Organs, 109
    The Idea of Unity, 109

  The Constituent Elements, 111

  Dysaemia, the Cause of All Constitutional Diseases, 113

  Heredity, 116

  Healing, 117

  The Unity of Nature, 119

  The Chemical Process of Disease, 121

  The Twelve Tissues, 123
     1. The Plasmo Tissue (Blood Plasma), 124
     2. The Lymphoid Tissue, 125
     3. The Nerve Tissue, 125
     4. The Bone Tissue, 126
     5. The Muscular Tissue, 127
     6. The Mucous Membrane Tissue, 128
     7. The Tooth and Eye Tissue, 128
     8. The Hair Tissue, 128
     9. The Skin Tissue, 129
    10. The Gelatigenous Tissue, 130
    11. The Cartilage Tissue, 130
    12. The Body Tissue in General, 131

  Degeneration of Tissues, 132
    The Meaning of "Healing", 132
    Grouping of Constitutional Diseases, 133

  The A.B.C. of My System of Healing, 135
    A. Diet, 135
    B. Nutritive Compositions, 135
    C. Physical Treatment, 136

  Diet--Its Vital Importance, 136
    The Reason Why, 137
    The Laboratory of the Body and Functions of Its Branches, 137
    Creation of Life blood, 137
    Building the Framework, 138
    The Material, 138
    The Refuse, 138
    Diet Forms No. I to No. VI, 138

  Nutritive Compositions, 143
    Representations to Government, 143
    Functions of Minerals in Our Food, 148
    Minerals in the Human Economy, 148
    Chemical Elements Essential to Life, 149
    The Impulse of Growth, 150
    The Genesis of Polyps, Tumors and Cancers, 151
    Review of Mineral Elements, 152
    Iron in the Blood, 152
    Generation of Electricity, 152
    Faraday, on Magnetic Blood, 152
    The Motor of Nervous Function, 153
    Creation of Bodily Warmth, 153
    The Secret of Sleep, 153
    The Function of the Spleen, 154
    Rejuvenating Influence, 154
    The Malpighian Bodies, 154
    The Liver and the Bile, 155
    Lecithin or Nerve Fat, 155
    System of Cell Renewal, 156
    Nutrition-Soda and the Bile, 156
    Chemical Fixation, 156
    Sodium Sulphate Essential, 157
    Basis of Muscle Tissue, 157
    Basis of Bones and Teeth, 158
    Growth of the Hair, 158
    Medium of Chemical Combustion, 158
    Human Organism Cannot Assimilate Inorganic Matter, 159
    Necessity of Prepared Nutritive Salts, 159
    Incomplete Fertilization, 160
    Sickly (food) vegetation, 160
    Improper Fertilization Breeds Disease, 161
    The Rock and Its Lesson, 161
    Food Instinct, 161
    An Imperative Duty to Mankind, 162
    Result of Experiments (Poultry), 162
    Results of Experiments (small fruit), 163
    Haemoglobin Eggs for Weakened Constitutions, 164
    Lecithin for Neurasthenia, 164
    Physical Regeneration, 164
    Reserve Energy Essentials, 165

  Nutritive Compositions, 166
    16 Nutritive Cell-foods, 166
    12 "Dech-Manna" Compositions, 166
    Specialities, A. to J., 167
    Explanations, 168
    Schuessler's Absurdity, 170

  =Dech-Manna Compositions=--
    No. 1. Plasmogen--(Plasma Producer), 172
    No. 2. Lymphogen--(Lymph-cell producer), 176
    No. 3. Neurogen--(Nerve-cell producer), 179
      The Ignorance of "Nerve Specialists", 180
      Consequent Increase of Insanity, 180
      A Complacent Public, 181
      Neurasthenia, 181
    No. 4. Osseogen--(Bone cell Producer), 182
      Deformity of Bone Structure, Curvature of the Spine, etc., 183
      The Lime-water Fallacy and Others, 183
      "Fire proof" Bone Structure, 183
    No. 5. Muscogen--(Muscle-cell Producer), 184
      Combination with Eubiogen (No XII), 185
    No. 6. Mucogen--(Mucous Membrane-cell producer), 186
      Pervading Importance of Membrane, 186
      Catarrhal Conditions of Tissues
    No. 7. Dento & Ophthogen--(Tooth & Eye cell Producer), 187
      Connection Between Teeth and Eye, 189
    No. 8. Capillogen--(Hair-cell Producer), 189
      Causes of Falling Hair, 190
      Prevention of Baldness, 190
      Failure of "Hair Restorers", 190
    No. 9. Dermogen--(Skin-cell Producer), 191
      The Fallacy of Dermatology, 192
    No. 10. Gelatinogen--(Gelatigenous-tissue Producer), 193
      The Functions of Expansion and Contraction, 193
    No. 11. Cartilogen--(Cartilage Producer), 194
      Prevention of Friction, Bones and Joints, 194
    No. 12. Eubiogen--(Healthy Life Producer), 196
      Positive Composition, 196
      Eulogy of Eubiogen, 196
      Analysis of Eubiogen, 201
      3 Forms of Eubiogen, 204
      Special Composition B Alternative for Infants
        and Feeble Invalids, 204
      Comparative Analysis Human Body and Eubiogen, 206

  =Appendix I=, 207
    Life Preservers and Elixirs, 207
    =Special Dech-Manna Compositions=, 207
      A. Oxygenator (Radium Tablets), 207
        Balneotherapy-directions, 208
      B. Eubiogen Liquid. For babies and feeble invalids, 209
      C. Tonogen--Tonic and Beverage, 210
        Universal Scope and Effectiveness, 211
        Combination with Plasmogen, 212

  =Appendix II=, 213
    =Compositions for Specific Cases=, 213
      D. Tea, Diabetic, 213
      E. Tea, Laxagen, 213
      F. Salve, Lenicet, 213
      G. Massage Emulsion, 213
      H. Propionic Acid, 213
      I. Oxygen Powder, 213
      J. Anti phosphate or Negative Compound, 213

  Price list Dech-Manna Compositions, 214
    Physical Treatment, 215
      Baths and Packs--Vinegar Water, 215
      Massage and Exercises, 216
      Importance of Ablutions, 216
      The Habit of Gargling, 220

  Vinegar Packs--Their Significance and Basis, 220
    Effect of the Packs, 226
    Temperature, 226
    Construction of Packs, 227
    Length of Application, 227
    Danger of Ice Applications, 228
    Excretion of Auto toxins, 230
    Dissolving, Diverting, Excreting, 230
    General Treatment of Body, 232
    The Key to Success, 232
    General Advice for Packs, 232
    Measurements for Material, 233
    Temperature of Packs, 234
    Duration of Packs, 235
    Changing the Packs, 236
    General Rules, 237
    "Diverting Packs" Important, 237
    The Main Rule, 238
    24. Abdominal Pack, 238
        Divided Packs, 241
    25. The Cross Pack, 242
    26. Leg Packs, 244
        Partial Packs, 245
        Foot and Wrist Packs, 246
        Neck Pack, 247
        Shoulder Pack, 248
        Scotch Pack, 249
        Divided Scotch Pack, 250
        Shawl Pack, 251
    27. Three quarter Packs, 252
        Half Pack, 255
        Whole Pack, 255
        Small Compresses, 257
    28. Gymnastics, 258
    29. Massage, 258
    30. Breathing, 258
        Electric Vibrators, 260
    31. Oxygenator, 261
    32. Radium and Salt Baths, 261

  Diseases, Treatment and Method, 262
    I. Degeneration of the Plasmo Tissue, 263
      Anaemia, Chlorosis, Pernicious Anaemia, 263
      A. Scrofulosis, 266
      B. Tuberculosis, 266
      C. Syphilis, 266
      D. Cancer, 267
      Therapy, 267
        Diet
          I. For Anaemic Patients, 267
          I. & II. A. For Scrofulous Patients, 269
          I. & II. B. For Tuberculous Patients, 270
          I. & II. C. For Syphilitic Patients, 271
          I. & II. D. For Cancer Patients, 271
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 271
        Physical, 272
    II. Degeneration of Lymph Tissue,272
    III. Degeneration of the Nerve Tissue, 273
      Neuralgia Neuritis, Neurasthenia, 274
      Asthma Epilepsy St Vitus's Dance, 274
      Therapy, 275
       Dech-Manna Compositions, 277
       Physical, 277
    IV. Degeneration of the Bone Tissue, 277
      Rickets Osteomalacia and Similar Diseases, 277
      Therapy, 278
        Diet, 278
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 279
        Physical, 279
    V. Degeneration of the Muscular Tissue, 280
      Muscular Rheumatism, Sciatica, 280
      Infantile Paralysis, Atrophy, 280
      Amyloid Organs, 280
      Therapy, 281
        Diet, 281
        Special Diet
          For Disease of Heart and Inactive Kidneys, 282
          For Irritable Kidneys and Diseases of the Bladder, 285
          For Liver Disease, 286
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 287
        Physical, 287
    VI. Degeneration of the Mucous Membrane Tissue, 288
      Catarrh, Acute and Chronic, 288
      Bronchitis, Pleurisy, Pneumonia, 288
      Inflammation of Nose Throat, Bowels, Stomach and Bladder, 288
      Decomposition of Mucous Membrane, 288
      Hemorrhoids, Polyps Benign Tumors, 288
      Bright's Disease, Initial Stages, 288
      Therapy, 289
        Diet, 290
        For Throat and Larynx Disease, 290
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 290
        Physical, 290
    VII. Degeneration of Tooth and Eye Tissue, 291
      Therapy, 292
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 292
        Physical, 292
    VIII. Degeneration of the Hair Tissue, 292
      Therapy, 293
        Diet, 293
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 293
        Physical, 293
    IX. Degeneration of the Skin Tissue, 293
      Therapy, 295
        Diet, 295
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 295
        Physical, 295
    X. Degeneration of the Gelatigenous Tissue, Stomach &
         Intestinal Disease, 295
      Therapy, 296
        Diet, 296
        Normal Diet for Stomach Diseases, 297
        General Hints for Nourishing Treatment, 298
            Treatment, 298
            In case of Constipation, 299
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 299
        Physical, 299
    XI. Degeneration of the Cartilagenous Tissue, 300
      Ankylosis. Gout. Arthritis, 300
      Therapy, 300
        Diet, 300
        Dech-Manna Compositions, 300
        Physical, 300
    XII. Degeneration of the Body Tissue in General, 301

  Infantile Paralysis, 303

  Facial Diagnosis and "The Clinical Eye", 306

  Diagnosis, Physiognomy and Psychology, 308
    The Biological Healing System, 308
    The Psychological Side, 308
    Regeneration and Retrogression, 309
    The True Physician's Principle, 309
    External Symptoms, 310
      Perspiring Hands and Feet, 310
      Quality of the Nails, 311
      Baldness, Gray and Dishevelled Hair, 311
      The Evidence of the Eyes, 312
      Prof Liljequist on the Colour of the Eyes, 312
      The Shades of Death, 313
      Testimony of the Mouth and Tongue, 313
      Indications of the Nose, 314
      Diagnosis by Odour, 315
      Story of the Teeth and Gums, 316
      Demonstrations of the Neck, 317
      Significance of Chest Formation, 317
      Signs of the Abdomen, 317
      Indications of the Legs, 317
      Indications of the Skin, 318
      Freckles, 318
      Chemical Construction, 318
      Prevention and Cure, 319
      Simple Precautions, 319

  Children's Disease. Introduction, 319
    The Cause of "the Poor", 319
    The Child of Mortality, 319
    Parental Egotism and Pedagogy, 323
    Maternal Solicitude--and Ignorance, 320
    Vital Statistics, 324
    O Tempora! O Mores!, 325
    The World's Indifference to Truth, 326
    For the Understanding of Disease--the sine qua non, 326
    Back to Nature, 326
    "The Age of Nerves", 327
    Medical Polemics, 327
    "Existence is Movement"--Progress, 328
    Man, the Sceptic, 328
    The X-Rays and the Sequel, 329
    The Atom and the Electron, 330
    "Man's Passing Strange, Complex Mortality", 332
    The Vibrations of Electrons, 332
    Electro-Magnetic Control, Mundane and Solar Forces, 333
    The Ocean a Storage Battery, 333
    The Action of Acids and Alkalies, 334
    Electro-Magnetic Processes and Metabolism, 335
    Weather and Local Influences, 336
    Negative and Positive Vibrations, 337
    Healthy Blood Formation, 338
    Dech-Manna Diet, 338
    Electrons and the Effect of Injury, 339
    Bacteria, 340
    Febrile, or Positive Diseases, 340
    Curative Process, 341
    The Law of Opposites, 341
    Action of Water, 341
    Action of Earth on Mud, 341
    Vinegar Packs, 342
    Cooling Drinks, 342
    Temperature Reduction, 343
    Negative Diseases, 344
      Curative Process, 344
      Sun Baths, Light Baths, 344
      Exercise, 345
      Massage, 345
      Coloured Light Treatment, 346
      Internal Treatment, 346
      The Salts of the Body, 346
      Nourishment, 347
    The Science of Food, 347
      Diet, 348
      Food Standard, 348
      Heat Production, 348
      Discretion in Diet, 348
    Diet of Children in General, 349
    Diet for School Children, 351

  Fever and its Treatment Based on Biology, 354
    A. General Description, 354
    B. Treatment, 357
    C. Diet in Cases of Fever, 362

  Scarlet Fever, 367

  Measles, 371

  German Measles, 372

  Chicken-pox, 373

  Small-pox, 374

  Typhoid fever or typhus abdominalis, 375
    A. General Description, 375
    B. Essentials, 376
    C. Symptoms and Course, 377
      Stage of Development, 378
      The Climax, 378
      Stage of Healing, 378
    Respiratory Organs, 381
    Organs of Circulation, 381
    Nervous System, 381
    Bones and Joints, 382
    Urinary and Sexual Organs, 382
    Skin, 382
    Recurrence, 383
    D. Treatment, 384
      Mental condition, 385
    E. Relapsing fever (Typhus Recurrens), 386
    F. Diet in Cases of Typhus, 387
      Dech-Manna compositions, 392
      Physical Treatment, 392

  Negative Children's Disease (so called), 393
    Catarrh, 393
    Bronchitis, 393
    Grippe, 393
    Influenza, 393
    Catarrhal Inflammations, 393
    Cholera Infantum or Summer Complaint, 393
      Therapy, 393
      Physical Treatment, 394

  The Contagious Character of Children's Diseases, 394
    The Golden Rule, 395
    Diet, 395
    Dech-Manna Compositions, 395
    Physical Treatment, 396

  The Tonsure of the Tonsils, 396
    A Strong Indictment, 396
    American and English Corroboration, 397
    Arguments Against Tonsillotomy, 397
    A Medico-cum parental craze, 398
    Prof Mackenzie's Denunciation, 398
    Maternal Ineptitude, 399
    Wild and Incontinent Superstitions, 400
    Operators and Their Teachers, 400
    Facts and Fables, 401
    A "Lazy and Stupifying Delusion", 402
    The "Roll of Unrecorded Death", 402
    A trenchant and Tragic Article, 404
    The True Mission of Tonsils, 405

  Pre-natal Care, 405
    Pre-natal Clinics, 405
    Human Magnetism, 405
    Hygienic Birth, 406

  Endemic and Epidemic Disease, 406
    Climatic, or Yellow Fever, 407
    Pellagra, or Hook worm, 407
    Cholera and Plague, 408
    The Spanish Influenza, 409
    The World's Great Pandemics, 410
    Terminological Notes, 410
    Fundamental Causes, 410
    Sero Therapy, or the Illusive Germ Theory, 412
    The Alternative Origin, 412
    The Attitude of the Public, 413
    The History of the Influenza Germ, 413
    Culture and the Manufacturing Chemist, 413
    The Great Experiment, 413
    The Dictum of Surgeon Genl. Blue, 414
    Serums and Specifics, Hospitals and Undertakers, 415
    Opinions of the Press, 416
    The Parting of the Ways, 417
    George Bernard Shaw's Views, 418
    Public Health Reports, 419
    Raising the Resistance of the Body, 419
    The Vis Medicatrix Naturae, 421
    St Paul, on the Unity of the Body, 421
    The Cause of Medical Failure, 421
    The Law of the Minimum, 423
    The Sixteen Essentials, 423
    Prof Kuhnemann, on the Influenza, 424
    The Interpretation, 427
    The Professor and the Shy Bacillus, 428
    The Vision of the Vagus Nerve, 429
    Its Vast Responsibility, 431
    Three Nutritive Possibilities, 432
    The Emotions as Factors of Disease, 432
    "Panasthema," the General Loss of Vitality, 434
    The Seat of Affection in the Vagus, 435
    "The Writing on the Wall", 437
    Demos Dies by Violence, 438
    Nature's Trust Betrayed, 438
    The Law of Compensation, 438
    A Great Scientific Discovery, 440

  Finis       440


ERRATA IN VALERE AUDE

  Page
    6, line 28 from top read, Sinai's
   19, line 5 from top read, continents
  134, line 10 from top read, adenoids
  149, line 9 from top read, haemoglobin
  149, line 27 from top read, fluorine
  150, line 6 from top read, a comma after 'itself'
  152, line 5 from top read, tumors
  152, line 20 from top read, grams
  156, line 34 from top read, two of ammonium
  156, line 45 from top read, ammoniacal
  157, line 44 from top read, phosphate of ammonium
  161, line 44 from top read, avidity
  166, line 7 from top read, fluorine
  182, line 9 from top read, organic lime
  186, line 14 from top read, indispensible
  187, line 1 from top read, dimensions
  192, line 17 from top read, the patient
  200, line 22 from top read, vain
  201, line 16 from top read, sinews
  223, line 1 from top read, oxygenous blood
  244, line 22 from top read, leg
  261, line 6 from top read, allow him to extend the area
  276, line 27 from top read, Alcohol and alkaline
  279, line 11 from top read, legumes
  281, line 3 from top read, Amyloid degeneration
  301, line 31 from top read, space at my disposal
  315, line 20 from top read, the hypochondriacal
  365, line 16 from top read, Form III comprises
  409, line 34 from top read, social cataclysm.
  414, line 37 from top read, consensus.
  423, line 36 from top read, chlorine.
  427, line 21 from top read, to numbness in the nerve.
  429, line 35 from top read, more unmistakably.
  430, line 31 from top read, nerve substance lecithin.
  438, line 16 from top read, hypnotized complacency.
  440, line 12 from top read, Hygienic-Dietetic.

[Transcriber's Note: The items on the list of Errata have been corrected
in the text.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Valere Aude, by Louis Dechmann

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VALERE AUDE ***

***** This file should be named 14985-8.txt or 14985-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/9/8/14985/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Karen Dalrymple and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
