The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Kitty, by L. T. Meade

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Wild Kitty

Author: L. T. Meade

Posting Date: November 12, 2011 [EBook #9986]
Release Date: February, 2006
First Posted: November 5, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD KITTY ***




Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team











WILD KITTY.

BY L. T. MEADE





CONTENTS

CHAPTER I. Bessie, Alice, Gwin, and Elma

CHAPTER II. The Blarney Stone

CHAPTER III. Is that the Girl?

CHAPTER IV. Tiffs all Round

CHAPTER V. Incorrigible Kitty

CHAPTER VI. The Tug-of-War

CHAPTER VII. Elma

CHAPTER VIII. The Little House in Constantine Road

CHAPTER IX. The Head Mistress and the Cabbage-Rose

CHAPTER X. Paddy Wheel-About

CHAPTER XI. In Carrie's Bedroom

CHAPTER XII. The "Spotted Leopard"

CHAPTER XIII. Coventry

CHAPTER XIV. The Lost Packet

CHAPTER XV. Gwin Harley's Scheme

CHAPTER XVI. Paddy Wheel-About's Old Coat

CHAPTER XVII. "We Are Both in the Same Boat"

CHAPTER XVIII. "I Cannot Help You"

CHAPTER XIX. Kitty Tells the Truth

CHAPTER XX. An Eye-Opener

CHAPTER XXI. The Lady from Buckinghamshire

CHAPTER XXII. Stunned and Cold

CHAPTER XXIII. Stars and Moon, and God Behind

CHAPTER XXIV. Sunshine Again

CHAPTER XXV. Kitty "Go-Bragh" (Forever)




CHAPTER I.

BESSIE, ALICE, GWIN, ELMA.


Bessie! Bessie!

"Yes, mother," replied Bessie Challoner. "You'll be late for school,
child, if you are not quick."

"Bessie!" shouted her father at the top of his voice from below stairs.
"Bessie; late as usual."

"I am really going, father; I am just ready," was the eager reply.
Bessie caught up her sailor hat, shoved it carelessly over her mass of
thick hair, and searched frantically round her untidy bedroom for the
string bag which contained her schoolbooks.

"Oh, Bessie, you'll get into a scrape," said Judy, one of her younger
sisters, dancing into the room. "Why, you are late. I hear the
schoolbell ringing; it will stop in a moment."

"Don't worry me, Judy," cried Bessie. "Do you know where my bag is?"

Judy ran into the middle of the room, turned round, and began to laugh
ecstatically. "Do you know where it is, you little good-for-nothing?
Have you put it hiding?"

"Yes, yes, yes," screamed the child, jumping up and down in her joy.

"Then, if you don't give it to me at once, I'll--"

But Judy had dodged her and was out of the room. Up to the attic flew
the child, and after her dashed Bessie. The bag was found in the corner
of the linen-cupboard. Bessie aimed a frenzied blow at Judy, who once
again dodged her, then the schoolgirl ran downstairs and was out of the
house.

"Bessie, for shame!" said her brother, who was standing smoking his
cigarette in a very lazy manner in the garden. "Why, you'll never get
full marks."

"Don't," said Bessie. "I feel quite hunted between you all."

She had got on the highroad now, and could walk away in peace. She was a
tall girl, somewhat bony-looking at present, with a face which showed
abundance of intellect, large dreamy eyes, a wide mouth, a flat nose, a
long chin. Bessie was certainly not at all a pretty girl; but,
notwithstanding this fact, there were few of all the pupils at Middleton
School who approached her in popularity. She was clever without being a
scrap conceited, and was extremely good-natured, doing her work for the
pleasure of doing it and not because she wanted to outstrip a
schoolfellow. She was conscientious too, and would have scorned to do a
mean or shabby thing; but she was hopelessly untidy, careless to a
fault, late for school half her days, getting into countless scrapes and
getting out of them as best she could--the butt of her class as well as
the favorite, always true to herself and indifferent to the censures or
the praise of her fellow-creatures.

"Well, Bess, is that you? Do wait for me," called out a panting voice
in the distance.

Late as she was, Bessie stopped. It was never her way to leave a
fellow-creature in the lurch.

A girl with dancing eyes and rosy cheeks came panting and puffing round
the corner.

"I just caught a sight of the red ribbon with which you tie your hair,"
she said. "I am so glad you are late; I am too, and I am quite ashamed
of myself."

"Why in the world should you be ashamed of yourself, Alice?" asked
Bessie. "I don't suppose you meant to be late."

"Of course not; but I shall lose my mark for punctuality; and you know,
Bessie, I am feverishly anxious to get a move, and to--to win the
scholarship at the midsummer break-up."

Bessie yawned slightly.

"Come on, Alice," she said; "I am disgracefully late as usual, and we
need not make matters worse. I suppose we must wait in the hall now
until prayers are over."

"It's too bad," said Alice. "I'll tell you afterward how it happened,
Bessie. I am glad you waited for me. They always scold you so much for
being late that they will not take so much notice of me. May I slip into
my place in form behind you?"

"If you like," said, Bessie.

They entered the great schoolhouse, turned down a long corridor,
deposited their hats and jackets on the pegs provided for the purpose,
and went into the schoolroom just when the pupils were filing into their
different classes.

Both girls had marks against their names for unpunctuality. Alice
frowned and fidgeted, turned scarlet, glanced nervously at her
fellow-pupils, but Bessie took the matter with her wonted calm. Soon she
forgot all about it. She became absorbed in her different studies, each
one of which she had prepared with extreme attention. As she answered
question after question her great, full, dreamy eyes seemed to lighten
with hidden fire, her face lost its plainness, the intellect in it
transformed it. One or two other girls in the class watched her with a
slight degree of envy.

Bessie was very high up in the school. As usual she quickly rose to the
head of the form; this position she kept without the slightest
difficulty during lesson after lesson.

Alice, muddled already by that mark for unpunctuality, got through her
work badly; as Bessie rose in the class Alice went down. At the end of
the morning's work the two girls were far as the poles asunder.

"I can't think how you do it," said Alice, coming up to Bessie during
recess, and linking her hand through her arm. "You never seem to mind
disgrace at all."

"Of course I mind disgrace," answered Bessie. "Come out into the
playground, won't you Alice? We can't talk in here."

They went out and began pacing up and down the wide quadrangle devoted
to the purpose. Other girls passed them two and two, each girl talking
to her special companion.

"How very handsome Gwin Harley looks this morning," said Alice, pausing
in her grumbling to gaze at a slender and lovely girl who passed them,
walking with another dark-eyed, somewhat plain girl of the name of Elma
Lewis.

"I wish she was not such friends with Elma," said Bessie. "I like Gwin
very much indeed; I suppose every one in the school does."

"Catch Elma not making up to her," said Alice. "Why, you know Gwin is as
rich as ever she can be; she has a pony-carriage of her own. I cannot
make out why she comes to Middleton School."

"Because it is the best school in the neighborhood," said Bessie
somewhat proudly. "It is not a question of money, nor of anything but
simply of learning; we learn better at Middleton School than anywhere
else; there are better teachers and--"

"But such a rum lot of girls," said Alice. "Of course we all go in sets,
and our set is quite the nicest in the school; but all the same, I
wonder a rich man like Mr. Harley allows Gwin to come here."

Gwin and Elma drew up at that moment in front of the other two.

"Bessie," said Gwin, "I saw you carrying everything before you this
morning. But," she added hastily, "that is neither here nor there. I
shall never be a great learned genius like you, but I shall admire
geniuses all the same. Now, I want to say that Elma is coming to tea
with me this afternoon, and will you both come as well? We have a good
deal to talk over."

Bessie's face lightened.

"I should like it very much indeed," she said; "but you know I must get
through my studies first."

"Oh, you won't take long over them."

"Yes, but I shall," answered Bessie; "there is a very stiff piece of
German to translate this afternoon. I can manage French and mathematics
of course, and--"

"Oh, don't begin to rehearse your different studies," said Gwin, holding
up her hand in a warning attitude. "I don't care in the least what you
learn, Bessie; I want you to come. Because," she added, "you are such an
honest creature."

"Why should not I be honest?" said Bessie, opening her eyes wide. "I
have never had any temptation to be anything else."

"My dear Bessie, you are too painfully matter-of-fact," said Elma. "Gwin
meant that your nature is transparent--it is a beautiful trait in any
character."

"Well, Bessie, will you come or will you not?" interrupted Gwin.

"Yes, I'll come. I'll manage it somehow," said Bessie. I can't resist
the temptation."

"And you too, Alice?" said Gwin, turning to Alice Denvers, who was
watching Bessie with envious eyes.

"I don't suppose mother will let me. I am ever so vexed," said Alice.

"But why not, dear; you have nothing special to do to-day?"

"Well, I had a bad mark for unpunctuality, and--"

"What does that signify?"

"But listen; I have gone down several places in class. Father and mother
are so particular; they seem to think my whole future life depends upon
my position in school. Of course I know we are not very rich, like
you--" Here she flushed and hesitated.

Gwin Harley flushed also.

"When you talk like that," she said, "I feel quite ashamed of being well
off. I often long to be poor like--like dear little Elma here." As she
spoke she patted her somewhat squat little companion on her arm. "But
never mind, girls; I am not one of those who intend to throw away all my
money; that is one reason why I want to have a good talk this afternoon.
You must come, Alice; you simply must."

"But there is another reason," said Alice. "Kitty Malone is coming
to-day."

"Kitty Malone! Who in the name of fortune is she?"

"Oh, a wild Irish girl."

"Truly wild, I should think, with that name. 'Kitty Malone, ohone!' I
seem to hear the refrain somewhere now. Isn't there a song called 'Kitty
Malone'?"

"There is a song called 'The Widow Malone,'" said Bessie; "don't you
know it? You read all about it in 'Harry Lorrequer.'"

"But who is Kitty Malone, Alice?"

"I say a wild Irish girl."

"And what has she got to do with you?"

"She is coming to board with us. She is going to join the school, and
mother is to have the charge of her. A precious bore I shall find it."

"When did you say she was coming?" asked Gwin eagerly.

"I expect she is at home by now; she was to arrive this morning."

"Delightful!" said Gwin, clapping her hands, "she shall come too. I want
beyond anything to become acquainted with a real aborigine, and of
course any girl called Kitty Malone hailing from the sister-isle must
belong to that species. Bring the wild Irish girl with you by all means,
Alice; and now, as you have no manner of excuse, I'll say ta-ta for the
present." She kissed her pretty hand lightly to the two girls, and went
on her way, once more accompanied by her faithful satellite, Elma.

"Isn't she fascinating?" said Alice; "aren't you quite in love with her,
Bessie?"

"Dear me, no," answered Bessie Challoner. "I never fall in love in that
sort of headlong fashion; but all the same," she added, "I admire Gwin
very much, only I do wish she would not take up with Elma."

"So do I," said Alice.

"It was very kind of her to ask us," continued Bessie, "and I for one
shall be delighted to go. I have not the least doubt that in a big house
of that sort they have 'Household Encyclopædia,' and I want to look up
the article on magnetic iron ore."

"Oh, what in the world for?" cried Alice.

"I am interested in magnets, and--but there, Alice why should I worry
you with the sort of things that delight me. I am going, and that is all
right. You will be sure to come too; won't you Alice?"

"Yes, I must manage it somehow; and as Gwin has asked Kitty Malone it
won't make it quite so difficult. I know mother would not let me leave
Kitty this afternoon, for it is, from the money point of view, a great
thing for us her coming. Her people are quite well off, although they
are Irish. They live in an old castle on the coast of Donegal, and Kitty
has never been out of the country in which she was born. They are paying
mother very well to receive her, and mother is ever so pleased. Of
course it's horrid for me for she will be my companion morning, noon,
and night; we are even to sleep in the same room. It was that that made
me late for school this morning, and got me that horrid, horrid mark for
unpunctuality."

"But why? I don't understand," said Bessie.

"Well, you see, I put it off until the last minute. I know it was all my
fault; but I would not empty the cupboard in the corner of the room,
although mother told me to do so at intervals for the past week. Well,
mother came in this morning and found it choke full--you know the sort
of thing, full to bursting, so that the door wouldn't shut--and she said
that I should empty it before I went to school. I told her I should be
late, and mother said it was a just punishment for me. Didn't I bless
Kitty Malone! But of course I set to work, and I scrambled out the
things somehow. Of course I am in hot water, and father is so terribly
particular; but I will try and come. Yes, I'll try and come, and I'll
bring Kitty."

"Very well; if you are going we may as well go together," said Bessie.
"Gwin never mentioned the hour she had tea; but I suppose if we are at
Harley Grove by five o'clock it will do."

"Yes, I should think so," said Alice in a dubious voice. "It is a pity
she did not mention the hour. There she is still hobnobbing with Elma.
I'll just run across the quadrangle and ask her."

Alice left her companion, obtained the necessary information from Gwin,
and came back again. "She says if we are with her sharp at five it will
do quite well, and we are to stay until nine o'clock, then we can all go
home together."

"Delicious!" said Bessie. "I love being out late. I hope there will be a
moon, and that there won't be many clouds in the sky, for I want to
examine the position of some of the planets. Did I tell you, Alice, that
Uncle John has a telescope through which I can see the asteroids?"

"What on earth are they?" cried Alice, yawning as she spoke.

"Oh, the very small planets."

"Then, my dear, I hope you will see them. But really, Bessie, I can't
run round nature as you do--your intellect is quite overpowering; one
moment you want to get up information with regard to magnetic iron ore,
and the next you confound me with some awful observation about
asteroids. Good-by, Bessie; good-by. I shall be late for dinner, and
then no chance of going to the fair Gwin's this afternoon."

"Well, if you do go, call for me," shouted Bessie after her; "I'll wait
for you until half-past four, then I'll start off by myself."

"Yes, yes, I'll come if I can, and bring Kitty also if I can."

"Be sure you don't fail. I'll look out for you."

Alice put wings to her feet and set off running down the dusty road, and
Bessie more soberly returned home.




CHAPTER II.

THE BLARNEY STONE.


Alice's home was nearly half a mile from the school. It was a big,
commonplace suburban house standing at a corner. It had a small garden
in front and a larger one at the back; but neither at front nor back
were the gardens tidily kept. They were downtrodden by the constant
pressure of many feet, and were further ornamented at intervals by sheds
and kennels, for Fred and Philip Denvers were devoted to all sorts of
pets; there was also a rabbit-run at one end, and a little railed-off
place where Mrs. Denvers tried to keep fowls.

Alice at intervals had sighed for a tennis lawn; but whenever she dared
to mention the idea she was hooted by her big brothers, who did not want
the garden to be made in the least bit, as they expressed it,
ornamental.

"But tennis isn't ornamental!" said Alice.

"Beastly game," remarked Fred. "Only meant for girls; just to give them
an opportunity of hobnobbing together, and talking gossip, and making up
mischief."

"You talk in the most ridiculous, unfair way," said Alice in
indignation; but she did not dare to mention the subject of the tennis
court again, and the boys still continued to build fresh sheds and
introduce new animals.

On this occasion, as Alice walked up to the house, she was met by Fred,
who ran out to meet her in some excitement.

"I say, Alice," he cried, "she's come, and she is a rum 'un!"

"Who has come?" asked Alice; "not--not Kitty Malone?"

"No one else, at your service, Kitty Malone, ohone!" cried Fred. "And
oh! isn't she Irish! You come along and see her. I never saw anything
like her before."

"Why, Fred, I didn't think you cared for girls."

"Nor do I as a rule, but this one--oh! I say she is a jolly sort. Why
she's been down in the kitchen and up in the attics--she knows every one
in the house already; and do you know what she is doing now--sitting in
the drawing-room with the window wide open, grinning down at you, and
she has got Pointer in her arms. You know Pointer, dirty old
fellow!--well, she caught him up the moment she came in, and insisted on
bringing him upstairs, and he has taken to her as if he had known her
ever since he was a puppy. Mean of him, isn't it; but I declare I don't
blame him. Oh! there you are, Kitty Malone." Fred raised his laughing
face to encounter another as laughing, a face at that moment grinning
from ear to ear.

"Are you Alice?" called a voice. "Are you the one I am to sleep with?
Just say, call out loud; don't mind if you shout, because I'm accustomed
to that sort of thing."

"Is this Kitty Malone?" thought Alice. She liked frank, jolly girls;
but she was not quite prepared for Kitty.

She entered the house, flung down her bag of books, and ran upstairs to
the drawing-room. The next moment she found herself in the firm embrace
of a girl a little taller than herself, a slim, very pretty, very
untidy, very overdressed girl.

"Here I am and welcome to yourself," said Kitty. "I was so vexed you
were not here to greet me; but bless you, my dear, I'm quite
comfortable. No, I'm not a bit tired--you haven't asked me, by the way,
but I suppose you mean to. I had a spiffin' journey. Sick! not I. I'm
never seasick, and I enjoyed the train. I made friends with such a dear
old gentleman and with two boys. I nearly kissed the boys when I was
leaving them, but I didn't quite. Is that you, Fred? Come along in now
and let us be jolly together. Why, Alice, how stiff you are; you have
not opened your lips yet."

"I have not had an opportunity," answered Alice. "You do talk such a
lot, Kitty."

"Do I? I expect we all do in Old Ireland. Bless her! she's a dear old
country, and I'm as sorry as anybody to say good-by to her. But, all the
same, I am glad to see England (poky, stiff sort of place it seems). Say
now, Alice, do you like my dress? It was made in Dublin; it's the height
of the fashion I am told."

"It's very showy," said Alice.

"Do you think so? Well, you are plainly dressed; nothing but that brown
merino. And--my dear, I thought they were always dressed up to the nines
near London. This place is near London, isn't it?"

"Yes, a few miles off. Oh, of course your dress is very nice; but now I
must get ready for dinner."

"Oh! and ain't I peckish?" said Kitty, clapping her hands and winking
broadly at Fred.

Alice turned to leave the room.

"We may as well go together," said Kitty, following her and slipping her
hand through her arm. "Do you know," she said, "when I first came to the
house I could scarcely breathe. Why, it's nothing but a nutshell. I
never saw such a deeny dawn of a place in the whole course of my life.
How many of you live here?"

"Father and mother, and the two boys and I," answered Alice.

"And you are the only girl?"

"Yes."

"Now come to the window and let me have a good squint at you." As Kitty
spoke she dragged Alice forward, put her facing the light, and stood
herself with her back to it. She began to make a careful scrutiny,
calling out her remarks aloud: "Eyes passable, forehead so-so, mouth
pretty well, complexion not bad for England, hair--"

"Oh, I say, Kitty, I can't quite stand this," said Alice. "Are those
your manners in Ireland? What a wild country it must be!"

"Dear, darling, jolly old place!" said Kitty, dancing up and down.

"And you really give me to understand that people make remarks on one
another in that sort of fashion?" said Alice, darting away from her
companion and pouring some water into a basin to wash her hands.

"Well, yes, love, they do when they like, and they don't when they
don't like. We are free and easy folk, I can tell you, and we have a gay
time. I'll tell you all about father and the old castle, and the dogs,
and the cows, and the cats, and the rabbits, and the mice when we have a
spare moment. That brother of yours, Fred, is not half a bad old chap;
and I saw a nice, curly-headed little gossoon coming in just now with
his books under his arm. What's his name?"

"Oh, you mean Philip. Yes, he's the youngest; he's well enough if you
don't spoil him, Kitty."

"I won't spoil him, bless his heart," said Kitty; "but of course I'll
make friends with him. I couldn't live without boys. There are two at
home, Pat and Laurence; and, oh! I shall miss Laurie, dear old chap! I
must not think of him." Kitty's face underwent a swift change, the
brightness went out of it just as if a heavy cloud had swept away the
sun; the big, very handsome dark-blue eyes, so dark as to be almost
black, grew full of sudden tears; the exquisitely curved lips trembled;
she turned her head aside and looked out of the window.

At that moment it seemed to Alice that she saw beneath Kitty's wild,
eccentric manners a heart of gold. She only caught a glimpse of it, for
the next moment the girl was chatting away in the most light, frivolous,
extraordinary style. The dinner-bell sounded through the house, and the
pair went down to dinner.

"I'd like to sit near you, please, Mr. Denvers," said Kitty.

Philip's place was always near his father; this had been a custom ever
since he had been a baby. Kitty now ensconced herself in the little
boy's chair.

"Am I taking anybody's seat?" she asked, looking up.

"Only mine," said Phil.

"Never mind, little gossoon; you shall have it to-morrow. I want to sit
near Mr. Denvers because I expect he can tell me a good many things I
don't understand."

"You must allow me to eat my dinner, Miss Malone. You see I have a good
deal of carving to do, and besides I am a busy man," said Mr. Denvers in
a good-humored voice, for it was difficult to resist the roguish glances
of Kitty's eyes, and the sort of affectionate way in which she cuddled
up to her host's side.

"Oh, I won't talk _over_ much," she said, glancing with her flashing
eyes round at the entire party. "But you see I am quite a stranger; and,
oh my! the place does seem lonely. You are all so stiff, I cannot quite
understand it. Is it the English fashion, please, Mr. Denvers?"

"Well, you see," answered Mrs. Denvers from the other end of the table,
"we don't know you yet."

"But I am sure all the same we shall be very good friends," said Mr.
Denvers. "May I give you a glass of wine?"

"Wine! Bless you, I'm a teetotaller," said Kitty. "Why, it isn't habits
of intoxication you'll be putting into me. I never take anything but
water, or milk when I can get it; and it isn't Miss Malone you're going
to call me is it, for if it is I tell you frankly that I'll die
entirely. I must be Kitty from this moment, or Kitty Malone, or anything
of that sort, but Kitty something it must be. Now, is it settled fair
and square, Kitty shall I be? Here's my hand on my heart; I'll die if
I'm called Miss Malone!"

Fred burst into roars of laughter.

"I say," he cried, "what an extraordinary girl you are!"

"Well, and so are you an extraordinary boy," said Kitty. "Oh, dear me, I
am hungry! Do you mind handing me over the potatoes? Why, you don't mean
to say you peel 'em. I never heard of such a thing! Why don't you have
them in their jackets?"

"Potatoes are generally mashed or peeled or something of that sort in
England," said Mr. Denvers. "I see, Kitty--" he added.

"Ah! bless you now for calling me that! What is it you want to say, dear
Mr. Denvers?"

"I see we shall have a good deal to teach you," he said, and then he too
burst into a fit of laughter, and so the merry, somewhat rollicking meal
proceeded.

Alice alone would not succumb to the fascinations of the Irish maiden.
She sat holding herself somewhat stiff, feeling a good deal disgusted,
wondering what Bessie Challoner would say, what Gwin Harley would think,
anticipating in advance Elma's sneers.

Kitty, however, subjugated Mr. and Mrs. Denvers and the two boys
completely. As to Pointer, he would not leave her side; as her long,
white, taper fingers touched the top of his grizzled head, he looked at
her with eyes of unutterable love.

"What have you done to the dog?" said Fred at last. He felt almost
afraid, in his great admiration of the bewitching stranger.

"Only given him a taste of blarney," was the reply. "Tell me now, Fred,
were you ever in Ireland?"

"No," answered Fred.

"Ah! I thought as much. If you had been, and if you had kissed the
Blarney Stone, why then, it's nothing could withstand you."

"What is the Blarney Stone?" asked Fred.

"Don't you know that much? Why you are an ignoramus out and out. Well,
I'll tell you. It's a stone on Blarney Castle, set low down in the wall,
five or six feet from the top; and to kiss it, why that is no easy
matter, for you have to be held by your heels and let hang over the
wall; and if you can get some one to hold you tight--very tight,
mind--you slide down and you reach the stone and you kiss it, and from
that moment--oh glory! but you carry everything before you. There's not
a man, a woman, nor a child, no, nor a beastie either, that can resist
you. You bewitch 'em."

"I have no doubt, Kitty, you kissed the stone," said Mr. Denvers.

"Why then, it's yes, sir," she answered raising her big eyes and then
dropping them again with an inimitable expression.

"What a queer little girl you are!" he said. "You are very amusing; but
I think we must tame you a bit."

"You won't do that, sir. They call me the wild Irish girl at home, and
the wild Irish girl I'll be to the end of the chapter. If it's schooling
I want, why, I'll have it, but taming, no thank you."

Kitty jumped from her seat and began to dance a sort of improvised Irish
jig about the room.

"Do you know the jig?" she said, dancing up to Fred as she spoke.

"No," he answered; "are you trying it on now?"

"Yes; jump up, my hearty, and I'll teach you in a twinkling. Here, watch
me; point your toes so, turn round--pirouette as we call it. Now, then,
put your hand on your hip, courtesy to me, and come back again. That's
how it's done. Oh, Fred, I'll soon have you as beautiful a broth of a
boy as if you were born in Old Ireland."

"Fred, my son, it is time for you to go back to college," said his
father. "Kitty, we are very pleased to have you here, and you are a very
amusing girl; but you know life is not all play."

Kitty pulled a long face. Fred darted a laughing glance at her, and ran
off. Kitty and Alice at last found themselves alone.

"You're disapproving of me a good bit, aren't you, Alice?" said Kitty,
going up to the other girl and taking both her hands in hers.

"Well, I think you are very odd," said Alice.

"And do you want me to be quite sober and tame, and to have all the
spirit knocked out me, alanna?"

"No; but we don't do exactly as you do in this country."

"And you think you'll tame me into your cut-and-dry pattern?"

"I don't know about that. I don't understand you, Kitty."

"You will after a bit, Alice. It's here I am for sure, and a gray sort
of land it is! Why, the sun doesn't even shine!"

"Oh, doesn't it," said Alice angrily. "It's ridiculous to talk in that
strain about this country. We have much finer weather than you have in
Ireland."

"Don't be cross, darling; I mean it metaphorically. You see we live a
gay life over there, we have a joke about everything, and the wit that
runs out of our mouths--why, it's like flashes of lightning. Oh, we have
a good time in the old country, and when you come and stay with me at
Castle Malone you'll say so for yourself. Now, then, what do you want to
do this afternoon?"

"I must look over my lessons first."

"Lessons--how many?"

"A good few. You see of course I want to get on."

"By the way, Alice," said Mrs. Denvers, who came into the room at that
moment, "I am afraid you had a bad mark for unpunctuality this morning."

"Yes, mother, that is so."

"And what is your place in form?"

"I went down two or three places, mother."

"I am sorry to hear it; your father will be very much annoyed."

"I'll try and make up for it to-morrow, mother. And, mother, Gwin Harley
has asked me to go to tea with her this afternoon--may I?"

"I don't see how you can. There is Kitty Malone."

"But she has asked Kitty too."

"What's that?" asked Kitty, bounding forward. "A tea party, bless you?"

"You have been asked to tea at Harley Grove. Mother, may we go? I think
Kitty would enjoy it."

"If you are sure you are not too tired, Kitty; you have had a long
journey," said Mrs. Denvers.

"I'm not a scrap tired," said Kitty. "I'm as gay as a lark and as fresh
as a daisy. I hope it's rather a big swell party, for I have got some
awfully pretty dresses. I want to make myself look smart. You can tell
me how they manage these sort of things in England. I'm all agog to go."

"Yes, Alice, you may go," said Mrs. Denvers. "But Kitty, my dear, if I
were you I would let them down lightly."

"What do you mean, dear Mrs. Denvers?"

"Don't startle them too much. They are not accustomed to such--such
frankness as you are disposed to give."

"I'll bewitch 'em," said Kitty, beginning again to dance with light
fantastic measure up and down the room. "I'll bewitch 'em one and all. I
have made up my mind. I didn't kiss the Blarney Stone for nothing!"




CHAPTER III.

IS THAT THE GIRL?


Kitty and Alice went up to their bedroom, where Kitty began to unpack
her trunks and toss her dresses about--they were all new and most of
them were gay. She had scarcely a quiet-looking dress in the entire
collection.

"What will you do with those?" said Alice, who saw nothing to admire in
the fantastic clothes, and much to condemn. Alice had not the smallest
love for dress, and at this period of her life she considered any pains
taken over clothes a sheer waste of time.

"But don't you like them?" said Kitty. "I thought girls loved pretty
dress. Aunt Honora says so, and so did Aunt Bridget when she came to see
us at Castle Malone a month ago. When she heard I was going to England
she said: 'Why, then, my dear Kitty, you must titivate up. It will never
do for them to see you not looking as bright as a sunbeam and as gay as
a cricket. It's colors you'll want, Kitty, and rich materials, and
spangles, and jewels, and beads, and all the other fal-lals.' And father
said to Aunt Bridget:

"'Why then, now, Biddy,' said he, 'you just get what's right for the
child, for she hasn't a notion, and no more have I, what's worn in that
foreign place England.'

"So Aunt Bridget said: 'A wink's as good as a word,' and I'll dress her
up in dashing style!' So she took the measure of my chest, and the round
of my waist, and the length of my skirt, and she saw how many inches I
wanted in the sleeve, and she said: 'You leave the rest to me, Kitty.'
And of course I did, and in three weeks' time down came a trunk that
would make your eyes shine even to look within it. Oh! wasn't it just
the darling entirely! Here's one of the dresses. Now, what do you think
of that?"

As Kitty spoke she pulled out a pink nun's-veiling, made up with
innumerable ruffles and frills and laces and embroidery, a really very
pretty dress for quite a gay party, but totally unsuitable for a
schoolgirl of Kitty Malone's age.

"Why, it's a long dress?" said Alice. "How old are you, Kitty?"

"It's fifteen I'll be my next birthday, darling. Well, and is there
anything wrong about fifteen? I always thought it was a jewel of an
age."

"Yes, but this dress is long; why, there's a train to it!"

"Oh, mercy me! so there is," said Kitty. "To tell you the truth, I never
even tried on the skirt, I was so bamboozled and overexcited with the
others. A train to be sure! Oh, won't I bewitch 'em entirely. Let me try
it on, darling. Have you got a long looking-glass anywhere?"

"Not in this room," answered Alice; "it is not necessary."

"Not necessary? Well, now, I should say it's the one thing you ought to
have in every room, a long looking-glass that you can see yourself in
from top to toe. Why, half your elegance is lost if you cannot see how
you look your own self. Is there one in any other room?"

"In mother's dressing-room, I think."

"And where's that room situated, my jewel?" asked Kitty.

"Oh, at the other end of the passage; but really, Kitty--"

Kitty, however, was off. Alice stayed in her room, too disgusted to
follow her.

"Something must be done to put a stop to this," she thought. "Of course,
mother won't keep a girl of that sort. Why, she's a regular wild Indian;
I shall be ashamed to take her out this afternoon."

But at that moment a high voice, accompanied by peals of laughter, was
heard shouting for Alice.

"Alice, mavourneen, come along this minute! Alice, come quick! quick!
Why, it's enthralling I am! You never saw anything like me before, did
you? Oh, the Blarney Stone, what it has done for me. Come, Alice, come,
come quick!"

"What can be the matter?" called Mrs. Denvers from downstairs. "Has
anything happened?"

"Oh, it's only me, dear Mrs. Denvers. Do come up this minute, my dear
ducky woman, and see me. I found a dress with a train to it in my trunk,
a new dress from Dublin, and I'm in it, and beautiful I look. Come up
and see me. I'm gazing at myself in your glass. I never saw anything so
lovely in the whole course of my life."

Mrs. Denvers and Alice now both appeared upon the scene. Kitty in her
new dress, with a train nearly a foot on the ground, was stepping
backward and forward before the long glass in Mrs. Denvers' wardrobe.
Her eyes were flashing with merriment and delight. Her small arched feet
were dancing a _pas de seul_ in and out of the many flounces which
befrilled the end of the pink dress.

"Well, do you like it?" called Kitty. "How do you think I look? Did you
ever see anybody more elegant in all your born days? Oh, if only the
dear old dad could see me! I feel as if I must kiss myself." Here she
commenced blowing kisses vigorously at the gay figure reflected in the
glass.

"Come, Kitty," said Mrs. Denvers, "you are not going out in that dress."

"And why not, my dear Mrs. Denvers? Why shouldn't I go out and captivate
the natives? That's what a pretty girl is made for."

"Not in this country," said Mrs. Denvers in a somewhat severe voice. "It
cannot be done; Kitty, you are much too young to wear a dress of that
sort. While you are with me you must expect to be guided by my taste and
wishes."

"But, dear Mrs. Denvers, Aunt Bridget ordered it."

"Well, of course, dear, you can wear it at Castle Malone, but not
here--at least, not out of doors. Yes, my child, it is a very pretty
dress; but I do understand what is right for girls to appear in. You
must have something quieter, Kitty."

"Then come along and choose for me," said Kitty, who was as good-natured
as she was high-spirited and volatile. "Come straight and choose, for
Alice, poor child, is troubled with the sulks."

"What do you mean?" said Alice indignantly.

"But isn't it true, darling; you have such a frown between your brows,
and it doesn't improve you. There, cheer up, Alice, honey! Why, it's the
best of friends I want to be with you; but you don't like me, not a bit.
I'll win you yet, Alice, aroon! But at the present moment you're saying
in your heart: 'What a nasty, forward, ill-bred girl that is, and I am
ashamed, that I am, that my schoolfellows should see me with the likes
of her.'"

"Come, come, Kitty, no more of this," said Mrs. Denvers. "If you are
going out you have no time to lose. Yes, let me see your wardrobe. I
think this dark-blue dress is the best."

"But you are not expecting me to go out in the open air without a body!"
said Kitty, "and there's nothing but a skirt to this. I suppose I may
wear one of my pretty blouses?"

"Yes; that skirt and a nice blouse will do. Now then, get ready, both of
you, as quickly as you can. Kitty, remember I expect your things to be
put away tidily."

"To be sure, ma'am. Why, then, it would be a shame to spoil all these
pretty garments. I'll put them away in a jiffy, and come down looking as
neat as a new pin."

Alice, who had brushed out her hair, put on a clean collar and a pair of
cuffs, was now standing waiting for her friend.

"Look here," she said suddenly, "will you be long putting away your
things and dressing?"

"Not very long, darling; but I must curl my fringe over again."

"I wish you wouldn't wear a fringe, Kitty; none of the nice girls do at
the school."

"Is it give up my fringe I would?" answered Kitty.

"What a show I'd be! Why, look at my forehead, it's too high for the
lines of pure beauty. Now, when the fringe comes down just to here, why,
it's perfect. Aunt Bridget said it was, and she's a rare judge, I can
tell you. She was a beauty in her youth, one of the Dublin beauties; and
you can't go to any city for fairer women than are to be found in
Dublin. I tell you what it is, Alice, I see you are in a flurry to be
off. Can I overtake you?"

"You can," said Alice suddenly. "You can come to me at Bessie
Challoner's house."

"Bessie Challoner!--what a pretty name!--Challoner! I like that!"
answered Kitty, looking thoughtful. "And where's her house, aroon? What
part of the neighborhood is it situated in?"

"Come here to the window and I'll show you. When you leave this house
you turn to the right and walk straight on until you come to Cherry
Lodge--that's the name of the house. Bessie and I will be waiting for
you."

"Well, then, off you go, and I won't keep you many minutes."

Alice ran out of the room. She found her mother waiting for her
downstairs.

"Oh, mother," said Alice, "she's too dreadful."

"Come now, no whispering about me behind my back," called a gay voice
over the stairs. "I thought it would be something of that sort. That's
not fair--out with your remarks in front of me, and nothing behind."

"Kitty, Kitty, go back and dress, you incorrigible child!" called Mrs.
Denvers.

"Mother!" said Alice.

"My dear Alice," said her mother, "you will soon learn to like that poor
child. She has a great deal that is good in her, and then she is so
pretty."

"Pretty?" muttered Alice. "Oh, I see you're bewitched like the rest of
them."

She left the house, feeling more uncomfortable, depressed, and angry
than she had done for several years.

Mr. Denvers was a lawyer, and made a fairly good income; but his large
family and the education of his boys had strained his resources to such
an extent that he was very glad to accept the liberal sum which Kitty's
father was paying for her. Alice knew all about this, and at first was
more than willing to help her family in every way in her power. She did
not murmur at all when she was asked to give up half of her room to the
Irish girl. She was quite willing to take her under her patronage, to
show her round, to try to get friends for her among her own
schoolfellows--in short, to make her happy. But then Alice had never
pictured any one in the least like Kitty Malone. She had imagined a
somewhat plain, shy, awkward girl, who would lean upon her, who would
give her unbounded affection, and follow her lead in everything. Now,
this sparkling, racy, daring Kitty was by no means to her mind. There
was not the least doubt that Kitty would not be guided by anybody, that
she would never play second fiddle, and there was also a dreadful fear
down deep in poor Alice's heart that she would fascinate her school
fellows instead of disgusting them, and that Alice's own dearest friends
would leave her in favor of the stranger.

She walked very slowly, therefore, a frown between her brows, discontent
and jealousy in her heart.

Bessie was waiting for her at the gate.

"Why, Alice," called out Bessie, "how late you are. We shan't get to
Harley Grove by five o'clock."

"I can't help being late; it is a blessing you see me now," answered
Alice. "I wonder you waited for me, Bessie."

"Well, my dear," answered Bessie, "I would much rather walk with you
than take a solitary ramble by myself. I thought," she added, "you were
going to bring that new Irish girl with you. Has she come?"

"Has she not come?" answered Alice. "Oh, Bessie, Bessie, it is because
of her I am late. Oh, Bessie, she is quite too dreadful."

"How so?" asked Bessie.

"She is the most extraordinary, wild, reckless, absolutely unladylike,
vulgar person I ever came across in the whole course of my life."

"What a lot of adjectives!" laughed Bessie. "I shall be quite curious to
see her; from your description she must be a monster."

"She is a monster, a human monster," answered Alice; "and the worst of
it is, Bessie, that in some extraordinary way she has fascinated both
father and mother, and even Fred--Fred, who hates girls as a rule; they
are all so taken up with this blessed Kitty Malone that they don't mind
her perfectly savage manners. I can tell you I am quite miserable about
it."

"Poor Alice," answered Bessie in a sympathetic tone. "I suppose then,
dear, she is not coming with us?"

"Oh, yes, she is; she is following us. She could not find anything quiet
enough to put on."

"Quiet enough to put on! What do you mean?"

"Oh, my dear, her wardrobe is beyond description. She absolutely wanted
to come to poor Gwin's quiet little tea party in a dress fit for a ball,
flounced and frilled and laced and ribboned, and with a train to it,
absolutely a train, although she is not fifteen yet."

Bessie could not help laughing. "I am sorry she is fond of dress," she
answered; "I can't bear that sort of girl."

"Oh, you'll positively loathe her, Bessie. I quite pity you at the
thought of having to walk with her this afternoon."

"My dear Alice, we must make the best of it," answered Bessie, "and I
don't suppose she will quite kill me; she will be amusing at any rate."

"Amusing enough to those who have not got to live with her day and
night," answered Alice in a very discontented voice. "Oh, and here she
comes," she added; "and, look, she is running and racing down the road
and waving her hands to us. Oh, Bessie, it is intolerable! Don't you
pity me?"

"What! is that the girl?" cried Bessie. "How very--"

"How very what?" asked Alice.

"How very pretty she is!"

"Pretty," said Alice in a tone of such withering scorn that Bessie could
not help gazing at her friend in astonishment.




CHAPTER IV.

TIFFS ALL AROUND.


Kitty's dark-blue skirt was all that was correct and proper; it reached
just to her ankles, and her remarkably small and beautifully-shaped feet
were encased in the neatest possible tan boots. But the blouse of light
pink silk, all bedizened with bunches of ribbons and lappets of lace,
was in Alice's eyes almost as painfully unsuitable as the trained skirt.
Kitty wore a little close-fitting cap of dark-blue velvet on her head.
Her hair, of the softest, cloudiest black, true Irish hair, was piled up
in a thick mass behind; in front it waved and curled round her white
forehead. Kitty was very tall, and, child as she still was in years, had
a more formed figure than most girls of her age. She was drawing on her
tan gloves now, and unfurling a parasol of tussore silk with a heavy
lace fall.

"I do hope I'm smart enough," she said, panting slightly as she spoke.
"Is this one of your schoolfellows?"

"Yes; my friend, Miss Challoner."

"Haven't you got a Christian name?" asked Kitty, staring frankly with
her wide-open eyes at Alice's friend.

"Bessie is my name," answered Bessie Challoner.

"Do you mind my calling it to you? I like Challoner awfully, and if I
were to say Challoner without the Miss it might do, but Miss is so
stiff. I hope I may be Kitty to you, and then you won't object to being
Bessie to me."

"Not a bit," answered Bessie heartily; "but we are a little late, and
had better walk on as fast as we can."

Gwin Harley lived in a beautiful house about two miles away, and the
girls turned down a path which led across some fields in the direction
of Harley Grove. The time of year was toward the end of May, and the
weather was perfect.

Kitty, who had been silent for a time, now stood in the middle of the
field, threw both her hands to her sides, let her parasol drop on the
ground, and opened her mouth wide.

"Have you gone quite mad?" asked Alice in a severe tone.

"Mad is it?" said Kitty; "not I. I am taking in some of the air." Here
she began to breathe very deeply and with considerable noise. "Why, my
ducky girls, the pair of you, I was fairly suffocated in that bandbox of
a house; now the breeze here is fine and fresh, and I want to fill my
lungs. Is there any objection?"

"Oh, none I am sure," answered Bessie; "but you really did look most
extraordinary."

"I am glad no one was passing at the moment," said Alice. "What would
they have thought?"

"Does it matter what they think?" asked Kitty. "We never mind what
anyone thinks of us in Ireland. Ah, the dear old place; how I pine for
it! There now, my lungs are full, and we can go on again."

She picked up her parasol and began to stride forward.

"Isn't she a horror?" whispered Alice to Bessie.

"Hush!" answered Bessie; "she only does it to amuse us. The thing is to
take very little notice; we'll soon tame her down."

"Is it taming me you're after?" called back Kitty. "Well, then, you'll
never do that, for I come of a wild lot, and I have always been called
Wild Kitty from the moment I could speak. But there's no harm in me, not
a bit. Now, then, I'll walk as sober as you please. What shall we talk
about?"

"Is there anything you would like to ask us?" said Bessie.

"I am sure then, darling, I don't think there is. Wouldn't you like to
ask me some questions? I'm as open as day. I'll lay bare all the
thoughts of my secret soul to the pair of you, if you care to hear
them."

"I don't know that we do," said Bessie. "You see we have got to make
your acquaintance yet, Kitty."

"Ah, now it's nice of you to call me Kitty, and that's a very pretty
little voice you have; soft and winning. How is it you say some of those
words? I can't get my tongue round them; but I dare say I will after a
bit."

"Would you like to know what kind of place we are going to?" asked
Bessie.

"Oh, I'll wait until I get there," answered Kitty. "I suppose it's like
all other places; there's a house and some girls; and if we are asked to
tea, why we'll get tea, and they'll think me no end of an oddity, and
I'll think them a lot of muffs; but that don't matter. Oh, my dears, if
you only saw Old Ireland, and if you only knew the free life we have
there, and the beautiful air that comes blowing in from the broad
Atlantic. Why, it's smothered I'll be in this queer place. I doubt if
I'll stay long. I'll write to father, and ask him to take me back
again."

"I would if I were you," said Alice stoutly.

"Now, what do you mean by that, 'Alice, aroon?'"

"I mean," said Alice, who had now almost lost control over her temper,
"that if you go on as you have done since you came here, we shall none
of us like you, and I for one shall be delighted when you return to
Ireland."

As Alice spoke Kitty's charming face suddenly lost its brilliant color;
it became white, and her dark eyes flashed with an angry fire. She stood
perfectly still for a moment, then began to walk on a little faster than
before.

"You have hurt her, Alice," said Bessie; "you should not have said
that."

"I don't care; she made me do it; she is intolerable."

"Still, you had no right to speak as you did; remember she is a
stranger."

Here Bessie ran after Kitty, and tried to slip her hand through her arm;
but the Irish girl made an impatient movement, and, shrugging her
shoulders, walked on quicker than before.

"Oh, leave her alone," whispered Alice; "let us talk about things that
interest us. Why should all lives be upset by her? There, she is going
on in front; let us fall back and talk about interesting things. Have
you finished your work yet?"

"Oh, yes; I had a great deal to do this afternoon. I do hope, Alice,
that Gwin won't mind if I ask her to let me go into the library. I must
take a peep into 'Household Encyclopædia;' it is such a chance."

"Oh, I am sure she won't mind," replied Alice. "Gwin is the soul of good
nature. I only dread what she will think."

"Oh, you need not dread anything," said Kitty, suddenly turning round
and coming back to the girls. "I shan't be here long; don't be afraid."

"Please, Kitty," said Bessie; "don't mind what Alice said just now, she
was vexed, because we are not quite accustomed to manners like yours.
You will soon get into our ways, you know."

"Never, never!" cried Kitty.

"Well, at any rate, don't mind about it now. Do you think you will like
your school life?"

"No; I shall just hate it."

"What a pity that will be; but I'm sure you don't know what you are
saying. You are vexed with Alice, and I don't wonder--Alice, you were
very hard on her."

"Oh, never mind," answered Kitty; "don't ask her to apologize. I can go
home again. I don't want to be with people who have made up their minds
to dislike me. All the folks at home love me, and--" Here tears dropped
from her eyes, splashing down her cheeks in bright round pearls.

"I didn't mean to vex you," said Alice, who was disconcerted at this
evident grief. "I dare say I shall get accustomed to you after a bit. I
mean I do not really want you to go home."

Kitty's face underwent a change, rapid as a flash of lightning.

"If you want to make friends, Alice, it's as right as rain," she cried.
"I know I was vexed, but it is over now; yes it is over. I am willing to
be friends if you are willing."

"Of course," said Alice; "and I know I ought not to have spoken as I
did; but you do manage to fret me dreadfully. I never saw a girl exactly
like you before."

"It is all right now you really want to be friends," answered Kitty;
"and I will try to be as dull as you please." Here she paused and seemed
to consider. "There's no use," she continued after a moment; "I mean I
must be myself whatever happens. I must be genuine. Please, Alice, let
me be genuine for a week; if at the end of that time you find me
intolerable, why I'll be off."

"Don't say anything about that," said Bessie; "everything is quite new
to you, and Alice did speak unkindly; but please, Kitty, don't be angry
if I say something."

"Oh, no, I won't be angry with you; you're a real duck," cried Kitty.

"Well, we English girls are not quite accustomed to your sort of way; we
are quieter here and more reserved. Perhaps you had better--"

"Oh, I know exactly what the end of that pretty little speech is going
to be," said Kitty; "but I cannot. I must be Kitty Malone or nothing. I
was born that way. Why, bless you, it is in our race. Aunt Bridget was
just the same when she was young, and so was Aunt Honora, and even
father; oh, and--and Laurie. If you only saw Laurie and Pat! Oh, I wish
you knew Laurie; if you saw him you would say, 'If there is a broth of a
boy in the world he is one.'"

The girls had now reached the avenue gates at Harley Lodge, and the
lodge-keeper ran out to open them. A few moments later they found
themselves in sight of the pretty, modern mansion which Mr. Harley had
lately purchased. The door was opened by a butler in very correct
livery, and the young folk were shown into a handsome drawing-room at
the other side of a broad hall. There was no one in the room when they
entered, and Kitty walked straight up to a glass let into the wall, and
began to survey herself with intense satisfaction. She had by this time
forgotten the rebuff which Alice had given her, tears had only added to
the brightness of her eyes, and her momentary fit of vexation and temper
had deepened the color in her blooming cheeks. She nodded to herself
with smiles of intense satisfaction, pushed her velvet cap in a slightly
more coquettish way over her mass of black curls, and began once again
to dance a very graceful _pas de seul_ in front of the glass.

"I do think I have nice feet," she said; and just at that moment the
door was opened, and Gwin Harley and Elma Lewis entered the room.

Gwin, statuesque, graceful, dressed in the most suitable manner, made a
perfect contrast to poor, excitable Kitty. Kitty's words had been
plainly audible, and Alice flushed deeply with vexation.

"Why, then, I had better introduce myself," said Kitty, who was by no
means abashed. "Are you Miss Harley? You have got a very nice looking
glass, let me tell you; it shows off the figure to perfection."

Gwin could not help coloring in surprise and astonishment.

"I am Kitty Malone, at your service," continued Kitty. "Shall I drop you
a courtesy in the true Irish way? Some of us bob like this--so, and some
of us step back like this," here Kitty performed a very elaborate and
very graceful courtesy, then stood upright, and laughing heartily,
showed rows of pearly teeth. Gwin held out her hand.

"May I introduce my friend, Elma Lewis? Elma, this is Miss Malone."

"Kitty Malone. I won't be called Miss Malone," said the incorrigible
Kitty.

"Won't you all come upstairs now, girls?" said Gwin, who perceived that
both Alice and Bessie were annoyed by Kitty's manners.

"If we take off our things we can go into the library and have a good
game before tea, or would you prefer a walk?"

"Well, I for one am tired," said Kitty. "The fact is," she continued,
these boots are somewhat tight. They're awfully becoming, you know,
aren't they? but they do squeeze a little just across the toes; how
ever, as Aunt Honora says, 'Pride feels no pain,' and I am desperate
proud of my feet. Shall we all look at our feet, and see which has got
the prettiest pair?"

"I don't think we will just at present," said Gwin. "If you are tired
you must take your boots off. Have you not just come from Ireland?"

"Bless you, yes," answered Kitty; "I only arrived to-day. The place is
as new to me as it can be. Up to the present I don't think much of it,
although you have got a lovely house, Miss Harley--fine and airy with
plenty of big rooms. I suppose you have got money _galore_; have you?"

"I believe we have," said Gwin in some astonishment, and a haughty note
coming into her voice.

"Ah, now, don't begin to be proud and stiff!" exclaimed Kitty. "It is
quite wonderful; every one I speak to here seems to take me the wrong
way. What in the world do you all mean? I thought when I came to England
that people would say, 'Well, now, that's a remarkably pretty girl. I am
sure she's Irish by the twinkle in her eye and the roll of the brogue in
her voice; but we'll like her all the better for that.' But, bless my
heart! that's not the way you're taking me. Every time I open my lips
somebody seems to think I have said something wrong. Upon my word it's a
nice state of things, and I, the darling of my old father. If Aunt
Honora and Aunt Bridget were here they would soon put matters straight;
and Laurie, dear, darling, old Laurie, if he saw his Kitty put upon,
wouldn't he give it to you all?"

"We none of us want to put upon you, Miss Malone," said Gwin Harley.

"_Miss_ Malone!"

"Yes," said Gwin firmly, "it is the custom here to call girls by their
surnames for a little until we get to know them; but I am sure," she
added kindly, "you will soon be Kitty with us all, for I see you are
very nice, although you have not quite our ways."

"Ah, there, that is all I want you to say," answered Kitty with a
profound sigh, "and now I'll go upstairs and slip off my bits of boots,
for they are a trifle tight. Can you lend me a pair of your shoes, Miss
Harley?"

"Yes, with pleasure," replied Gwin, and turning, she led the way out of
the room. The rest of the evening passed off better. Kitty became a
little subdued, and satisfied herself with talking less, and casting
ravishing glances of delight and roguish entreaty first at one girl and
then at the other. It was extremely difficult to withstand her, for her
voice was low and singularly sweet, her eyes were beautiful, she could
not do an ungraceful thing, she was altogether like a bright, flashing
meteor, and soon she began to exercise an extraordinary fascination both
over Bessie Challoner and Gwin Harley. Having got over her first
astonishment, Gwin began to take a sincere interest in the pretty
stranger. The lovely expression of her coral lips made her long to kiss
them, and to assure the Irish girl that she for one would be her friend;
but the next instant Kitty said something so very much against the grain
that Gwin felt as much repulsed as a moment before she was delighted.

Immediately after tea Bessie went off to the library to hunt up her
darling "Encyclopædia."

"Now that she has gone," exclaimed Gwin, "we are not likely to get her
back for some time. What a remarkably earnest student she is!"

"The Earnest Student?" interrupted Kitty. "I thought that was the name
of a religious book. I think father has got it at home."

"Perhaps so," replied Gwin, "but we always call it to Bessie. She is
wonderfully clever. She gets on splendidly at school, taking everything
before her. I am certain she is the kind of girl who will make her mark
by and by."

"I hate studies!" said Kitty in her low, humorous voice.

"I am sorry for that," answered Gwin, "for if you come to school you
won't be at all popular if you do not care for your books."

"Popular? How do you mean? Is it with the teachers or with the girls?"

"Well, with both I fancy."

"Then, I tell you what," exclaimed Kitty, "I'd like to bet with you that
you are wrong--that I'll be the most popular girl in the whole of the
school with the teachers--yes, with the teachers--and the scholars as
well."

"You must be very conceited," exclaimed Elma, who had sat silent during
the greater part of the evening, taking Kitty in, however, all the same.

"Conceited? No more than you are," cried Kitty, "but I know my powers,
and I have not kissed the Blarney Stone for nothing."

"Oh, you need not tell us that ridiculous story over again," said Alice.

"But I should like to hear it," cried Gwin.

"You really would not Gwin; it is too absurd. We must show Kitty, now
she has come to live among us, what is real wit and what is not. Her
way of talking is only silly."

Gwin knit her brows, and looked pained.

"I would rather not correct her now," she said in a gentle voice. Then
she added, her eyes sparkling with sudden eagerness, "Would it not be a
good opportunity for talking over the rules of our society, girls?"

"Oh yes," cried Elma, "yes; but is it well to----"

Here she bent forward, and began to whisper vigorously in Gwin's ear.

"Yes, I think so," answered Gwin.

"I wouldn't, I really wouldn't," said Elma. "I am certain Alice agrees
with me."

"I can guess what you are saying," cried Alice, "and I do agree most
heartily."

"And I can guess what you are saying," exclaimed Kitty, starting to her
feet with flashing eyes. "You don't want to talk about your society or
whatever it is because I am present. Well, discuss it without me. I'll
find my way to the library. Poor dear Bessie is the only decent one
among you, and I shall go and sit with her. How do you know I won't take
up with literature just to spite you all? I can do anything I have a
mind to, and that you will soon find to your cost."

She ran out of the room as she spoke, slamming the door behind her.

"There, that's a comfort," cried Alice, breathing freely for the first
time. "Did you ever, girls, in all your lives, see a more terrible
creature? What is to be done? Why, she will disgrace us all at school.
You know what a very nice set we are in at present."

"Oh, an excellent set," said Elma, in a sarcastic voice.

"You know, Elma, that we do belong to the nicest set in the school, and
I am sure, Gwin, your father--"

"You need not drag father in," cried Gwin. Father likes all the people I
like."

"But, surely--" began Alice.

Gwin looked at her gravely, then she nodded.

"I am not quite certain yet," she said; "but I think it highly probable
that I shall take up that poor, wild, little Kitty. At least she is
fresh; she speaks out her mind plainly, and there is a great deal to
admire about her."

"Then, listen, Gwin," cried Alice; "if she is taken into our special
society I will resign."

"Will you really, Alice? What, if I ask you to stay?"

"It is hard to refuse you, dear; but you scarcely know what all this
means to me. I am rubbed the wrong way; I don't understand myself. But
frankly, Gwin, you are not going to ask Kitty Malone to join our
society?"

"What if it does her good?"

"But ought we not to think of the others? She is a perfect stranger to
us all at present."

"But she won't be long. Bless the child, she has no reserve in her, and
I do want to help her, poor little girl! Well, we need not decide that
point at present."

"Do let us vote to leave her out," cried Alice.

"No, Alice, we will leave the point undecided. Now let us set to work,
and begin to form our rules, for really we have no time to lose."

"But what are we to do without Bessie?" exclaimed Alice. "Whatever
happens, we cannot do without Bessie Challoner; she will be the life and
soul of the whole society. Shall we send for her, Gwin?"

"No, Kitty is with her, and they had better not be disturbed."

"What a difference Kitty makes," cried Alice. "I did think we should
have had a delightful and heavenly evening, and it has been all ruction
from first to last."

"Because you dislike her so much, Alice," said Gwin.

"Well, I do," said Alice; "I can't abide her. But do I show my dislike
so plainly?" she added.

"Rather! Any one can see it in the curl of your lip and the expression
in your eyes; and then you say such terribly withering things to the
poor girl. You try to crush her."

"Well, if I may say what I think," cried Elma, "Kitty Malone seems to me
to be a very unpleasant, vulgar girl, and I cannot imagine why she has
been sent here."

"Oh, as to her vulgarity," said Alice, who suddenly felt forced to
defend herself against Elma's spiteful speeches, "Kitty comes of a very
old family, and her father is as rich as ever he can be. They live in a
wonderful castle in County Donegal, just overhanging the sea; and from
what I learn are considered county people. Father was very pleased to
have her, and whatever she is, she is a lady by birth."

"So she is rich?" remarked Elma in a low voice. "Well, at any rate,"
she continued after a pause, "she is very pretty."

"Pretty!" cried Gwin; "I should just think she is. She has the most
lovely face I ever saw. Girls, it is quite true what she says; she will
fascinate any number of people. That dashing, daring way of hers will go
down with numbers. Yes, she will make a revolution in Middleton School,
I am certain."




CHAPTER V

INCORRIGIBLE KITTY


Mr. Harley's library was a beautiful room. It was lined with books from
floor to ceiling, and these books had been selected with the greatest
care. Standard works of all sorts and in three languages were to be
found on certain bookshelves, also modern works, both poetry and prose,
with some of the best novels of the day.

Bessie Challoner never envied rich people. She cared nothing whatever
for fine dresses, nor for carriages and horses, nor for the luxurious
life of the wealthy, but she did envy Gwin Harley the use of her
father's library; and when she entered the room now, with that delicious
faint smell of leather which all libraries possess, she sniffed first
with ecstasy, and then climbing on the ladder secured the volume of the
"Encyclopædia" which she required, and seating herself at one of the
center tables, was soon lost in the fascinations of her subject. After a
time a little cough, very gentle, however, caused her to raise her head,
and there standing before her was Kitty Malone.

Kitty's long arms had dropped to her sides, and she had pushed back her
masses of dark hair. There was a pathetic expression about her rosy
lips, and tears trembled on her long eyelashes.

"Why, what is it, Kitty; what do you want?" asked Bessie.

"Ah, then it's good to hear you say that word, aroon," said Kitty. "I
want to sit near you. I won't speak, no, not a syllable. Hush will be
the only word with me, hush! hush! hush! You can go on with your beloved
reading and I'll stay near you; that's all I require. Why, then, it's
just a shelter I need, and nothing more. Read away, Bessie, my honey,
and I'll do nothing to interrupt you."

"But why have you left the others?" asked Bessie.

"Never mind, dear, now. I'll just sit quietly here, and contemplate you
while you are studying."

Bessie sighed impatiently. She then bent again over her book, and began
to devour the pages. Kitty watched her with marked interest.

"I wonder if it will be my fate to have to take up with literature in
sober earnest," she said to herself, "I, who can never abide a book. Oh,
to be back again in the dear old place! I should not be a bit surprised
if Laurie is out fishing now, and Pat with him. And oh, suppose they are
bringing in the trout, and the creatures are leaping and struggling as
they come to shore, and father is going round to feed the dogs--why, the
thought is enough to madden me. Oh, then, why did I ever leave home? I
don't care _that_ for books, nor for being clever nor for--How she works
to be sure! How earnest she looks. She has got a very fine forehead,
although it is miles too high. She ought to wear a fringe; it would
improve her wonderfully. I will cut her hair some day if she will let
me. I will cut it and curl it. I have got the dearest little jewel of a
pair of curling tongs that ever was seen! Aunt Honora sent it to me in a
box with a spirit lamp all complete when I got the rest of my things.
I'll just exercise those little tongs on dear, nice Bessie. I do wish
she would not be so devoted to that book, she might talk. Oh, I am
lonely. I think I'll fidget a bit."

Kitty moved her chair, creaking it ominously; but Bessie had got to a
most thrilling part of her subject, and Kitty might have creaked the
library down before she would have roused her companion's attention.

"Now, if I sigh, perhaps that will do it," thought Kitty. She opened her
mouth and let some profound sighs come up from the depths of her heart;
but they only depressed her still more, and had no effect whatever on
Bessie.

"I think I hate intellectual people," muttered the Irish girl. She
jumped to her feet.

"I must do something to rouse her or I shall go mad. She is the nicest
of them all, much. I wish she would speak to me. Why should I break my
heart, and why should she simply go on devouring that stupid book? Here,
I know what I'll do. I'll just toss down one of the big volumes; it will
make a clatter and she will have to look up. Perhaps I'll let it drop
just the tiniest bit in the world on the corner of her toe; that will
finish her." Here Kitty laughed excitedly, pushed out her arm and
knocked over a huge volume which certainly fell a good deal more than a
tiny bit on poor Bessie's foot.

"Oh, Kitty, what have you done?" cried Bessie. "You have quite hurt me.
I wish you would not drop the books about."

"There, darling, I had to do it. Pray forgive me," said Kitty.

"You had to do it!" answered Bessie. "Do you mean that you did it on
purpose?"

"Why, then, yes, love--that's what I do mean exactly. I did it because
I wanted you to talk to me, and you _would_ think of nothing but that
book."

"It is such a chance," answered Bessie, "and I wanted to find out for
myself all about that wonderful magnetic iron ore. You know it never
loses its power, it is potent for hundreds and hundreds of years, and--"

"Oh, don't tell me any more, or I'll lose my senses. Dear Bessie, what
does magnetic iron ore matter. Bessie, I'm awfully unhappy. Every one is
so unkind to me. Promise you'll be my friend, won't you?"

Bessie looked up, and then she saw something so touching in Kitty's face
that she closed her book with a reluctant sigh, to devote herself the
next moment with all the sympathy she possessed to her companion.

"I am sure you are suffering, Kitty, and I am sorry for you," she said.
"I'll fetch my hat and we'll go out for a little."

"Oh, what a darling you are!" answered Kitty.

A moment or two later the girls were walking across the beautifully-kept
garden; they soon reached a shady path at the further end.

"And now, Kitty," said Bessie, "I mean to lecture you a little."

"Anything in the world you like, darling. I'm quite agreeable. Aunt
Honora and Aunt Bridget lecture me, and so does the dear old dad
sometimes; but I always say when they have finished that it is like
water on a duck's back--it rolls off without making the least bit of
impression, and then they laugh and say that I am the queerest mixture
they ever came across, and that they had best leave me to nature. But
perhaps I'll listen to you, Bessie."

"I wish you would," said Bessie. "I am sure," she added, speaking with
great earnestness, "that you are a very nice girl, Kitty; but at the
same time you are wild."

"Oh, I pride myself on that," said Kitty in her frankest of voices.

"But I wish you would not, Kitty, for it really isn't nice."

"Not nice! Now what may you be meaning by that, aroon?"

"Well, there is a sort of dignity which I think a really well brought-up
girl ought to possess."

"Oh, my! dignity is it?" said Kitty. She stepped away from her
companion, drew down her face to a ridiculous length, nearly closed her
eyes, and folded her hands demurely across her breast.

"Is that pleasing you, mavourneen?" she said. "Is it dignified and sober
enough poor Kitty Malone looks now?"

"Oh, Kitty, you will joke about everything."

Kitty immediately changed her mood.

"No, I won't," she said. "I am really awfully obliged to you. You don't
know what all this has been to me. Father said I was growing too
wild--yes, the darling dad did; he agrees with you down to the core of
his heart, and he said I must go to England and be taught manners. But,
bless you, they'll have a job. I told him so when I was going. I said,
'Dad, it's the hearts of the teachers I'll be breaking;' and dad said,
'Oh, no, you won't, Kitty, aroon. You'll be a good girl, and you'll try
to please your old dad and you'll come back a beautiful, perfect lady!'
He said it with tears in his eyes, he did, the darling; and I promised,
and down on my knees I went and asked God to help me. But, dear, it's
like the froth of the sea-foam inside me, the fun and the mischief and
the nonsense and the ways that you think queer; but, all the same, those
ways delight the good folk at home. Must I really give them up,
Bessie--must I?"

"To a certain extent," said Bessie, "or you will have a lot of enemies
here, Kitty, and you won't be at all happy."

"How I wish I lived with you, Bessie Challoner. You're a broth of a
girl, that you are. You have not taken a dislike to me just because of
the fun bubbling up in my heart?"

"No, dear; on the contrary, I like you extremely."

"Ah, you precious duck of a darling! It is a good squeeze you would
like, if I gave it to you?"

"Well, I am not very fond of being kissed; but if you must, Kitty."

"I must, dear, I must, for the heart in me is full to the brim. Now
then, stand still, and I'll catch you up close to my heart. There! isn't
that better?"

Poor Bessie gave some long-drawn breaths, for the firmness, in fact the
ferocity, of Kitty's embrace quite hurt her for a moment.

"There," said Kitty, "that's the way we hug in Old Ireland. Now I'm a
sight better, and I'll let go. So you do like me, Bessie?"

"Yes, very much indeed, Kitty, only--please don't do it again."

"I won't to-night, I won't really, but it's wonderful that you don't
like it. I wish you could see Aunt Honora and Aunt Bridget hug one
another. Why, it's the noise they make when they get together, and the
way they kiss! Oh, dear, I hope some day you'll come to Ireland."

"You don't tempt me by these descriptions," replied Bessie. "But now,
Kitty, will you promise just to be a little quieter, to keep in all
those irrepressible and--really I must say it, dear, at the risk of
hurting you--those silly words."

"But then I'm silly myself," said Kitty. "Can you expect wisdom out of
nonsense? I am pure and simple nonsense from first to last."

"But you do want to be something better? You do want to lead a good
life?"

"A good life! I never thought there was anything bad in me."

"You want to learn for instance?"

"No; that I don't, darling."

"You don't want to learn, Kitty? Then what is the good of coming to
Middleton School?"

"Listen," said Kitty. "I'll do anything for father. Father said I was to
learn, and that I was to get manners. Now I think your manners are
perfect. I'll model myself on you, dear; that I will. Will you teach me
your manners, Bessie Challoner?"

"I'll do all I can to help you, Kitty."

"And you'll be my real faithful friend?"

"Yes, only please not--"

"I won't, dear, I won't to-night; but when I meet you to-morrow you'll
allow me just once?"

"Well, if it will break you in."

"It will, it will. It will enable me to bear Alice. I am not the sort to
hate people; but I'll soon get to hate her. It's an awful affliction
that I have got to live with the Denvers; not that Mrs. Denvers is bad,
nor Mr. Denvers, poor dear, nor Fred, but Alice! I'd like to get Alice
over to Ireland, to Castle Malone. I could punish her a bit if I put her
into Laurie's hands. But there!"

"Well, Kitty, time is going," said Bessie. "It is a bargain that I help
you to learn some of our English ways, and that you, in order to pay me,
try to be gentle yourself, and to restrain some of your wild words."

"I'll try. I'll do my very, very best. You'll see when I get to
Middleton School what a proper, respectable sort of girl I'll become."

"And you'll work hard too, won't you, Kitty? For I know it will do you a
great deal of good, and I am sure you are very intelligent."

"Well, I can take in most things; only it's no end of a bother."

"I am certain you will succeed if you try," said Bessie. "Then it's a
bargain, isn't it? You'll try to learn a great deal, and you will do
your best to get better mannered?"

"Why, of course I will. I hate learning, and I don't want to be bothered
with lessons: but there's nothing under the sun I wouldn't do for those
I love; and I love father and I love you too, Bessie Challoner."

"They are calling us. We must go into the house," said Bessie.

"Do yield to me on one point," cried Kitty.

"What is that?"

"Let us go back to the house with our arms round each other's waists. It
will show Alice that we have come to an understanding. I don't care
twopence about Miss Harley nor about that other girl--I don't remember
her name; but I want Alice to see us. Why, it's mad with jealousy she'll
be. Come along, aroon. Here's my arm firm round your waist; now let us
dance up to the house."

"Oh Kitty, Kitty, you are incorrigible!" cried poor Bessie, and a
feeling of despair certainly visited her at that moment.




CHAPTER VI.

THE TUG-OF-WAR.


A few days after the events related in the last chapter Alice Denvers,
Bessie Challoner, Elma Lewis, and Gwin Harley met once more at Gwin's
pretty home, to discuss the rules of a little society which they were
drawing up among themselves. The nicest girls in their set were to be
invited to join; but the important subject of the rules was first to be
discussed. Gwin £ad drawn up a plan which she now submitted to her eager
companions.

"The most important thing of all is the name," she said. "I thought of
calling it 'The Early Rising, Devoted to Study Society.'"

"Oh, twice too long," said Bessie. "Who could be bothered saying all
these words? You know when we are in the rush of school-life we cannot
be bothered talking of the 'Early Rising, Devoted to Study;' it would
never, never do. We must express what we mean in a single word if
necessary."

"Then let us get one," said Gwin. "You have not the least idea what a
headache I had last night searching in the dictionary and cudgelling my
brains; but a sensible word which would express all our meaning I could
not get."

"Let us think what our meaning clearly is," said Elma.

"Don't you know that yet?" exclaimed Bessie. "The society is to be
formed as an incentive to make us work extra hard. You know," she added
"I always think the motives of school-life are quite wrong."

"Oh, do listen to the words of Miss Wisdom," said Elma, in a very
mocking tone.

Bessie's big gray eyes flashed for a moment with indignation; but she
soon recovered her usual calm.

"I think the motives of school are wrong," she repeated; "there are
prizes offered, and there is a lot of emulation--"

"And how could we live without emulation?" cried Alice. "Why, it is the
very breath of life."

"But the desire of each to excel the other is not surely why we are sent
to school," continued Bessie. "We are sent to school because our parents
want us to learn something. They don't want us specially to get prizes,
although they are glad when we do, because they suppose that we have
accomplished some of the objects of our school life; but their real wish
is that we should know English history, and history generally, that we
should be well acquainted with geography, that we should speak French
fluently, and understand German so as to be able to converse in that
tongue, and to read the literature."

"Oh, do listen to the bookworm," cried Elma.

"In short," continued Bessie; "that we should become accomplished
women--that is undoubtedly the real object of school."

"Well, we are not gainsaying it," said Gwin. "We all know, dear Bessie,
what you feel about learning; it is the breath of life to you."

"It is, I rejoice in it," said Bessie. "A good vigorous tussle with a
tough subject is the keenest pleasure which I can possibly have."

"But the rest of us are not made the same way," continued Gwin. "Now I
like my studies very much--that is, in moderation. When I am learning
and mastering French, and getting through my music creditably, and, in
short, going through the usual curriculum of work, I feel interested;
but I also have a delightful sense that if I work for so many hours I am
entitled to play for so many hours."

"Oh, bother the play," interrupted Bessie.

"You see, Bessie Challoner, that is the difference between us. I like
work just to form part of my life, but not the whole; you want work to
form the whole of your life."

"Yes; that I do," said Bessie.

"But now to return to the society," interrupted Elma. "We all know that
it won't be the slightest effort to Bessie to join; but she will be a
good incentive to the rest of us. She will always be at the top of the
tree, at the head of her class, and all that sort of thing. She won't
require to be told to get up early, because she always does."

"I tell you what," interrupted Bessie; "let us put things into our rules
which will be a tug-of-war for me too. For instance, now, I am untidy."

"Well, yes; just a little bit," said Gwin, her eyes dancing.

"It's more than a little bit," said Bessie. "Oh, Gwin, you don't know
what a nuisance it is to keep my room in order, and sometimes I forget
the things dear mother tells me, and I am impatient with poor little
Judy, who takes, I must say, a fiendish delight in putting my things in
hiding. Now, our rules might include tidiness of person and order
generally. It's no trouble to me to keep my books in order, nor my mind
in order; but I do hate washing my hands before every meal, and brushing
my hair and doing it up in a fashionable roll at the back of my head."

"Oh, my dear child," said Elma, "do you imagine for a moment that that
excrescence at the back of your head is fashionable? I never saw
anything more dowdy."

"Dowdy? Is it?" said Bessie. "I spent five minutes over it this morning,
and twisted it up three times in order to give it that horrid little
handle of a jug look which you all aspire to. Well, well, I don't
suppose we need add to our rules that the girls who belong to the
society are to be fashionable."

"It would be a really good idea if we did," said Elma. "I cannot see why
schoolgirls should be a lot of frumps. Our society is to effect a
certain object which can never be acquired unaided in a great school
like Middleton. We want to be as ladylike, as refined, as nice as if we
belonged to a very small and select school. We get the best teaching at
Middleton, but I don't suppose we get the best manners."

"Well, let us add all these things to the rules," said Gwin, "and let us
begin to put them down at once. First, as to the name. Until we can
think of a better we must call it the 'Mutual Improvement Society.'"

"A hateful word," said Bessie. "The M.I.S.!"

"Yes, it does sound priggish," said Elma.

"Well, I dare say some one will have genius enough to think of a more
flashy and brilliant name," said Gwin, "but for the present we will call
it the 'Mutual Improvement,' for that is exactly what it means. Now then
for the rules."

As Gwin spoke she drew in front of her a sheet of foolscap paper; and,
dipping her pen in ink, looked eagerly at her three young companions.

"Rule I.," she said.

"For goodness' sake," cried Bessie, "let Rule I. apply to study. Do let
down lightly with regard to tidiness and fashionable hair, and all that
sort of thing."

"Yes, we will begin about the most important matters first," said Gwin.
Here she began to write rapidly in pencil. "I must copy this out in my
best and most copperplate hand presently," she continued; "but while we
are correcting matters and getting down our rules somehow pencil will
do. Well, Rule I. Shall it be something like this, girls? 'The members
of this society are expected to aim for the top of the class in each
branch of their study at Middleton School. They are expected to gain at
least one prize at the midsummer examination.'"

"That sounds rather like emulation coming in," interrupted Bessie.

"It must come in, Bessie--it must," said Elma. "We must have something
to work for."

"I thought the love of the thing--" began poor Bessie.

"Oh, Bessie Challoner, do shut up. Yes, Gwin, that first rule goes very
well," said Elma. "We are to aim for the top of the class, and we are to
secure at least one prize each. Hurrah! for the Mutual Improvement
Society! Now, then let us get to Rule II."

"That applies to deportment," said Gwin. "'The members of the Mutual
Improvement Society are to aim at ladylike manners, they are to refrain
from slang in conversation, and they are to refuse to make friends with
girls who indulge too largely in that special form of vulgarity.' Poor
Kitty Malone!"

"But she does not talk slang," said Bessie. "She talks Ireland, and
Ireland and England are as far apart as the poles."

"Rule III.," continued Gwin, "relates to tidiness; and now, Bessie,
comes your tug of war. 'The members of the society must engage to keep
their home things in perfect order, as well as their school desks. They
must be neat in their persons, exquisitely clean with regard to hands
and teeth, and tidy with regard to hair.'"

"I don't think I'll join," said Bessie.

"Nonsense, Bessie; it was you who told us to put all this in. I, as a
matter of course, always do these things," said Gwin, looking very sweet
and the essence of young ladyhood as she spoke.

"Oh, yes, you dear old thing, you are perfect; but you don't live in the
sort of ramshackle house we do," said Bessie. "However, never mind. I am
quite agreeable to go in for the tug-of-war. And, now, is there anything
else?"

"Oh yes, there is," said Elma, "and I think it is a most important
thing. 'The members of the Society, as far as they possibly can, are to
adhere to fashionable dress, to hair done in a stylish manner, and in
short to that distinction of appearance which ought to characterize the
lady of the present day.'"

"Well done, Elma," said Gwin, "that is a capital rule."

"It is a hateful rule," said Bessie. "I really don't think I can join. I
don't know what fashionable clothes are. I never study the fashions. I
have not the slightest idea whether sleeves are worn stuck out to the
size of a balloon or skin-tight to the arm. All I ask for in a sleeve is
that it should be comfortable; all I ask for in a dress is that I should
not know I have it on. I like to be warm in winter and cool in summer.
More I do not ask for."

"Then the rule will do you a wonderful lot of good," said Gwin. "And now
is it decided? If so we will draw up the rules in proper form, and----"

"I tell you what," said Bessie. "I have thought of a name and a good one
too. Let us call the society the 'Tug-of-war Society.'"

"Well done," said Gwin; "that will be capital. And now is there to be a
subscription or is there not?"

"Oh, certainly," said Alice. "It would make it much more distinguished,
and prevent too many girls asking to join. We want to have the
Tug-of-War Society rather select, don't we?"

"I suppose so," said Gwin; "but I don't think that really depends upon
the amount of the subscription. What do you say to half a guinea,
girls?"

Alice looked thoughtful, and Elma's face turned rather pale; but she was
the first to say she thought Gwin's suggestion an admirable one.

"Then that is all right," said Gwin, "and I will set to work to write
out the rules as neatly as I can. After they are all set out in due
form, we can see if there are any improvements to be suggested."

Gwin set to work, bending low over her foolscap paper, and Alice offered
to help her. Elma and Bessie wandered out of the room, and soon their
conversation turned to the much-discussed subject of Kitty.

Bessie stood up warmly for the harum-scarum Irish girl, as Elma called
her.

"She has a lot of good in her," said Bessie warmly. "She would be a
splendid girl if she were tamed down a little. I really don't think we
want to take much of the fire out of her; but if she would only restrain
some of her wild speeches it would be all the better; for if she remains
as frank as she is at present to the end of the chapter she cannot help
making enemies."

"I want to ask you a question, Bessie," said Elma, dropping her voice to
a low tone; "is it true that Kitty Malone is rich?"

"Rich?" echoed Bessie. "I really cannot tell you."

"I thought you might happen to know, as you have made such chums with
her. She is your greatest friend now at Middle ton School, is she not?"

"Certainly not," replied Bessie. "What do you mean by asking me such a
strange question, Elma? Alice is far and away my greatest friend, and
after Alice I like Gwin best."

"Oh, everybody likes Gwin Harley," said Elma; "who could help it? She is
so beautiful to look at, and she has such a delightful, lovely home."

"I cannot see that her having a lovely, delightful home has anything to
do with our liking her," said honest Bessie.

"Not to you perhaps," answered Elma, and a queer look, half-wistful,
half-defiant, came into her eyes.

"I thought you would be sure to be able to tell me if Kitty were rich,"
she said again after a pause.

"I cannot. You must ask Alice--she lives with Alice. She has plenty of
pretty dresses, and all that sort of thing; but I don't know anything
about her having money."

"I will run into the house this minute and ask Alice," said Elma.

"Do, of course, if you are anxious; but I cannot imagine what difference
it makes to you."

"No, it doesn't, but I am just curious on the subject. I won't keep you
long."

Elma dashed into the house. She presently came back.

"I have found out all about it," she said.

"All about what?" asked Bessie.

"What I went into the house for. How forgetful you are, Bessie!"

"I was wondering if I might steal into the library," said Bessie. "I did
not get all the information I wanted about magnetic iron ore, but--Well,
what is it, Elma?"

"Kitty Malone is rich, very rich, and----"

"I can't see that it matters," said Bessie--"I mean to us."

"Oh, but it matters a good deal. You don't understand. I shall certainly
vote that we ask her to join the Tug-of-War Society."

"You will?" cried Bessie--a look of great pleasure came into her eyes.
"Then I am really glad, for to join such a society would do Kitty more
good than anything else in the world. Only the nicest girls will belong,
and she will get at once into the best set. She is as wild as she can
be, but she has got plenty of honor; and if she once gave her word that
she would do a certain thing no one would do it better."

"Let us have her by all means. Let us put it to the vote as soon as we
go back to the house," said Elma. "Come Bessie, no slinking away in the
direction of that fascinating library. They have nearly copied the
rules, and we are to read them over and make comments."

"I think it will be a delightful society," said Bessie. "I am sure it
will do me good."

"It is meant to do us all good," said Elma. "Tug-of-war! I should rather
think it will be! How I shall hate that terrible effort to get to the
head of my class; not that I am stupid or dislike my lessons."

"That would be the nice part as far as I am concerned," said Bessie;
"but oh! the fashionable sleeves and the stylish hair. Oh dear! I often
feel inclined to have my hair cut short."

"Well, Bessie, you would be a fool if you did," said Elma. "Your
splendid hair; why, it's nearly down to your knees."

"Yes, and that's the bother," said Bessie, "for mother insists on my
brushing it out every night for at least ten minutes, and all that time
is taken from my books. I tell you, Elma, I would gladly change with
you."

Elma's locks were very thin and straggly, and she could not help
coloring at this left-handed compliment; but at that moment Alice
appeared on the balcony to tell the other two girls that the rules were
ready, and that they might return to the house. They did so, and the
rules were then read carefully over (by Elma on this occasion),
criticized by Gwin, Alice, and Bessie, and finally carried as far as the
original members of the society were concerned. The next important thing
was to put to the vote who was to be asked to join and who was to be
excluded. Several girls were named, and among them Elma suddenly
introduced the name of Kitty Malone.

"Now what do you mean by that?" said Alice, her eyes flashing angrily.
"If Kitty joins the society, I, for one, will resign."

"But you cannot, dear," said Gwin in her placid voice. "Remember you are
one of the founders; you are bound to uphold the society now for at
least one term of its natural life. At the end of that time you are
permitted to resign, but certainly not before."

"Then, as I presume I have a vote with regard to the election of
members, I certainly do not wish for Kitty Malone," said Alice.

"I think the votes must go by the wishes of the majority," replied Gwin;
"does any one else want her?"

"I do." said Elma, holding up her hand.

"And I think it would be good for her," said Bessie.

"Dear me, Bessie, how spiteful of you to say that," cried Alice.

"But I do think it, Alice; I do truly."

"Why, Bessie?" asked Gwin.

"Well, you know there are the sort of things mentioned in our rules
which would just give Kitty the sort of restraint she wants," began
Bessie.

"Yes, I think I begin to understand you, Bessie. I too will vote that
she is asked to join," said Gwin.

Alice looked very sulky, but did not say anything further, and soon
afterward the girls broke up their conference.




CHAPTER VII.

ELMA.


Kitty Malone was admitted to a low form at Middleton School, her
acquirements being the reverse of distinguished. This fact did not give
her the smallest sense of discomfort. On the contrary, she was pleased;
and although her fellow-scholars were all younger and smaller than
herself, she soon became a sort of queen among them, laughing and joking
with them, and flying round the playground with half a dozen small girls
at her heels, feasting them with unlimited chocolate and telling them
stories. She soon got through her somewhat easy lessons, and was wilder
and more incorrigible than ever. The only sober moments she seemed to
enjoy were when she was with Bessie; for Bessie Challoner took a sincere
interest in her, and was very anxious to get her into a higher form,
where she would be with girls nearer her own age, and would thus be
forced to submit to more discipline than she could enjoy with the
younger girls. Bessie also hoped great things from the Tug-of-war
Society, and soon told Kitty that she was to be asked to become a
member.

"I will certainly join when I am asked," answered Kitty. "I have not the
least idea what you are all driving at, but I'll become a member if it's
to be in the same society with you, my darling duck of a girl!"

Bessie then read her a copy of the rules.

"Why, then, you can't expect me to adhere to the first of them," was
Kitty's answer. "It's no, it's no to that, Bessie. I wouldn't tell a lie
for any earthly thing, and I could not drive myself to the head of that
class. Why, I wouldn't take the place from sweet little Agnes Moore for
all the world. Why it's tears I'd bring to the pretty eyes of the
creature. Oh, I couldn't get ahead of her. I'd just as lief be at the
tail--just as lief."

"But, Kitty, have you no ambition?"

"Well, no, dear, I don't think I have. I never could see the fun of
taking a prize from another; it's no use I'll be in the society, not the
least bit."

"Well, all the same it would do you good," said Bessie, "for you know
you love your father, and you said you would try to acquire knowledge to
please him."

"Oh, where's the good of reminding me of that," said Kitty, looking very
thoughtful and somewhat pensive. "Why did you come out with it, Bessie,
aroon; it's fretting the heart out of me you are. Dear old dad! there's
nothing I wouldn't do for him."

"I am glad I did remind you, Kitty, for you know you have come here to
learn."

"Ah, dear, I'll shut my ears if you talk any more in that sort of way,"
said Kitty. "If I must learn, I must; but don't be reminding me of it,
there's a good creature--it's play out of school if it's work in."

"Much work you do, Kitty! Why, I always see you laughing and winking
and twinkling your eyes, and pushing your feet about."

"Pushing my feet about! And is it to keep them in a corner I would,
pretty feet like mine! Why, they are meant to be seen. That's the only
reason why I object to a long dress, because it does not show so much of
the feet and ankles. Ah, sure it's dear little ankles I have, as neat
and trim as you please."

"Kitty, you are getting wilder than ever."

"Well, darling, I'll cool down if you'll just let me give you one of my
big hugs."

"I really can't; my ribs are quite sore. You must not do it to-day. I
told you, you might once a week, but no oftener."

Kitty sank down on the nearest chair and looked comically miserable.

"Go on with the next rule, Bessie," she said, after a moment. "I want to
belong to the Tug-of-war because it's close to you I'll be, darling.
What's the next rule?"

Bessie read it out to her.

"Why, now, it's the pink of a lady I am myself," said Kitty. "I was
always told I was; I don't mind that rule in the least. There won't be
much of a tug-of-war there; if Kitty Malone is to be a lady, why, a lady
she is. I wish you could hear Aunt Honora and Aunt Bridget talking about
our ancient family and our long and royal descent. Go on, Bessie; that's
not so bad as taking the prize from poor little Agnes. What's Rule
III.?"

Rule III. was read aloud to Kitty, who shook her head solemnly several
times.

"Now, to be frank with you," she said, "there's only one bond between
Alice and me, and that is we do make a froth of the things in our
drawers; and if we are both to struggle against our besetting infirmity,
it will go hard with us; but there, it will be fun to see her struggling
to be tidy and all to no purpose. I think I'll join on that account. I
shall like to see her fighting her drawers. I know if I'm put to it I
can keep mine twenty times tidier."

"I am now coming to Rule IV.," said Bessie; this she read aloud with
some qualms, for she disliked it so very much herself. Kitty's eyes
flashed with pleasure.

"Now, that is after my own heart," she cried, "fashionable dresses are
they, and hair done up in style. Mavourneen! mavourneen! you will have
to wear a fringe!"

Kitty burst into peals of laughter.

"Oh, Bessie," she said, "I have just been longing to attack that head of
yours. I'll bring my little tongs along, and I'll curl up such a lovely
fringe on your great intellectual forehead."

"You'll do nothing of the kind," said Bessie, clasping her hands over
her head to protect her thick, long hair.

"But you must, mavourneen, you must if you join the Tug-of-war Society.
Oh, it's beautiful you'll look! And I tell you what it is, Bessie, I'll
lend you the patterns of my new sleeves--those that are all crinkled
from above the elbow down to the wrist, and puffed ever so much at the
top, with little tucks, and little insertions, and little--"

"Kitty, I won't listen to you for another moment. I shall try to dress
as neatly as I can, and perhaps I must twist my hair into a more stylish
coil at the back of my head, but beyond that I absolutely refuse to go."

"Well, it's a delicious rule," said Kitty Malone, "and I hope I'll work
you round after a bit, Bessie. It seems but fair that if I yield to you
with regard to the other rules you ought to yield to me about Rule IV. I
am sure if I do take the prize from poor little Agnes Moore, and if I
never speak a word of slang, and if I keep my abominable drawers as neat
as a new pin, and all my clothes in perfect order, that you on your part
ought to wear a good thick, heavy fringe, and have your hair pointed out
ever so far at the back in the way it is worn in the present day. I'd
love to do it; and you have magnificent hair, Bessie, aroon! so you
have."

"I must ask you to leave me now, Kitty," was Bessie's answer. "You are a
very funny girl, and there is a great deal that I like in you; but I
cannot neglect my studies even for you."

"Oh, bother your studies!" answered Kitty.

Bessie, however, was quite in earnest, and Kitty had to leave her.

The next day there was another meeting at Gwin Harley's house, and the
members of the Tug-of-war Society were formally initiated into the
mysteries of what they had undertaken. About ten girls joined in all,
and it was decided to limit the number to these until the end of the
present term. In addition to the four chief rules it was also clearly
understood that the members were all to be absolutely faithful the one
to the other, that no member of the Tug-of-war Society was to speak
against another member; on the contrary, she was to uphold her through
thick and thin, to help her if possible, to aid her in moments of
difficulty, and to rejoice with her in moments of triumph. Once a week
the members were to meet at each other's houses. There they were to have
tea together, to discuss the rules if necessary, but at any rate to have
a pleasant time. As the summer advanced picnics were to be inaugurated
on Saturdays, and fun of some sort or another was to be the vogue.

Kitty, who had dressed herself for this auspicious occasion in a dress
of the palest blue, with a silver sheen running in zigzag lines all over
it, whose black hair was curled up on her forehead and coiled
fantastically round the back of her head, whose eyes were shining and
wreathing themselves in all sorts of smiles, could scarcely restrain her
spirits while the rest of the girls were debating on the rules.

Finally Gwin laid a little box on the table, and asked the new members
to subscribe their half-guinea each. Each girl dropped her
half-sovereign and sixpence into the box with the exception of Elma,
who, coloring a little, said she would bring it to Gwin the next day. No
one made any remark, as it was well known in the school that Elma was
anything but well off, and Gwin privately resolved to subscribe for her
without saying anything about it.

Then the girls had tea in Gwin's own private sitting-room, and afterward
they wandered about the lawns, and returned home in the cool of the
evening. On this occasion Elma found herself side by side with Kitty
Malone. Kitty was walking quietly; she had exhausted some of her
emotions during the hours that she had played tennis, and laughed and
chatted with the other members of the Tug-of-war Society, and when Elma
put her hand on her arm, and looked up at her half-timidly and
half-beseechingly, Kitty stopped short, and said in her hearty, frank
voice:

"And what may you be wanting with me, Elma? Is it a favor I can do you;
because if it is I am sure you are welcome to it with all the pleasure
in life."

"You are a good-natured girl, Kitty," said Elma; "I always felt that
from the very first. Shall we drop a little behind the others? The fact
is I don't want every one to hear what I am going to say to you."

"If it is a secret, darling, don't tell it to me," said Kitty, "for I
cannot keep it. I always say so quite frankly. I say to each person who
comes to me with a private confidence, 'Confide nothing in Kitty Malone,
for Kitty Malone is a sieve.'"

"Oh, but it would never do for you to be that," said Elma, who was
somewhat alarmed and secretly greatly disgusted. "A girl is not worth
her salt if she tells what is confided to her by another girl; and of
course, now that you have become a member of the Tug-of-war Society, if
you are found blabbing any of our secrets at Middleton School I don't
know what will happen!"

"I wonder what would happen!" cried Kitty; "it would be quite nice to
find out. Do tell me, Elma."

"How can I when you don't understand," said Elma. "You would be wanting
in all honor; none of us ten girls would speak to you again."

"Wouldn't Bessie Challoner, the darling?"

"Certainly not. She could not; none of us could."

"I shouldn't like that," said Kitty thoughtfully. "I did not know, when
I joined the Tug-of-war, that I was to be burdened with secrets. And am
I not to explain to any of the other girls why I am moving heaven and
earth to get to the very head of the class? Am I not to breathe the real
reason, when I am taking poor little Agnes Moore's place, and breaking
her heart, the pretty lamb? Is that so?"

"You certainly are not," said Elma. "Dear me, Kitty, what a very
extraordinary specimen you are!"

"Well, don't scold me, for pity's sake," said Kitty. "I am so sick of
every one telling me that I am an extraordinary specimen. In Ireland
they think I am a very fine specimen; but here! oh, it's nothing but
holding up of hands and rolling up of eyes, and 'Oh, dear, let us get
out of her way!' and 'Oh, dear, how queer she looks in her grand
clothes!' and--and----"

"Do stop talking, Kitty. You are the most awful rattlepate----"

"There, now, on you go," said poor Kitty. "I'm a rattlepate, am I? It
seems that I can never speak but I get into somebody's black books."

"You don't get into mine, I am sure," said Elma. "But I think you ought
to be greatly obliged to me for telling you what is your plain duty with
regard to the Tug-of-war Society. It is just like a secret society; our
rules are our own, and not a soul who is not a member must know anything
about them."

"Well, I won't tell," said Kitty. "When I say a thing I stick to it. I
won't split--there I that's flat and I suppose I am obliged to you,
Elma."

"Yon ought to be," answered Elma. "Why, what a terrible scrape you would
have got into. And now, then, Kitty, I have something else to tell you."

"Well, and what is it?" asked Kitty.

"First, are you not pleased that you are a member of the Tug-of-war
Society?"

"To be sure I am. I think it is awfully nice of all you girls to ask me
to join."

"It is a great distinction," continued Elma; "a new girl like you, one
who is not known a bit in the school! Out of the whole school we have
only selected ten, including the founders, and you are one. You ought to
think yourself in rare luck."

"So I do."

"And you ought to be very grateful."

"So I am."

"But do you know whom you ought to be grateful to?"

"Well, I suppose to Bessie."

"Not a bit of it; it is to me you ought to be grateful. But for me you
would not be a member of the Tug-of-war Society."

"But for you, Elma?"

"No."

"Was it you who got me asked to join?"

"I was the one who insisted on your being asked to join us. I put it
plainly to Bessie and to Gwin, and they quite agreed with me. Alice was
the only one who voted against you."

"Oh, just like her, spiteful thing!" said Kitty, coloring with
annoyance. "Well, I am sure, Elma, I am obliged to you, and if there's
anything I can do--"

"I am coming to that," said Elma; "it's not much, but if you could--"

"Could what? Why, I'll do anything. Is it one of my gowns you want to
borrow?"

"No, no. What extraordinary ideas you hare!"

"Oh, there you begin again," said Kitty. "I never can speak right. Well,
what can I do for you, Elma?"

"If you could--just until next Monday--if you could lend me some--some
money," said Elma, coloring as she spoke, her voice faltering, and her
eyes seeking the ground.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE LITTLE HOUSE IN CONSTANTINE ROAD.


Kitty stared at her companion for a moment, then she put her hand into
her pocket and took out a very fat sealskin purse. She opened it and
held it out to Elma.

"Help yourself," she said.

Elma looked into the purse--golden sovereigns lay there in delicious
rows. There must have been at least fifteen sovereigns in the purse.

"Take as many as you like," said Kitty; "you are heartily welcome."

"You don't mean it; you can't," replied Elma, turning very pale.

"Why, what are you hesitating about? You said you wanted some money.
Dear heart alive! everybody wants money in Ireland, we are always
borrowing one from the other. Take as many of those yellow boys as you
fancy, and say no more about it."

"I am obliged to you, Kitty," said Elma. "I think you are quite
splendid; but can I--do you really mean it--can I take five?"

"Five, bless you! Take them all if you want them. I have only to write
to the dear old man at home, and ask him to send me a fiver or a tenner,
and he'll do it. You need have no qualms, and----"

"But when must I give them back?"

"Whenever you like."

"You don't really require them on Monday, do you?"

"I don't require them at any special date. Pay me when it is convenient.
Here, you may as well have ten."

"I could not; it is too much," said Elma. She put her hands behind her
back, her teeth were chattering, and she was trembling all over. She was
afraid that Kitty must read her through and through.

"Oh, what is the use of bothering?" cried Kitty Malone. "If you won't
take ten, take eight. Let me see, that leaves me seven over. Seven
sovereigns. I don't ever want to spend any money here. Of course I may
require a new dress when the fashions change. I must keep strictly up to
date now that I have joined the Tug-of-war; but in case I do, I'll just
send a wire to Aunt Bridget in Dublin and she'll send me over a beauty.
Ah, she's a dear old soul, Aunt Bridget is. There, Elma, do take the
money and be quick about it."

Elma--feeling sick and low, hating herself as she had never hated
herself before--dipped her greedy fingers into Kitty's sealskin purse,
and soon extracted eight of the golden sovereigns. These she slipped
into her pocket.

"I cannot tell you how grateful I am to you," she said.

"Not another word!" cried Kitty. "I have forgotten all about it already.
Now shall we have a run? I want to catch up to Bessie; I have not had a
word with her for the whole of the day."

Elma no longer required to keep Kitty Malone in the background. She had
now gained her object. Hoping against hope to extract from half a
sovereign to fifteen shillings from the generous-hearted Irish girl, she
suddenly found herself the lucky possessor of eight whole sovereigns.
Never in the whole course of her life had Elma possessed anything
approaching such a sum. Her mother was very poor. She had only one
sister, a daily governess. All Elma's people were hard up, as the
expression goes, and Elma herself only attended Middleton School because
an aunt paid her school fees. Hardly ever could the girl secure even
half a crown for her own pleasure. She hated poverty, she detested the
small privations which slender means involved. She was in no sense of
the word a high, refined character; on the contrary, there was something
small in her nature, something little about her. She had ever cringed to
the wealthy. She had made friends with Gwin Harley, who was rich,
high-spirited, and generous, but also very conscientious, and with
abundance of common sense. A glance had told Elma that she could never
ask Gwin to lend her money; but Kitty--innocent, frank, generous
Kitty--had proved an all too easy prey.

At that moment Elma despised Kitty as much as she was grateful to her.
The eight pounds, which she might return whenever she liked, lay lightly
in her pocket; she almost danced in her excitement and sense of triumph.
Of course Kitty would never tell--that went without saying; and in the
meantime she was rich beyond her wildest dreams. The girls had joined
forces when they came up to the stream which led across a wide field
called the Willow Meadow. Kitty linked her hand inside Bessie's arm, and
Elma and Alice walked side by side.

"Well," exclaimed Alice, "how did you get on with her, Elma?"

"With whom?" asked Elma.

"Oh, need you ask? That detestable Kitty Malone. I saw you sucking up to
her, and wondered why."

"I wish you would not use such horrid, vulgar words, Alice," said Elma.
"You know you are really breaking the rules of the Tug-of-war. We are
requested not to make use of slang."

"I forgot," said Alice. "But if it comes to that," she continued, "I
believe I shall have to leave the society if I can never express my
feelings with regard to Kitty Malone."

"But do you really dislike her as much as ever?" asked Elma, who, shabby
and mean as she was, in her poor little soul could scarcely bring
herself to run down generous Kitty just then.

"Dislike her!" cried Alice. "I hate her--there! I suppose that's flat
and plain enough."

"It certainly is."

"But you don't mean to say--it is impossible, Elma--that you see
anything to like in her?"

"Well, of course," answered Elma--who wished to propitiate Alice, for
her nature was to be all things to all men--"I can see at a glance that
she is not your style; she has not got your cleverness and refinement,
dear Alice."

"Oh, bother!" cried Alice. But all the same she was pleased, and when
Elma tucked her small hand inside of her arm Alice did not shake her
off.

"Any one can see that," continued Elma Lewis; "but I don't think she is
quite so bad as you paint her, Alice."

Alice's private opinion of Elma was that she was a little toad, and she
now managed to extricate herself from the smaller girl's clasp.

"I shall never like her," she said. "There is no good in your praising
her to me. If you mean to be her friend you must do so from a double
motive."

"How uncharitable of you!" cried Elma, coloring crimson as she spoke.

"Oh, I can guess it very well, my dear," pursued Alice. "But for you she
would not be a member of the Tug-of-war. What would have been a
delightful society, a pleasure to the best girls at Middleton School,
will be nothing whatever but a ridiculous farce, a scene of high comedy,
something contemptible, now that Kitty Malone has joined it. But for you
she would never have been asked to join. Why did you do it, Elma?"

"For no reason in particular," answered Elma.

"That is certainly not true, and you know it."

"I cannot think why you speak to me in that tone," said Elma. "What have
I done to you that you should think so badly of me?"

"Oh, I don't think badly of you, Elma, not specially; but I have always
seen that whatever you did, you did with a reason. In your own way you
are clever, you are extremely worldly wise. There are certain people who
would commend you; but you are not like the rest of us. You are not like
Gwin for instance, nor like Bessie, nor like me. Yes, I will frankly say
so, I am better than you, Elma. I have not got your double motives for
everything. You are only a girl now; I don't know what you will be when
you are a woman!"

The thought of the eight sovereigns so comfortably reposing in her
pocket made Elma able to bear this very direct attack. She determined to
take it good-humoredly; there was no use whatever in quarreling with
Alice. Accordingly she said cheerfully:

"You may think what you like of me, Ally, but I hope in the course of
years that you will find I am not so bad as you paint me."

Shortly afterward the girls parted, and each went on her way to her
special home. Bessie ran briskly up the short avenue which led to her
house, waving farewells to her companions as she did so. Alice and Kitty
were obliged to content themselves one with the other; and Elma, in the
highest good-humor, her heart bubbling over with bliss, departed in the
direction of her own humbler residence. She had to walk quite a mile and
a half, and at the end of that time she found herself in a much poorer
part of the large suburb where Middleton School was situated. The houses
here were of a humble description--not even semidetached, but standing
in long, dismal rows, a good many of them backing on to a
railway-cutting. These houses boasted of no small gardens, but ran flush
with the road. They were built of the universal yellow brick, and were
about as ugly as they could well be.

Elma paused at No. 124 Constantine Road. As she did so, a high, rasping,
and fretful voice screamed to her from an upper window:

"You are later than ever to-day, Elma, and mother has been fretting
herself into hysterics. Do come in at once and be quick about it."

Elma mounted the two or three steps which led to the hall door, and
pulled the bell with considerably more energy than was her wont. The
sovereigns were in her pocket; they made all the difference to her
between misery and happiness. She entered the house in high good-humor.

"What is it, Carrie?" she called to the fretful voice, which was now
approaching nearer.

The next moment a slatternly-looking girl appeared at the head of the
stairs.

"It's very easy for you to ask what is it," cried its owner, speaking in
high dudgeon. "You promised to be in between five and six, and it is now
between seven and eight. Here is all my chance of an evening's fun
knocked on the head. It's just like you, Elma; that it is."

"Oh, never mind now; please don't scold me," said Elma. "What is
it--about mother; has she been bad again?"

"Oh, it's the usual thing; she has had one of those dismal letters from
father. I can't imagine why she thinks anything about them. It came just
when we were all sitting down to dinner, and she began to cry in that
feeble sort of fashion."

"Oh, don't, Carrie; she will hear you," said Elma. "Pray go back to your
room, and I'll be with you in a minute. I have something to tell you.
You won't be quite so miserable when you hear my news."

Carrie stared at Elma, and then slowly backed until she reached a very
minute bedroom which she and Elma shared together.

Elma ran briskly upstairs. Turning to her right, she knocked at a
certain door; waited for an answer, but none came; then turned the
handle and went in. The Venetian blinds were down here, and the form of
a woman was seen lying in the center of a big bed.

"Is that you, Elma?" said a voice; and then the head was buried once
more in the pillows, and no further notice whatever was taken.

"Yes, mother, I am here," answered Elma. "I was thinking you might like
something nice for your supper--a crab or a lobster, or something of
that sort. Which would be your preference, mother?"

"A crab or a lobster!" muttered Mrs. Lewis. "You might as well ask me if
I should like a bottle of champagne, or some caviare. One is about as
likely to be forthcoming as the other."

"I tell you you may choose," said Elma. "I have my hat still on, and
I'll go as far as the fishmonger's, and bring in either a lobster or a
crab."

Mrs. Lewis raised herself on her elbow as Elma spoke.

"What are you dreaming about?" she said. "Where have you got the money?"

"Never mind. I have got the money. Which Would be your preference?"

"Oh, crab, dear; crab. I like it when it's well dressed; but then Maggie
never can do anything properly."

"I'll dress it on this occasion," said Elma. "You shall have a good
supper--crab and salad, and--There mother, do keep up heart again; you
give way too much."

"Ah, child," said poor Mrs. Lewis, "I have had another terrible letter.
He says he is starving; he cannot get work. I made the greatest possible
mistake in allowing him to leave the country."

"You could do nothing else," said Elma, with a little stamp of her foot.
"You know he would not help you in any way; he had to leave. But there,
mother, you shall tell me the dismal news after tea. You will feel ever
so much better when you have partaken of the dainty meal I mean to get
for you."

Mrs. Lewis did not say anything further. Elma bent down, touched her
parent on her brow with the lightest possible caress, and then stepped
on tiptoe out of the room.

"Poor mother!" she muttered. "It is surprising the kind of things that
comfort one; she is soothed at the thought of crab for supper with
salad. Well, that is all right; she will be as amiable and petting to me
as possible for the rest of the day. Now, then, for Carrie. A loose,
untidy, badly, hung together girl like Carrie is a trial to any sister.
However, I know the sort of thing that pleases her. I must be very
careful of my treasure-trove. I shall not spend it lightly; but in
giving my family small unexpected surprises it will be doing me an
immensely good turn."

Elma now entered the room where Carrie was fuming up and down.

"Well, what have you to say for yourself, miss?" she cried, when her
younger sister put in an appearance.

"Only that I am very sorry, Carrie; but to be honest with you, I quite
forgot that you wanted to go out this afternoon. Did I not tell you
that I was engaged to tea at Gwin Harley's?"

"You are forever with that odious girl," said Carrie.

"Gwin Harley an odious girl! What in the world do you mean?"

"What I say. Oh, of course I have seen her, and I know she's pretty, or
some people would think her so; in my opinion she's vastly too stuck up;
and so Sam Raynes says. Sam saw her last Sunday in church, and he said
she wasn't a bit his style."

"Oh, pray, don't quote Sam Raynes to me," said Elma. "Well, Carrie, of
course I had tea with Gwin, and of course she's about the nicest girl in
the world; and Kitty Malone was there, that scamp of an Irish girl. Oh,
she's not so bad when you get to know her better. And Alice Denvers was
there, and Bessie Challoner. We had quite a nice time. Of course I told
you about that society that I have joined. Well, there are about ten
girls members now, quite the elite of the school. I believe we shall do
a vast lot of good."

"What does it matter to me," said Carrie, stamping her foot. "I have
lost my pleasant afternoon with Sam. He and his sister promised to meet
me. I was to go with them to the Crystal Palace. Oh, it's too
provoking."

Carrie still fumed up and down the room.

"And I have such a dull time," she continued; "those children are quite
past bearing. They wear the very life out of me. See what that little
imp of a Claude did to my dress this afternoon."

As Carrie spoke she held up a decidedly shabby dress, which bore a huge
rent at one side.

"He caught it in his nasty little boot," said the girl. "He was
scrambling up on my knee, and made such a fuss, and there happened to be
a tiny hole, and then he wriggled and wriggled, and made it worse and
worse. The skirt is not fit to wear. I don't know what I shall do. I
really have not a blessed farthing to buy myself another new thing."

Elma made a careful calculation.

"How much was that stuff a yard?" she asked suddenly.

"What does it matter, Elma? It's worn out now, and there's an end of it.
You cannot buy me another gown; so where's the good of talking."

"But perhaps I can," said Elma dubiously.

"My dear Elma what do you mean?"

"Well, I am not quite certain, of course," said Elma; "and it would have
to be very cheap--very cheap indeed. But what color would you like,
Carrie?"

"Oh, blue," said Carrie, "rather light in shade. I love blue; and Sam
says I look sweet in it."

"If you begin to quote Sam again I don't think I'll give you sixpence
for anything. You know perfectly well that I loathe and detest him."

"Oh, that's your way," said Carrie. "You think it is very fine to detest
all the young men in our set; but I tell you Sam is a right good fellow,
and he has his ideas as much as anybody. He is going to get a raise,
too, at Christmas, and--"

"Are you engaged to him, Carrie?" asked Elma suddenly.

"Not yet. Oh, we don't think of any such thing; but I like to go with
him. He is great fun, and so is Florrie. Florrie doesn't mind a bit how
often she acts gooseberry."

Elma went and stood by the window. She looked gloomily out. How shabby
and sordid her home was; how miserable everything seemed! Carrie was
really a trial to any sister. Elma wondered if in the future she would
have to tolerate Sam Raynes as her brother-in-law. A sick feeling crept
over her. She was not a particularly refined girl; but in her school
life she associated with girls of a totally different caliber from poor
Carrie, and a shudder ran through her frame as she thought over her
sister.

"If you mean anything by that talk about a new frock, you had better
speak out plainly," said Carrie. "If you can really give me money to get
the stuff, something pretty and cheap, I could buy it to-night; there is
still plenty of time."

"Put on your hat and we'll go out at once," said Elma.

Carrie rushed to her wardrobe, took down her frowzy, over-trimmed hat,
stuck it on her towzled head, drew a pair of gloves up her arms, and
announced herself ready. The two girls ran briskly downstairs. Mrs.
Lewis called from her bedroom after them:

"Where are you two going?" she said. "Am I to be left alone in the
house?"

"No, Maggie is in the kitchen," called out Carrie.

"Oh, I am sick of being by myself, and I want my supper."

"I must go out to choose the crab, mother," said Elma.

"Oh, the crab," replied Mrs. Lewis in a mollified tone. "If you are
going really to get one, Elma, be sure you see that it has plenty of
coral in it, and choose nice, crisp lettuce. I care nothing for crab
without lettuce."

"All right mother; I'll manage," said Elma.

The girls found themselves in the street.

"So you are going to get mother crab and lettuce for supper," cried
Carrie. "Then I suppose after all you don't mean to give me money to buy
stuff for a new dress?"

"Yes, I do, Carrie, if you'll only have patience. I said I would, and
there's an end of it."

"But how have you got the money?"

"Never you mind; I have got it."

Carrie walked on, her spirits rose, and she began to talk in her high
staccato voice, allowing each person who passed to hear what she was
saying.

"This is Thursday," she said. "I shall get up at daylight to-morrow
morning, and I shall cut out the dress and put it in hand. I am always
home between four and five in the afternoon, so I can work at it again
until late at night. Then on Saturday, thank goodness! there's a whole
holiday. Oh, I shall manage to get it done by the evening, and Sam and I
can have a jolly time together in the park on Sunday."

"We will buy the crab first," said Elma, "and then we can call at
Macpherson's on our way home."

"They have sweet things at Macpherson's," said Carrie. "You really are a
very good-natured old thing, Elma."

"I am glad you think so," said Elma, her lips parted in a slightly
satirical smile.

Carrie, now beaming all over with good-humor, assisted in the choosing
of the crab; she further volunteered to carry this luxury home, and
suggested that radishes would be a great addition to the lettuce.

"Is there anything else you think mother would like?" asked Elma.

"Oh, a bottle of really good Guinness' stout," said Carrie.

"Capital, Carrie! Why, you are getting quite a head for housekeeping.
We'll give mother such a good supper, and it will do her a world of
good."

"Poor old dear, so it will," said jubilant Carrie.

Having purchased the materials for an appetizing meal, the girls now
entered a large establishment which, being supported by people of
extremely slender means, could only afford to indulge in the cheapest
articles. Carrie desired the shopman to exhibit cheap materials in
different shades of blue. She finally selected one, turquoise in color,
and wonderfully pretty, which cost the large sum of sevenpence
three-farthings per yard. She ordered the required length to be cut, and
Elma took out her purse to pay for it.

She did not at all want her sister to see how many sovereigns that purse
contained, and turned her back slightly as she laid one on the counter.

"Well, how you got it baffles me!" cried Carrie.

"Pray, don't speak so loud," said Elma; "they really will think that I
stole it if you go on giving me those sort of staccato rises of your
eyebrows. It's all the better for you; that sovereign has got you a new
dress."

"So it has, and you are an old darling," said Carrie. "I'll tell Sam
all about you on Sunday, Elma. By the way, what a good idea; wouldn't
you like to come with us? There's Sam's cousin, Maurice, a capital
fellow--Maurice Jones."

"Oh, no; don't speak of him," said Elma. She gave a shudder, and turned
her head aside.

The materials for the dress were purchased, even down to the linings and
buttons; and Carrie, holding her parcel tucked comfortably under her
arm, started home, Elma accompanying her. Carrie was so excited and
delighted with her dress that she had no time even to think of the
wonderful problem as to how Elma had got the money.

When they reached the house Elma ran into the kitchen and prepared to
dress the crab. She did so well, and when the dainty little meal was
upon the table, ran upstairs to bring her mother down.

"Now, mother, get up at once," she said.

"Get up. Oh. I can't," said Mrs. Lewis; "I have got such a splitting
headache."

"But the crab is downstairs, and I have dressed it myself, just in the
way you like best. I have brought in a little cayenne pepper, too, for I
know you don't care for crab without it; and the lettuce is wonderfully
crisp and fresh, and there are some radishes. Oh, and Carrie reminded me
that you would not care for crab without your stout."

"I know," said Mrs. Lewis in a plaintive voice; "your father would never
allow me to touch crab or lobster without stout. Ah, but those good old
days are gone!"

"Not quite mother, for there is a bottle of Guinness's waiting at your
disposal."

"Oh, is there?" said Mrs. Lewis. She raised herself on her elbow. "Then
I think I'll go down," she said.

"Well, make yourself smart, mother. I shall be waiting for you, and so
will Carrie."




CHAPTER IX.

THE HEAD-MISTRESS AND THE CABBAGE-ROSE.


Middleton School, which consisted of from six to seven hundred girls,
was kept in a state of discipline not so much by punishments as by a
very strict code of honor. There were certain things which no Middleton
girl who respected herself would ever dream of doing. There were other
things which she would do as a matter of course. For instance, she would
uphold her school through thick and thin, allowing no outsider to run it
down. To be a member of Middleton School insured her friendship with all
the other girls in the school. The _esprit de corps_ of this celebrated
day school was exceptionally strong. Even in after-life its members met
as friends, never forgetting that they were at one time schoolfellows in
one of the best and most thorough colleges of learning in the whole of
England.

As the fees for instruction were necessarily low, and as the school was
therefore open to all classes of girls, from the very rich to those who
had but limited means, a rule, and a very strong one, was that all money
and class distinctions were to be absolutely abolished. The girls, so
long as they belonged to the school, were absolutely on the same
footing, notwithstanding the fact that their home-lives might be very
far removed the one from the other. Among the most emphatic rules of
the school--a rule which, if it were disobeyed, would cause ostracism on
the part of the girls and the gravest reprimand, not to say a chance of
expulsion, on the part of the teachers--was the borrowing of money.
Money was supposed not to be mentioned between the girls; and as to a
poor girl borrowing from a rich, it was considered about the blackest
crime which could take place in Middleton School. Now, Elma, knew this
fact perfectly well, and when she took the eight pounds from Kitty
Malone she was aware of the grave risk which she ran. More depended on
her keeping up a good character in the school than her companions were
at all aware of. She was sent to Middleton School by an aunt who to a
certain extent had adopted her--her mother could not possibly afford to
pay the fees, small as they were.

Elma knew well as she lay down to sleep that night that if the little
transaction between herself and Kitty were known she would be
practically ruined for life. No other girl belonging to the school would
lend money even if it were asked for, so strong was the feeling on this
head; but Kitty knew nothing about it; she had not been long at
Middleton, and the subject had not been mentioned to her. Elma sincerely
trusted to Kitty's never alluding to it. Kitty had promised not to tell;
and Elma believed, wild and erratic as she was, that when her word was
once given, she would respect it. When she had asked Kitty to lend her
money she had intended only to take half a sovereign; she wanted this in
order to pay her subscription to the Tug-of-war Society; but when Kitty
generously opened her purse and told her to help herself, the temptation
had proved far too strong. Before she quite knew what she was doing she
had taken eight sovereigns; had put herself absolutely into Kitty's
power, and had run the chance of being ruined for life. Still, that
first night she slept soundly, and awoke in the morning with a sense of
bliss. She had still a little over seven sovereigns; not her own, and
yet in one sense quite her own, for Kitty had said there was no hurry
about the replacing of the money. Oh, yes, she was quite certain that no
one would find out. She opened her sleepy eyes, yawned, and saw Carrie
sitting at the window, busily employed cutting out her dress. Elma
remarked crossly at the blaze of light.

"Oh, don't say you mind it, you old dear," cried Carrie. "I can't see
unless I have plenty of light, and it's most important how I cut this
sleeve. I mean it to be puffy and yet not too puffy, and the elbows must
fit exactly in the right place. What a pity it is, Elma, that you and I
are not the same sort of figure. I am nearly double as big as you. It
would be so convenient if you could be my model; then I might fit my
things like a glove. Ah, well, I suppose there's nothing perfect in the
world."

Elma turned on her other side.

"If you talk to me any more," she said, "I shall become so cross as to
be unbearable. Go on with your dress if you must, but don't speak."

Elma returned to the land of dreams, and Carrie cut and snipped, and
basted and pinned, until it was time for her to go downstairs to
breakfast. Elma got up at her usual hour, ate her breakfast with
scarcely a remark, and started for school. When she got there the
different members of the Tug-of-war Society were hanging about the
doors. The school was not yet opened and the girls who belonged to the
society nodded to one another and whispered and smiled. Among the party
waiting at the door were Alice Denvers, Kitty Malone, and Bessie
Challoner. Gwin Harley had not yet arrived. It was never Gwin's stately
way to be either too early or too late for school; she generally
appeared on the scene, driving up in her pretty little phaeton, just as
the clock struck nine. The other girls always made way for this dainty
little turnout, and Gwin would spring carelessly to the ground, give a
direction to the smart tiger who sat behind, and who immediately took
the reins, and then, turning with a gay nod to her companions, would
enter the school with them.

Gwin was certainly the pride of the school. The girls who were not her
absolute friends looked at her with awe, wonder, and admiration. The
girls who were her friends bragged of the fact to their companions. It
was a pleasure even to look at Gwin, for, although she never overdressed
herself, she was always so wonderfully dainty--her neat little shoes,
her lovely stockings, the fine quality of her cambric handkerchiefs, the
delicate scent which clung to them, the glossy braids of her ever
exquisitely arranged hair, and the very set of that perfectly plain
sailor hat with its band of white ribbon, were all the acme of
perfection. Oh, they all betokened wealth and taste, taste and wealth.
No wonder the girls worshiped Gwin. She never boasted of her wealth,
she never brought it prominently forward; but for all that it pervaded
her from the top of her head to the point of her pretty bronze shoes.

Kitty now gave Gwin an earnest and longing look. There was a peculiar
expression about Kitty's face: a sort of new, thoughtful look, as though
something was worrying her and causing her to cudgel her brains to quite
a remarkable extent. Kitty Malone had never yet been affected with
shyness, nor was she shy now. Just as Gwin's carriage appeared and the
other girls made way for it as was their wont, and Elma approached quite
close to Alice, meaning to make some remark to her, what she never
afterward remembered, Kitty ran straight up to Gwin and clasped her by
the hand.

"I want to say something to you very badly," she began.

"How do you do, Kitty?" answered Gwin in her pleasant high-bred voice.
"You want to say something to me? But the bell has just rung; we must go
into school."

"I mean after school," continued Kitty. "Can I walk with you during
recess?"

"Oh, but please, Gwin," cried Elma at that point, "you promised to walk
with me to-day; don't you remember?"

"Yes, and you promised to walk with me, Miss Harley," exclaimed a girl
of the name of Marcia Tyndal.

"But it is so important, Gwin," pleaded Kitty, bringing that peculiar
Irish quality into her voice which it was difficult to resist.

"Ah, now do, Gwin," she continued; "do let me walk with you just during
this recess. The others may have you for every other recess until
Christmas; but do let me be with you just for to-day."

"I think you must, Kitty," said Gwin. "Elma, you won't mind, will you?
Marcia, you and I can have to-morrow instead of to-day; is it a
bargain?"

"Oh, I don't mind," said Marcia Tyndal in a good natured voice,
shrugging her fat shoulders as she spoke.

Then the girls trooped into school, prayers began, and immediately
afterward they all assembled at their different classes.

Kitty was restless and nervous, she could not settle to her work. She
was more _distrait_ and inattentive even than usual. The younger girls,
who delighted in her, and quite prided themselves on having her in their
class, nudged her in vain.

"Kitty," whispered one little girl quite three years Kitty Malone's
junior, "if you don't open your history book you won't have your lesson
ready when Miss Worrick comes."

"Oh, I know all that stupid history," cried Kitty in a low voice. "Don't
bother me, Annie, asthore. I can't be teased. I have got something in
the back of my head."

"Something in the back of your head?" whispered Annie.

"Yes, yes; but hush, alanna! I can't let it out; it's bothering me
entirely. There, if I must look at the stupid history, I must. What part
are we doing, Mary Davies?"

"Oh, it's about Charles the First."

"Poor martyr! Shame to England to cut off his head!" Kitty bent over her
book, but soon her erratic fancy had started off in another direction.
She was sent to the bottom of the class when the history lesson came on,
and was looked at with growing disfavor by Miss Worrick, a particularly
painstaking and earnest young teacher.

"Really, Miss Malone, if this sort of thing goes on I must report you,"
she said. "It is pure inattention. If you wish to take any position in
the school you must make up your mind that while in school you must
work."

"And while out of school I must play," retorted Kitty. "Ah, then, it's
little of the play I get. If I had my share of the play I could do my
share of work."

"Come, you must not answer me," said Miss Worrick. "Now, sit down and
read up that chapter in your history. You will not be allowed to go out
during recess this morning."

"Not go out during recess?" cried Kitty in horror; "but it's most
important. Ah, now, do let me out; just excuse me to-day, won't you?
I'll be as good as gold to-morrow, and better; but excuse me to-day;
please, please. Say you will; for I really must go. I was to meet Gwin
Harley, the darling; and it's put out she would be awfully if I wasn't
with her. You'll let me out to-day, won't you? Please say yes."

"I do not understand you, Miss Malone. When I say a thing I mean it.
You are not to go out during recess."

Kitty's bright face fell; the cloud which had more or less hovered
round her during the entire morning deepened. She sank into her seat
with a heavy sigh.

"Never mind, Kitty; we all of us have to stay in sometimes," whispered
little Mary Davies.

"Take a chocolate out of my pocket, darlin', and don't talk to me any
more," was Kitty's answer. "I am sad past bearing. Not to see Gwin when
I had arranged it all; but I will, I must! There, take a second
chocolate if you want it; they are full of cream. But just leave me to
my own thoughts for a bit. I am so worried I don't know whether I am on
my head or my heels."

"Silence, girls--no whispering!" called the mathematical teacher, who
now came on the scene.

Poor Kitty's morning began badly, and it certainly was destined to go on
badly. None of her lessons were prepared with the slightest care; she
went down lower and lower in class, and each teacher gave her an
imposition or some other punishment. When recess came she alone in the
whole class was required to remain in the room.

The rest of the girls looked at her with pity.

"She's such an old dear, although quite the idlest and most ignorant
person I ever came across," said Mary Davies to her companions.

"Yes," whispered another little girl with fat rosy cheeks and round
eyes; "but did you ever taste such chocolate creams? Why, they must
cost a halfpenny apiece. I do love to sit next to her; she says I may
dive my hand into her pocket as often as I like."

"Oh, she's an old love!" echoed all the girls: "but what a pity it is
that she won't learn."

"She does not want to learn," said Mary Davies. "Learning would spoil
her; she is a pet."

Meanwhile in the playground Gwin Harley waited in vain for Kitty to join
her.

"Does any one know where Kitty Malone is?" she said, addressing one of
the girls in Kitty's class.

"She is kept in for an imposition; she did not know her history, and
Miss Worrick said she was to stay in," answered Mary Davies.

"Oh, well, I suppose I can see her another time," said Gwin. At that
moment she met Elma's anxious eyes.

Elma was just about to dart to the side of her friend, when, to the
amazement of all the girls, Kitty walked calmly across the playground.

"Oh Gwin, I must speak to you; it is about Alice. You know, you and
Alice are great friends. Things get worse and worse, and they are almost
past bearing. Last night I heard her sobbing in bed. She sobbed and
sobbed, and at last I could stand no more of it, and sprang out of bed,
and bent over her and said: 'Alice, is it about me you are crying?' and
she said: 'Oh, yes, Kitty, it is;' and I said, 'And why 'Oh, yes,
Kitty?' What has poor Kitty done to you?"

"'I am not happy,' answered Alice. 'Since you came everything has
changed; you have made my home miserable to me. I don't like your ways.'

"'Have you made up your mind never to be friends with me?' I asked.

"'Yes,' said Alice. 'I wish you would go away.' She sat up in bed then
with her tear-stained face, and looked at me ever so earnestly. 'Tell
mother that you would rather go to some other house--that you won't stay
here. I never could stand vulgar girls, and you are one.'

"Oh Gwin, I felt so mad. You don't think me a vulgar girl, do you?"

"Tell me the whole," said Gwin in a low voice.

"Oh, there is not much more. Alice was in a regular temper. She buried
her face in the clothes, and though I tried pinching her, and pulling
her, and petting her even, not another word would she utter. Now, you
must see for yourself, Gwin, that if this sort of thing goes on I shall
have to return home, and then the old dad will be fretted, and he will
think that I don't want to learn manners nor to get learning into me. Oh
dear, I don't want to fret him, although I hate England. I have just
been wondering if you would speak to Alice."

"Yes, certainly," answered Gwin. "I--" Her words were interrupted.

"Miss Malone, do I see you in the playground?" said a stern voice. Miss
Worrick had appeared on the scene.

"Why, then, yes, Miss Worrick, you do. It's a fine day, isn't it; and
the air is most refreshing," said Kitty in her most impertinent tones.

"Do you know that you have distinctly disobeyed me? I forbade you to
leave the schoolroom during recess. How dared you do so?"

"There wasn't much daring about it. I walked to the door, opened it, and
came out. I had made a previous engagement, and it was not at all
convenient to break it. I told you so at the time, did I not?"

For answer Miss Worrick took Kitty by the arm and led her across the
playground.

"I must take you to Miss Sherrard," she said. "I cannot manage a
disobedient girl like you."

She opened a side door, and, still holding Kitty by the arm, led her
down a long passage and into a small room, where she desired her to wait
while she fetched the head-mistress.

Miss Sherrard was a little woman, but she had a native dignity which is
beyond and above all mere personal appearance. She had a keen and
commanding eye, a somewhat pale face, an upright little figure. She was
not only short in stature, but slight; nevertheless, there was not a
mistress in the great school who did not hold her in awe as well as
admiration, and not a girl, with the exception, perhaps, of Kitty
Malone, who did not do her reverence.

When the door was shut behind Kitty, she drummed impatiently on the bare
mahogany table near which she had been placed, then walked to the window
and looked out. From her position she could catch a glimpse of Gwin
Harley pacing up and down the playground with Elma Lewis. She saw Alice
come up and talk to Gwin; she noticed that Gwin and Elma paused, then
that Alice slipped to the other side of Gwin, and the three walked
slowly up and down. As they walked they talked. Alice nodded her head
once or twice; Elma made emphatic grimaces; Gwin alone looked quiet,
calm, and stately.

"They are talking about me," thought the Irish girl, and an angry
feeling rose in her heart. "Is it for this I have left the dear old dad,
and the beautiful home, and the animals, and Aunt Bridget, and Aunt
Honora? Oh, is it for this I have left dear Old Ireland, may her heart
be blessed! to come here to be slighted, to be made little of, to be
joked at! Am I Kitty Malone, or am I somebody else? Oh! my heart will
break, my heart will break!"

"Miss Malone, I am sorry to hear this of you," said a very calm, very
distinct, and withal very kind voice, just at Kitty's back. Kitty turned
abruptly, and said aloud:

"Oh, and did you overhear me?" She then involuntarily dropped a courtesy
to the head-mistress.

Miss Sherrard shut the door behind her.

"I am sorry," she began, "to learn from Miss Worrick that you are
showing insubordination and disobedience."

"Why, then, now, and won't you let me tell my own story in my own way?"
said Kitty.

In spite of herself, Miss Sherrard gave an involuntary smile. It soon
vanished, but Kitty had caught the glint in the eye and the tremble
round the lips. "Why, then I see at a glance that you have the kind
heart," she said; "you thought to keep it in, but I saw it breaking out
just then. You'll let me tell my own story, won't you?"

"That seems fair enough," said Miss Sherrard. She seated herself as she
spoke on one of the bare, comfortless chairs, and looked full up at
Kitty.

Kitty was dressed according to Rule IV. of the Tug-of-war Society. She
wore a decidedly fashionable dress, the sleeves well puffed out at the
shoulders, fitting nicely at the elbows, and with ruffles of lace, real
lace, round the wrists. Round Kitty's throat also there were ruffles of
lace; the neck of her dress was cut a little low, showing the soft, full
contour of her exquisitely-curved throat. Her waist was clasped with a
belt of solid silver, and in front she wore a great bunch of
cabbage-roses. The cabbage-rose has a scent which, when once it assails
the nostrils, can never afterward be forgotten. Miss Sherrard, in spite
of herself, gave a little sniff.

Quick as lightning Kitty saw it, and detached the bunch of roses from
her belt.

"Now, will you have them?" she said. "Ah, do now, just to please me,
Kitty Malone; they came all the way from Old Ireland this morning. Stay,
I'll pin them into the front of your dress. Hold easy a moment dear
woman, and you'll have as neat a little bunch as ever you clapped your
two eyes on."

Miss Sherrard could not help once again letting that ghost of a smile
play round her lips, and then vanish.

"But really," she said--"oh, thank you for the roses; yes, they are very
sweet; yes, delicious! She bent her head and sniffed quite audibly.

"Ah, then, aren't they refreshing, and aren't they melting the anger
down in your heart? Say they are now--say they are. You see you never
had an out-and-out wild Irish girl to manage before. Well, and what is
it you want with me? I'll be as civil as you please, and as willing to
listen to the words of wisdom, if only you'll let me first tell my own
story."

"It is only fair that you should be allowed to tell your own tale,"
said Miss Sherrard; "but please understand that I am very angry. Miss
Worrick's story has amazed me. Do you know. Kitty Malone, of what you
are accused?"

"Well, I do, and I don't; but I should like to hear the crime spoken of
by your pretty lips. What is it? Something black of course; black things
are always laid to the door of Kitty Malone."

"The crime, Miss Malone, is the very grave sin of disobedience. You must
know that in a great school of this kind, if there were not perfect
obedience there would be no order at all."

"True for you, it looks like it; but then, as far as I can see--and I
have watched all the girls pretty closely of late--I am the only black
sheep. Now, I should think that one black sheep in a great big orderly
place of this kind would make a sort of diversion. You would all be
after her, and joking at her, and thinking which of you could get her
under control. Well, I am the black sheep, and I suppose I am sorry."

"Don't talk any more, Kitty; listen to me."

"Yes; what is it?"

"You have been disobedient; you were very inattentive over your history
lesson, not knowing it at all. Miss Worrick says, as a matter of fact,
you did not even trouble to open your book, and when the time came for
you to go through your lesson you were not able to answer a single
question. For this extreme carelessness she desired you to stay in the
schoolroom during morning recess. She said you pleaded hard that she
would excuse you, not liking to take the punishment which you richly
deserved; but Miss Worrick, very justly insisted on her word being
obeyed. What then, was her astonishment to see you in the playground
walking calmly up and down with Gwin Harley."

"Yes, dear; and what else could you expect?" answered Kitty.

"What else could I expect? I don't understand."

"Well, was it likely now that I would stay in that close, stifling
schoolroom when the sun was shining and there was a bird on a tree
outside singing to me as loud as ever it could? And I had made an
arrangement with Gwin Harley to walk up and down with her during recess,
and the darling girl had put off two others for me, and was waiting for
me. Don't you think it was about natural that I should disobey Miss
Worrick, whom I never cared twopence for, and go out to Gwin Harley,
whom I love? Of course I knew I was disobedient, and I supposed she
would punish me; but I didn't think she would have me up for you to
lecture me."

"You behaved very badly indeed," said Miss Sherrard; "and you are now
talking in an extremely silly way."

Kitty bowed her head; the light went out of her eyes, her face turned
pale.

"What punishment will you invent to torture me with?" she said at last
in a low voice. "I suppose I have done wrong, and I am willing to take
the punishment. What is it?"

"Of course you must be punished," said the head-mistress; "it would
never do to allow disobedience is the school. You see, Kitty--"

"Oh, bless you, bless you, for calling me by my Christian name,"
muttered Kitty Malone.

"Kitty, I am inclined to take you into my confidence."

"Are you, indeed? I declare you're an old dear!"

"You have come to school to learn, have you not?"

"Not a bit of it," answered Kitty; "I came to school to please the old
dad."

"Your father?"

"Yes, the dear old dad, the dearest, the best in the world."

"But what did he send you here for?"

"Well, I suppose to get knowledge and manners. Ah, bad luck to them! and
I suppose also to tame me down a bit. He said he never could manage that
at Castle Malone."

Miss Sherrard once more gave that faint involuntary smile.

"Your father sent you here," she said, "to put you under discipline.
While you are in this school, my dear girl, you must obey me, and also
the other teachers. If you are disobedient the other girls will be
disobedient, and then where should we all be?"

"It would be a lark!" muttered Kitty, with sparkling eyes.

"Don't interrupt, and please listen. I should be very sorry to send you
back to Castle Malone in disgrace. I should be sorry to have to write to
your father in order to tell him that his Kitty, whom he loves--his
bright, pretty, lovable daughter--can never learn manners nor
accomplishments, nor be tamed in the very least. There are from six to
seven hundred girls in this school, who all now know about your very
daring act of disobedience. Were I not to punish you they would be
astonished, and some of them might even go to the length of copying your
behavior. You see this for yourself, don't you?"

"Oh, I see it plain enough," answered Kitty; "plain as a pikestaff.
What's the punishment to be?"

Miss Sherrard hesitated. Once more she looked at Kitty; Kitty's eyes
were as bright as stars.

"You need not be afraid," said the pupil in an encouraging voice. "I am
nothing of a coward; I'll take anything in reason. Is it a flogging you
are thinking of ordering for me?"

"Oh, no; we never flog in this school," said Miss Sherrard in a shocked
voice.

"Why, then, if it is something in the shape of learning a lesson it will
go cruel with me. I don't care for learning, and----"

"I am afraid, Kitty, that I must give you the kind of punishment which
all the school may know about. All the school now knows of your
disobedience, and it must also be well aware of your punishment."

"Good gracious! this sounds exciting," answered Kitty. "I am to have a
punishment that all the school will know about."

"Yes, it is this. To-morrow morning, just before recess, you are to go
up to Miss Worrick, and tell her before the entire school that you are
sorry you disobeyed her; you are then to offer to stay in during the
play hour."

"If that's all," said Kitty, "it is not much of a bother. I am to say I
am sorry, and I am to stay in to-morrow. You won't object to my
bringing--"

"I'll hear of no conditions," answered Miss Sherrard, starting to her
feet. "Go away now, my dear girl, and please remember that your father
sent you here to learn, that I trust you will learn, and that you will
also endeavor to be good to--to please me, Kitty."

Kitty's eyes filled with sudden tears.

"You are very kind," she murmured. "I know I should soon learn to love
you. You wouldn't mind letting me give you a hug, would you?"

"I will certainly kiss you, dear, but no demonstration, please. Kitty, I
know you have a warm heart; but don't let it lead you into mischief.
There is much for you to learn in England, as I doubt not there would be
much for an English girl to learn in your country."

"Ah, but it is the dearest land in all the world," said Kitty.

"I am sure it is to you; but say no more now. I will speak to Miss
Worrick; she will expect you to do what I have desired to-morrow."




CHAPTER X.

PADDY WHEEL-ABOUT.


The next day there was a whisper through the school that Kitty Malone
was about to do public penance. She had already made more or less
sensation in that part of the school where she worked. In her own class
the girls, as has already been stated, adored her; but the other girls
also looked at her with interest. They admired her dress, her free,
careless gait, her upright, erect figure, and the bright, happy glance
in her eyes. They all thought her charming, and the expression of her
face was often so comical, the shrug of her shoulders so ludicrous, that
at a glance she set the girls tittering.

On this special occasion she sat down between her favorite Mary Davies
and Agnes Moore, and whispered to the former:

"Ah, then, darling, it is not your place I'll be taking to-day; sure my
head is bothered entirely. But I have got all kinds of nice things about
me. Do you know that I sat up late last night putting a pocket in the
left side of my dress as well as the right, so now the girl on each side
of me can have as many chocolates as she has a fancy for? You dive in
your hand whenever you feel the least bit inclined for a sweetie, Agnes;
and you do the same, Mary Davies; and, Mary, you might pass one on now
and then to that poor, little, thin Katie Trafford at the other end of
the class."

It was certainly impossible for a girl like Kitty Malone not to be
popular; and the other girls valued her, and thought themselves highly
privileged to be in the same class with her, dunce as she was.

Kitty had learned her lessons a little better, but the thought of the
public confessions which she was about to make rested heavy on her soul.
It made her restless; and her lessons, although they had been better
prepared, gained her no more marks than on the previous day.

"I wonder how I ought to do it," she whispered more than once to Agnes
Moore.

"To do what?" asked Agnes, who was a very earnest little student, and
whose dream was that she might get a remove at the end of the term.
"About what, Kitty? I wish you would not interrupt me."

"Oh, bother it, dear. Have a chocolate, won't you? What are your lessons
compared to my perplexities? What ought I to say? Ought I to drop a
courtesy or go on my knees? There was an old romance which I found in
the garret at home; and when the heroine did wrong she always dropped
upon her knees and folded her hands, and raised her eyes toward
heaven--is that the way I ought to do it?"

"Don't, don't, Kitty; you'll make me laugh, and then I'll be sent down.
Please, don't talk to me any more."

Kitty turned her attention to Mary Davies.

"Would you, Mary, go on one knee or on two? If you dip your hand down to
the very bottom of my pocket, you'll find some caramels--some people
like them better than chocolate creams."

"You must not talk to me any more or I'll get into disgrace," whispered
Mary in a low, frightened voice. "Look, Miss Worrick has come into the
room. Now do open your history book, there's a dear girl."

Kitty bent her curly head over her book. She was really interested in
the cruel fate of the martyr-king, but at that moment she saw nothing
but the picture she was conjuring up each moment before her excited
imagination--the tall girl asking pardon of the little teacher. Was the
girl to go on her knees?

"It really would be better," thought Kitty. "I'd be lower than her then.
It does seem ridiculous that the big should ask pardon of the little,
and--Oh, Miss Worrick, I beg your pardon; were you speaking to me?"

"I was, Kitty. Stand up; I am just going to lecture."

The history lesson began. Kitty did no better than yesterday. It came to
an end. The mathematical teacher took her class, and then the great bell
was rung for recess. Just at the moment when its last note echoed
through the vast school Miss Worrick came a step forward into the room,
and held up her hand to arrest the movement of the classes. She looked
at Kitty with an expectant expression. Kitty returned her gaze, and said
nothing. Kitty Malone felt glued to her seat. For a moment every nerve
seemed paralyzed, her face became crimson, her eyes filled with ready
tears, she looked down, the great tears splashed upon the desk before
her. At that instant she encountered the vindictive and delighted
glance of Alice Denvers.

Kitty had confided all her trouble to Alice on the previous night, and
Alice at the time had pretended to give a little sympathy; but where was
her sympathy now?

"I hate her," thought the Irish girl. "No one else would be glad to see
me so miserable."

"You have something to say to me, have you not, Miss Malone?" said Miss
Worrick in her stiff, precise voice.

Kitty staggered to her feet.

"I don't want to say it a bit," she grumbled.

"Come forward, my dear; come forward."

Kitty left the protection of her desk, and staggered across the room.
Miss Worrick had mounted a little platform, all the other teachers stood
waiting, and the girls waited also. Kitty looked round, the eyes in each
face seemed multiplied fourfold--the room seemed to be all eyes. She
longed for the mountains, for her father, for Laurie, for the old home.
She hated the school, she hated England. Why was she to be publicly
disgraced?

"Oh, it is very wrong indeed to ask me to do it," she cried. Then the
following words rushed out: "Miss Worrick, I am sorry I disobeyed you
yesterday, and I'll stay in class to-day. Yes, I will stay; but I hate
every one of you, and I hate England, and I wish I was back again in
dear Old Ireland. Oh, dear! oh, dear! oh, dear! Why was I ever sent into
this horrid, cold, freezing land? Oh, my heart is broken! my heart is
broken!"

Kitty's sobs were distinctly heard across the great schoolroom. She
returned to her seat. Miss Worrick with a wave of her hand dismissed the
rest of the girls. Kitty bent her head low down upon the desk before
her, and sobbed louder and louder. At last she felt a hand resting
lightly on her shoulder.

"I know I did it dreadfully, Miss Worrick," she said; "but it was so
bad. Why did you make me, why did you make me?"

"There, Kitty, it is over now, and you will never disobey your teacher
again as long as you live," said a kind voice, and Kitty raised her eyes
to see, not the face of Miss Worrick, but that of the head-mistress.

"Oh, Miss Sherrard, how could you make me do it?" she sobbed. "It wasn't
in me. None of the Malones could beg anybody's pardon, and I couldn't go
on my knees when the moment came because they felt stiff, they had no
joints in them. I could not do it properly; no, I could not."

"You did it, dear, but not very well. You did it, however, and you have
learned your lesson. Now come with me into my private sitting-room. You
and I will have lunch together, and I will excuse you from any more
lessons to-day."

Kitty Malone never forgot that next hour. Miss Sherrard was an ideal
head-mistress. She had the keenest sympathy with girls. In her long
experience she had met girls of every shade of character, the bold, the
ambitious, the timorous, the idle, the frivolous, the noble, the
earnest. She knew all about the Christian girl as well as the pagan
girl; all about the girl who had a terrible battle with her own evil pro
pensities, and the girl whose nature was so amiable, so gentle, so
sweet, that life would be comparatively easy for her. But although she
had been head-mistress of the great Middleton School now for several
years, she had never before met quite such an extraordinary specimen as
Kitty Malone. Where, however, others would see nothing but a spirit of
frivolity, a love of admiration, dress, pleasure, in Kitty, Miss
Sherrard peeped below the surface and discovered some really noble
qualities. She determined to be very gentle to this wild, willful
girl--to take her, in short, as she was.

"Oh, I wonder you care to speak to me," said Kitty, when her sobs having
ceased, she stood looking half-repentant, half-rebellious in Miss
Sherrard's private room.

"You are not to be the subject of our conversation at all for the
present, Kitty," said Miss Sherrard. "Lunch is ready, and you must be
hungry. Would you like to go into my room--it is just next to this--and
wash your hands and brush out your hair?"

Kitty looked at Miss Sherrard's small and beautifully-kept hands. She
was fastidious to a remarkable degree about her personal appearance.

"I dare say my hair is somewhat untidy," she said. "I might as well take
a squint at myself in the glass. I never like to look ugly. Is my nose
very red, Miss Sherrard?"

"Never mind about your appearance," said Miss Sherrard, who could not
help feeling slightly annoyed at what she considered such a very
irrelevant remark.

"I expect I am a fright," said Kitty standing up and talking half to
herself and half for the benefit of the head-mistress. "Crying always
spoils me. Now, I knew a girl at home, and the more she cried the
prettier she got. She used to let her tears roil down her cheeks in
great drops, and never attempted to wipe them away, and her nose never
got red, and her eyes only got bigger and quite dewy. Now, as to me when
I cry, my nose----"

"Kitty, will you please remember that I am waiting for lunch,"
interrupted Miss Sherrard.

"Oh, I beg your pardon, ma'am," answered Kitty. She ran into the next
room, examined herself critically in the glass, arranged her hair,
dipped her hands into hot water, and came back looking spruce, bright,
pretty, and once more restored to the highest good-humor.

"I said yesterday that I would love you, ma'am," she said, as she seated
herself at the other side of the appetizing board. "Oh! what a dear
little pie! I wonder is it pigeon pie"

"No, it is lamb pie," answered Miss Sherrard. "Will you help yourself?"

Kitty cut herself a generous slice.

"I like all sorts of good things," she said. "I am sure I was meant to
do nothing in life but dress well, and look pretty, and have the nicest
food to eat, and----"

"How dare you?" interrupted Miss Sherrard. Her words coming firm and
strong, the expression on her kind face arrested the idle girl's silly
remarks.

"What do you mean?" asked Kitty.

"I mean this, Miss Malone, that you are a girl with a considerable
amount of ability----"

"Oh, now that I have not got."

"With a considerable amount of ability," continued Miss Sherrard, "and
with a great many talents."

"Talents! I thought talents meant genius. Now, I have always and always
been told that I was a dunce of the dunces. It's not joking me you are,
is it, Miss Sherrard?"

"No, Kitty; I am in very sober earnest. You have been sent to me to make
something of you."

"Well, my dear woman, I am afraid you won't make much. The fact is, I am
wild through and through. I come of a wild stock. I wish you could see
us at home, and Laurie, and----"

"You must tell me about your home afterward," said Miss Sherrard. "But
now I have something to say about yourself."

As she spoke, Miss Sherrard drew her cup of coffee to the side of the
table, leaned back, and looked fixedly into the bright and lovely face
of the girl who sat opposite her.

"You have read your Bible, have you not?" she said.

"My Bible!" cried Kitty. "Yes; I read it every day."

"I am glad to hear that."

"Why, you don't suppose we are a lot of heathens at Castle Malone, do
you, Miss Sherrard? Father has prayers every morning, and we all troop
in, every one of us, into the big hall. Oh, I wish you could see the
hall, and the pictures of my ancestors, and----"

"Afterward you shall tell me about them," interrupted Miss Sherrard. "So
you do read your Bible every day. Then I dare say you happen to know
the beautiful story, or rather parable, spoken by Christ himself about
the talents?"

"Yes, I love that story; only I don't think it applies specially to me,
for I have not got any."

"Have not you? Perhaps I can find that you have."

Kitty gazed at her mistress very earnestly.

"What is it I am good in?" she asked after a pause. "Is it my English?
Bless you, they tell me it's awfully Irish."

"It certainly is, Kitty."

"Then, I don't know any music, although I can sing and whistle. Oh, I
can whistle anything. There's not an air that Laurie plays (it's he that
has the genius for music, bless the boy)--but there's not an air he
plays that I can't whistle it right up and down, and with variations
too."

"Yes, my dear, yes; but I was not thinking of this special talent. Now,
let me tell you something that you have got."

"What? Please speak."

"You have plenty of money."

"I never thought that was a talent," cried Kitty.

"I should think it a very great and responsible talent. You have been
given that money to do something for God. He wants you to use it for
Him. Then, also, you have a very bright, attractive, loving manner."

"Oh, I feel every word I say. It's not manner," said Kitty. "You don't
suppose I'm a hypocrite, do you?"

"No, I think on the contrary you are very sincere. We will now admit
that you have got two talents; you have got money and you have got a
pleasant manner. I think also that you have got a third, and I may be
able to prove to you that you have got a fourth."

"Dear me, this is most entertaining!" exclaimed Kitty. "So I have really
got two talents, and you think I have more. What is the third?"

"I don't wish to make you vain; but you have--yes, I must tell you--a
remarkably pretty face."

"Ah, now, what a darling you are! I always thought you were sweet. What
part of me do you admire most, the eyes or the mouth? I have the real
Irish eyes I know--gentian-blue, yes, that's the color--and my
eyelashes--aren't they long?"

"We need not discuss your beauty piece by piece," said Miss Sherrard.
"You are pretty, and I am willing to admit it. Now, a bright face like
yours, with an attractive manner, is a gift. Then, besides, you
have--you will be astonished when I say this--lots of becoming dress,
which adds to the charm of your appearance. Kitty, if you were all you
might be--if you would use that money which God has given you, that
beauty which God has given you, that attractive manner which God has
given you, all for His service--why, you could do a great deal in the
world. You could make it a better place, a brighter place, a happier
place. Now, my dear child, your father has trusted you to me. He wrote
to me a great deal about you before you came to Middleton School----"

"Dear old dad!" cried Kitty.

"He loves you with all his heart."

"I should think so, the darling blessed man--may the saints preserve
him!"

"As your father feels so strongly about you, and as I promised him to
do what I could for his child, will you help me, Kitty? Will you
remember that you are equipped for the battle of life much more bravely,
much more strongly than most of the other girls in Middleton School? Use
your beauty for Him, dear; use your attractive manner for Him."

"You make me feel very solemn," said Kitty. She rose. "I will try and
think about it," she said. "I wish I was not quite such a giddypate; but
I'll try and think about it."

Miss Sherrard kissed her.

"And now I want you to do something more," she said. "You won't be able
to be a better girl than you were in the past if you don't pray to God
to help you; and when you pray, Kitty, ask Him to teach you to restrain
your feelings a little, not to let them all rush to the surface, to keep
a little back. Thus you will gain strength of character, and--and be all
the better for it, my child."

"You are very good to me," said Kitty. "I don't mind what I do for those
I love. I suppose now you would wish me to learn my lessons perfectly
every day?"

"I certainly should."

"And to--to turn poor little Agnes Moore from the head of her class?"

"Well, Kitty, I cannot say anything about that. II you do better work
than Agnes Moore you will get to the head of the class and she will go
down; but I doubt your being able to do so, for Agnes is a very clever
and a very diligent little pupil. But I want you, dear, soon to get out
of that class, for it is a great deal too young for you. I want you to
be with girls of your own age. We are yet one month to the end of the
term. By the end of term I want to be able to tell you that you have got
a remove. And now, dear, good-by. Remember, I shall watch you, and--yes,
I shall pray for you."

"You are very good to me," repeated Kitty; and she walked out of Miss
Sherrard's presence with her head lowered, and a mist before her eyes.

For the next few days Kitty was strangely thoughtful. She did not speak
nearly so much as usual, she felt inclined to go away by herself, and
she was much puzzled about her talents. Miss Sherrard's words had made
quite a deep impression. She learned her lessons with care, and had
every chance, so her teachers told her, of a remove at the end of term.
Even Alice found less to say against her. Kitty began to look on her
school life as something roseate and delightful; but all these things
were to come to a speedy end.

On a certain afternoon she got home to find Alice out and Mrs. Denvers
seated in the drawing-room with a great basket of mending before her.

"Oh, what a lot of work! Would you like me to help you?" said Kitty.

"Very much, dear; but what kept you so late? Oh, here is a letter for
you."

"A letter!" cried Kitty eagerly. "Oh, it is from Laurie. Hurrah!
hurrah!"

She forgot all about her offer to help Mrs. Denvers with her darning,
tossed the letter in the air two or three times, and then sank down on
the nearest ottoman to read it. These were the words on which her eyes
rested:

"DEAR OLD KITTERKINS: I have got into the greatest bother of a mess that
ever assailed a poor gossoon, and if you can't help me, old girleen,
well, I shall be done brown, as the saying is. The whole matter concerns
Paddy Wheel-about. The poor creature has been getting queerer and
queerer lately, and father has been ever so much worried about him. I
didn't know a word of this, mind you, at the time, but learnt it
afterwards; and it makes my bit of a frolic all the blacker, I can tell
you. Father got Dr. Milligan to go and see Paddy in his cabin at the top
of Sleeve Nohr, and the doctor said that the poor old boy was going off
his head as fast as he could, and we must be careful not to give him any
shock. Well, but to come to my part of it. You know that coat of his,
and what diversion we have had out of it from time to time? You made one
of the patches yourself, don't you remember, Kitty? We always told him
that in each patch he had concealed a sovereign. Well, hot as the days
are, he has been wearing that coat, and a figure of fun he did look. The
Mahoney boys and Pat and I thought we would take a rise out of him; so
one night when he was asleep we stole up to his lair and got hold of the
precious coat. We bundled it up and were off with it. We had to cross
the lake, in the old boat with a hole in the bottom, in order to get
home in time, and what do you think happened? Up came a squall, the boat
was upset, and Paddy's coat sank to the bottom of the lake. We swam to
the shore and thought it would be an easy matter to fish up the old coat
on the following morning; but although we dragged and dragged, and Pat
and I both dived down to the bottom a good dozen of times, the coat had
sunk in the deep mud and we could not find it, no nor a sign of it.
Well, of course, our one hope was that no one should know; but what was
our horror to be confronted by no less a person than Wheel-about
himself. You know that craze he has about never speaking. Well, he spoke
to us and pretty sharp too, and told us he knew we had taken the coat,
and didn't he look thunders and daggers at us, and we funked it so
awfully--yes, I will confess it, Kits, your brave Laurie funked it like
anything--for Wheel-about did really look like a roadman; at last there
was no help for it--we had to out with the truth. Oh, didn't he raise a
yell louder than anything you ever heard, and then I told him that if I
could not get back the coat I would give him ten pounds for certain by
Saturday next. He said if I did he would lie quiet for a bit and not
tell the governor, so I want you like a blessed girleen to lend me the
money. Send it off the very instant you read this; for if you don't the
saints alone know what will happen. We are certain to be sent to a
school in England, at least I am. From what you tell me, Kitterkins, of
that place, I should think it would break our hearts to smithereens. Now
look sharp and send the money. Your loving brother,

"LAURIE."

"Oh, dear!" exclaimed Kitty starting to her feet. "Do you mind my going
out at once, Mrs. Denvers?"

"Certainly not, my love. Tea will be ready at five o'clock. Are you
going far?"

"Only to Elma Lewis' house. I want to see her; it is awfully important."

"But Elma lives quite two miles from here."

"Oh, that does not matter. I am sure to find my way. It is most urgent,"
said Kitty.

She rushed out of the room, pinned on her hat, and a moment later was
walking down the street as fast as she could go. She crossed a field
and a common, and after a time got into that part of the town where Elma
lived. By dint of asking half a dozen children and three or four
policemen she at last reached Constantine Road, and presently found the
right house. She ran up the steps and sounded a rattling rat-tat on the
knocker. The moment she did so a girl with a mop of untidy red hair
peeped up at her from the area below.

"Come and open the door at once," called Kitty. "Why do you keep a lady
waiting?"

The girl soon appeared, tying on her cap and apron as she did so.

"I thought as they was all out for the day," she began, "--Oh, miss, I
beg your pardon."

Kitty, notwithstanding her rather rude words, presented a very charming
spectacle as she stood on the steps. She was dressed not only in the
height of the fashion, but wore such a perfectly captivating little
toque at the back of her head as to fire the fancy and take the little
wit which she possessed out of Mrs. Lewis' maid-of-all-work.

Maggie had never seen anything so captivating nor so ravishing. A wild
desire to make a toque like it to put on her own towzled locks on the
following Sunday caused her to stare so hard at Kitty with her mouth
wide open that she did not hear a word that young lady was saying.

"Are you in a dream?" asked Kitty Malone. "I want to see Miss Elma
Lewis. Is she at home?"

"Miss Helma? No, miss, that she ain't," replied Maggie. "Oh, I beg your
pardon, miss; but it's it's the bonnet at the top of your head."

"My bonnet?" said Kitty.

"Yes, miss. Oh, I do beg your pardon, miss--I was took all of a heap.
Yes, miss, I'm attending now. But oh, if you would just turn your head a
little."

"You must be mad," said Kitty. But her eyes began to sparkle.

"Do listen to me," she continued; "it's most important. Is Miss Elma not
at home?"

"No, miss; she's out for the day, and so is the missus and Miss Carrie.
They're all out a-pleasuring in their different ways, and they has left
me at home to drudge. I'm the household drudge, miss, and no wonder I'm
took with anything so pretty. Do you mind telling me, miss, if them
wiolets is real?"

"Oh, the violets in my toque--are those what you are staring at?" said
Kitty. "Well, now, I'll tell you what I'll do--I'll give you the whole
bunch if you'll let me come into the house and write a letter to Elma,
and if you'll further faithfully promise that you will give it to her
the instant she comes home."

"To be sure I will, miss. Come right along in. Oh, what a beautiful
young lady you is!"

"Every one tells me I am beautiful," thought Kitty. "It really is very
pleasant. I am more flattered here than I was in Ireland. People told me
there I had a face like cream and roses, or cream and strawberries, and
father used to say that I had washed it in the fairies' dew, and Laurie
would tell me that I was a bouncing girl and no mistake; but then Aunt
Honora was always saying: 'Kitty dear, beauty is only skin deep, and
don't be set up by it, child. Handsome is that handsome does, Kitty.'
Oh, how she would deave me with that old proverb. But here they seem to
think beauty is a talent, and I ought to be desperately proud of it. Oh,
faith, but why do I think of these things when my precious duck of a
Laurie is in the mess he has got into. He go to England to break his
heart, the darling! Not a bit of it; not while his Kitty has her wits
about her."

Meanwhile Maggie conducted this ravishing and welcome visitor into the
tiny sitting-room, furnished her with pen, ink, and paper, and then
began to hover about near the door in order to get another view of the
lovely cap.

Kitty bent her head over the sheet of paper and indited a letter in hot
and furious haste:

"DEAR ELMA: I am so sorry, but I must ask you to return that eight
pounds to me immediately. I want it for Laurie. He has got into trouble
and requires it; so don't keep me waiting a single minute if you can
help it. I am so sorry you are out; but will you bring it to me the
instant you return home? It is of the most vital importance. I am in
dreadful trouble, and nothing else will save Laurie. Yours in great
haste, KITTY MALONE."

Having written the letter, Kitty looked round for an envelope; Maggie
also searched to right and left, but could not find one.

"But it will be all right, miss," she said. "I'll lay it just as it is
flat out on the table, and Miss Helma will see it the moment she comes
in."

"Thank you," answered Kitty. "And now I must go. Be sure you give it to
her her the instant she returns, and tell her to come straight to me
with the money, for I must send it off to-night whatever happens. It is
a money transaction; and you understand, don't you? What is your name?"

"Maggie, miss."

"Well, you understand, Maggie, that any transaction connected with money
is very important."

"Like the Bank of England, miss?"

"Yes, to be sure, and--"

"Oh, miss, forgive me; but you promised me them wiolets."

"To be sure I did."

Kitty snatched them from her toque, flung them to Maggie, who caught
them in an ecstacy, and a moment later was running home as fast as she
could.




CHAPTER XI.

IN CARRIE'S BEDROOM.


Of the Lewis family the first who came home that special evening was
Carrie. She walked straight into the little sitting-room, where Kitty
Malone's letter lying on top of the blotter immediately attracted her
attention. It need not be said that she instantly read it, and not only
once but twice.

"Ha! ha! Elma, I have got you into my power at last," she said to
herself. "So that accounts for the money. Now, what did you borrow it
from that queer Irish girl for? But now that I know a thing or two. I
may be able to draw on you to a considerable extent. Return it! not
you--you are not likely to; but I think I'll be able to frighten you. I
shall certainly do my utmost."

It will be seen from these remarks that Carrie was by no means an
amiable girl. She ran up to her room, took off her hat, and surveyed
herself in the pale blue dress which had been purchased with some of
poor Kitty's money. She then returned to the sitting-room, and folding
up the letter, deliberately put it into her pocket. As she was doing so
Maggie came in to lay the tea.

"Oh lor! Miss Carrie," cried the maid-of-all-work as she spread the
not-too-clean cloth upon the table, "whatever 'as become of that bit of
writin' that was lyin' atop of the blotter here?"

"What bit of writing?" asked Carrie, turning calmly round and surveying
her.

"Oh, a letter miss; I don't know what was in it, but it was a money
transaction, as important as the Bank of England, and it was to be give
to Miss Helma the very instant she come 'ome. Didn't you see it, miss,
when you come in?"

"No, I didn't," said Carrie promptly. "I saw no letter of any kind.
Here's the blotter, there is nothing on it. It may have got between the
folds, however." She took up the thick pad of blotting-paper and shook
it, but no letter dropped out.

"There," she said. "I have not the least doubt that Fido jumped on the
table and took it up and ate it."

"Oh lor! miss, you don't think so?"

"I should not be surprised. Fido can never resist paper; he is always
pulling it about and chewing it."

Maggie looked frantically under the table for even stray pieces of the
letter, but she could not find any.

"If he had ate it," she said at last, fixing Carrie with a very
determined stare--"if he had ate it he would have left some bits about.
I don't believe it; I believe you 'as took it Miss Carrie. Oh, miss, for
shame; and it was as important as the Bank of England--a money
transaction, miss, what ought not to be trifled with. I can't read
writin', though I can read books fair enough; but the young lady was
awful put about."

"What young lady?" asked Carrie. "You had better tell me everything."

"Oh, it was that Irish young lady, Miss Malone. She come here with the
most beautiful 'at on (no, it was wot they calls a talk), and the
wiolets in it they might 'av growed, I could a'most smell 'em; and she
come in distracted like, and writ the letter, and told me I was to give
it to Miss Helma the very moment she returned, and that Miss Helma was
to take her the money to-night--what money is more than I can tell, for
I didn't think Miss Helma ever had any. And she said it was an important
transaction. And I said, 'Is it like the Bank of England, miss?' and she
said, 'Yes, to be sure.' Why, Miss Carrie, you have not gone and hid the
letter, 'ave you? That would be real mean of you."

"Look here," said Carrie; "what did you say about those violets?"

"Why, she gave 'em to me, miss; she took 'em out of her cap, and she
give 'em to me, and I was to give the letter to Miss Helma. It was a
fair and honest bargain, and I must keep my part of it miss."

"Would you like some roses to put with the violets?" said Carrie, making
a careful calculation.

"Roses, miss? That would be prime, and very seasonable, wouldn't they
miss?"

"Yes, violets and roses look very pretty together, and I'll pin them
into your hat and furbish it up. And, look here, Maggie, you can go out
with your young man on Sunday. I'll manage it--I can. I will stay at
home."

"Oh, Miss Carrie, you don't mean it?"

"Yes, I do. I'll manage it; but I'll do it only on a condition."

"What is that miss?"

"That you don't every ask me another question with regard to that
letter, and that you never, never on any account breathe a word of it to
Elma. If you do, why----"

"Oh, Miss, it don't seem fair."

Poor honest Maggie walked to the window and struggled for a few minutes
with her temptation. The thought, however, of roses to add to the
violets, the thought also of Joe, whom she dearly loved, to walk with
her on the following Sunday, proved far too seductive. She struggled
with her enemy for a few minutes, and then she fell once and for all.

"I'll have the roses, Miss Carrie. I can't resist them and the thought
of Joe on Sunday. Joe is so passionate loving, miss, I can't resist
'im." And then Maggie rushed out of the room.

She flew to her attic, threw herself by the side of her bed and burst
into sobs.

"But I oughtn't to 'ave done it," she said several times--"I oughtn't to
'ave done it. If it worn't for the roses and for Joe I'd 'ave stood up
to her; but as it is I was too tempted. But all the same I oughtn't to
have done it--no, I oughtn't to 'ave done it!"

Meanwhile Carrie up in her bedroom was thinking hard. Here indeed was a
revelation! So Elma possessed eight pounds, or nearly eight--for Carrie
knew that her blue dress, and the lobster, and the lettuces, and the
stout had not cost a great deal of that valuable sum of money.

"At the present moment," she concluded, making a careful computation in
her mind, for she was a smart enough girl in certain ways--"at the
present moment Elma must possess the sum of seven pounds or thereabouts."
What in the world did that Irish girl lend it to her for? What an utter
fool she must have been! But as to Elma's paying it back! as to Elma
getting rid of those riches--Carrie thought she saw her way of
preventing that. In order to do so, however, it was all-important that
Elma should not see poor Kitty's passionate little appeal to her; for
although Elma was anything but an amiable girl, Carrie was certain that
mere fright would make her return the money.

Carrie stayed some time in her room; she was thinking out a plan. How
could she prevent Elma returning the money to Kitty Malone? She
considered rapidly. Never before had she felt so full of energy and of
resource; it suddenly occurred to her as extremely unlikely that Elma
would carry about so much money on her person. Suppose she, Carrie, had
a thorough good hunt for it now on the spot. Suppose she found it, then
would it not be her duty, by taking possession of it, to guard Elma from
giving it away? Carrie made up her mind quickly; she determined to have
a search for the money at once. In the somewhat meagerly-furnished
bedroom there were not a great many hiding-places, and Carrie began her
search systematically. Elma and she had a little set of drawers each;
there were no locks to these drawers. With all her faults, Elma
absolutely trusted her own family. It never occurred to her even in her
worst moments that Carrie would examine her drawers; she also believed
that Maggie was perfectly honest.

Carrie now began to search. She opened Elma's drawers and looked
through them. Soon she found what she sought for. In the small
right-hand drawer at the top corner was a little parcel. It felt heavy.
Carrie opened it and there lay seven shining sovereigns. There were also
a couple of shillings and a few pence; but Carrie's eyes were
principally fixed upon the sovereigns. Bright and new they looked,
almost as if they had just come from the mint. Carrie danced a pirouette
there and then.

"I have found the treasure," she gasped. "Now I must take it where it
will be safe. I know what I'll do. I'll give it to Sam Raynes to keep
for Elma. It will be a nice excuse for seeing him again, and I'll tell
him it is money of my own, and ask him to bank it for me. He'll be ever
so pleased; he will think all the more of me if he supposes I am
wealthy. Yes, I'll take it to Sam; he shall keep it for me."

Flushed, excited, her heart beating high, Carrie once more pinned on her
hat. She ran downstairs. As she passed through the hall her mother was
letting herself in with a latchkey.

"My dear Carrie," she said, "you are not going out again at this hour of
night?"

"I shan't be long, mother. I am just going into Summer Terrace to see
the Raynes."

"I wish you would not go out so late, Carrie; it really isn't----"

But Carrie had slammed the door without even waiting for her parent's
last words. She soon reached the Terrace, which was within three
minutes' walk of her own house. Florrie Raynes let her in.

"My dear Carrie," she said, "what do you want? Oh, you naughty girl;
you knew Sam would be in."

"Well, I want to speak to him. Can I see him just for a moment?" gasped
Carrie, panting and breathless, pushing the hair from her forehead as
she spoke.

"Yes, come right in," said Florrie; "you need not apologize. He is only
having a cigar, and he'll be right pleased to see you."

As she spoke she opened the door of a small sitting-room and pushed
Carrie in, slamming it behind her. The echo of her rude laughter as she
performed this unladylike feat was heard down the passage.

Sam was seated in front of an open window smoking a cigar. When he saw
Carrie he removed it from his mouth and came forward in a somewhat
nonchalant way to meet her.

"Now, Car," he said, "what's up? Any news? Can we have a jolly time next
Sunday?"

"Yes," answered Carrie panting slightly, "and for as many other Sundays
as you like. See here, Sam, I cannot wait a minute now. You know you
once told me that I was a frivolous little thing, that I was
extravagant, and all that. Now, what will you say if I ask you to put
seven pounds in the bank for me?"

"Seven pounds!" cried Sam; "'pon my word! Where in the world did you get
it, Car?"

"It's out of my savings," replied Carrie.

"Well, I must say--" Sam gave her a look of the broadest admiration he
had ever yet bestowed upon her. "You can bank it for me, can you not?"

"Yes, that I can. But I say, Car, would you like me to speculate with
it? I might double it, you know."

"Oh, do what you like with it, only keep it safe," answered Carrie. "I
shall want to draw a little of it from time to time. Now, good-by, Sam.
I can't wait another moment."

She laid the money on the table. Sam's large and somewhat fat hand
closed greedily over it, and the next moment it was conveyed to his
waistcoat pocket.

"This will come in very handy for myself," he muttered; but Carrie did
not hear the words--she ran home breathless and excited. She thought she
had managed splendidly.




CHAPTER XII.

THE "SPOTTED LEOPARD."


Kitty was miserable that night. An Irish girl has always her ups and
downs. She is either up in the seventh heaven of bliss, or she is down
almost below the ordinary earth in misery. Kitty was suffering from an
intense revulsion of spirits. Laurie was in trouble. He was the best
brother in all the world; he was Kitty's idol. There never was anybody
more reckless, more passionate, more dare-devil than Laurie Malone; and
Kitty had always been with him heart and soul, always from the time that
they had been little tots together. And now Laurie was in danger. The
best broth of a boy might be condemned to go to a school in England; he
might be condemned to the misery, the want of freedom, which she was now
enduring. Oh, she must save him at any risk. She could do so. She could
send him ten pounds; she would have exactly that sum in her possession
if only Elma returned the eight which she had lent her. It did not occur
to Kitty as at all difficult for Elma to return the money. She had never
yet know money difficulties herself; and when Elma had asked for the
loan of it she imagined that she could have it back at any time. If this
was not the case it would not greatly matter; but now, of course,
Laurie's letter altered the complexion of everything.

Kitty was too unsettled and anxious to stay quiet for a single moment.
She fidgeted Alice, who was busily engaged preparing her lessons for the
following day.

"Kitty," she said, when that erratic young person had jumped up to lean
her body half out of the window for the twentieth time, "if you cannot
sit still yourself, you ought to have some thought for me. What am I to
do if you keep rushing to the window and back again to your seat every
couple of minutes?"

"I am looking for Elma," said Kitty.

"For Elma Lewis? Do you expect her to-night?"

"Yes, and on a matter of vital importance. Oh, don't talk to me please,
Alice. If she doesn't come soon, I believe my heart will burst."

"That is exactly like one of your exaggerated statements," said Alice.
"People's hearts don't burst. Oh, if you only would stay quiet."

"I believe that's herself turning round the corner," cried Kitty,
bending out so far now that it was a wonder she was not overbalanced.

"Really, Kitty, you make my heart stand still," said Alice. "You will
fall out if you are not careful. Oh, for goodness' sake, don't stoop out
any further."

"It's not her," said Kitty, popping in her head. "I was only stooping
far enough to catch a glimpse of her boots. Elma always wears such
horrid shabby boots; and her feet are too large. By the way, Alice, what
do you think of these shoes; do you like them with straps across, and
little rosettes?"

"I don't like anything in the way of dress at the present moment," said
Alice. "I want quiet and peace. It is impossible for me to do anything
while you fidget as you do."

Kitty jumped with a bang into the nearest chair; opened a novel, and
tried to read it upside down.

"If she isn't in time I won't be able to send the letter to-night and
then--Alice, do you mind my interrupting you for a moment? What time
does the last post go?"

"The pillar outside the gate is cleared at twelve," said Alice.

"It is only nine now. You don't happen to be able to tell me when a
letter, cleared at twelve, would reach Castle Malone?"

"I cannot tell you. Forgive me, Kitty, I cannot stay in the room any
longer. I am going to our bedroom."

Alice gathered up her books, and swept out of tho room. When she reached
the bedroom she shut and locked the door.

Kitty was now left alone in the drawing-room, for Mr. and Mrs. Denvers
were spending the evening out. She was glad of this, as she could lean
as far out of the window as she dared, and there was no one to shout at
her. She could also pace up and down the room, which she presently did
with the rapidity and eagerness of a young tigress.

Oh, to be back again at Castle Malone! What was Laurie doing now?
Suppose Paddy Wheel-about really told her father about Laurie!

Squire Malone was extremely kind to Kitty; there was no saying what he
would not do for Kitty were she in trouble; but Laurie and Pat were
different matters. He had fits of severity-with them--only fits, mind
you; for he was too Irish in his character, too generous-hearted, ever
to keep his anger long; but in these fits he often made strange
resolves, and when these resolves were made, as a rule, he carried them
out. He was too proud to change his mind. If once he decided that the
boys were to go to school to England, to school they must go--to
"prison," Kitty termed it. Tears rose in her bright eyes, they rolled
down her cheeks. Oh, why was not Elma in time? How dreadful, how
dreadful if she (Kitty) missed the twelve-o'clock post! She was in this
state of fret and worry, when Fred entered the room. Fred hated all
girls, with the exception of Kitty Malone. He could not be said by this
time to hate her, for he admired her very much indeed. The moment she
saw him she called out to him to come in.

"Ah, then, Fred, it is you. Come along in," she cried; "you'll be a
drain of a comfort--not much, but still a drain. Oh, Fred, it's I who am
in the trouble entirely. You wouldn't think it to look at me, but I am."

"Dear me, Kitty I am sorry," said Fred. "What's up? Has Alice been
teasing you as usual?"

"Oh, bother Alice! as if I minded her little pinpricks. It's that
darling Laurie in Ireland. He has got into trouble, the broth of a boy
that he is."

She then related what had occurred in connection with Paddy
Wheel-about's coat.

"And the poor old coat is in the bottom of the lake," she added, "and
the lake is feet deep in mud just at the bottom, and anything that falls
with a weight into it would sink and sink. Oh, they will never find the
coat till the day of judgment, and it full of beautiful money! And Paddy
Wheel-about has lost the little grain of sense he ever possessed, and
Laurie will be sent to one of those prisons."

"To prison?" cried Fred; "but surely your father--"

"Oh, I mean a school--it's all the same. Don't interrupt me, Fred. When
my mind is full I must rattle off the speech somehow."

"And he wants you to send him ten pounds?"

"Yes."

"And have you got ten pounds to send him?"

"To be sure I have--I have ten pounds ten. I am an awful girl for
spending money. I bought a whole pound's worth of chocolate yesterday. I
only wish I had the money now instead; but poor little Agnes Moore and
the other girls in my class, they do love chocolate, and they quite seem
to fatten them. I bought the chocolates, and I have got ten shillings in
my pocket."

"But you showed me a whole purseful of gold the other day," said Fred.

"Well, it's gone, Fred, and it isn't gone; but I know who could help me
to find it if I could catch a sight of her."

"And who is that?" asked Fred.

"Elma Lewis."

"Elma Lewis! Do you like her?"

"I can't say that I like her--no I don't think I do; but she would help
me, if I could only get to see her."

"Then, do you want me to go to her house and tell her so?"

"Why, Fred, that's a splendid idea. You are a jewel, a darling, a duck!
Let me fetch my hat, and you and I will go together."

"But I don't know my lessons yet. It is that beastly German. I have
pages to translate. It is such rot."

"Oh, what does the German matter? Think of the misery poor Laurie is in.
Just stay where you are, Fred; I'll be back in a minute."

Kitty dashed upstairs, two or three steps at a time, and thundered a
loud tattoo on the locked door of Alice's bedroom.

"You cannot come in, whoever you are," cried Alice from within.

"Yes, but I must, Alice, aroon; let me in, jewel that you are. I want my
hat, and gloves and jacket, nothing else. Do, for goodness' sake, let me
in, Alice, asthore!"

But Alice was obdurate. Once let Kitty in, she would never be able to
get rid of her again, and her lessons must be learned. They were
specially difficult and required all her attention.

"Then if you won't," cried Kitty, whose quick temper was beginning to
rise, "at least fling the things out of the window."

"You know you must not go out at this hour."

"If you won't give them to me," said Kitty, "I'll go without them."

"You are not to have them; you are not to go out. It isn't right,"
called Alice, who felt strong in the cause of virtue.

Kitty rattled violently on the handle for a moment longer, and then
rushed downstairs again to where Fred was waiting.

"I can't get my hat," she said; "but it doesn't matter. I'll go as I
am."

Now Kitty's dress was more picturesque than suitable. She had on a
crimson blouse and a skirt bedizened with many ribbons and frills. The
blouse had only elbow sleeves and was cut rather low in the neck.
Nothing could be more becoming to the dancing eyes, the rose-bloom
cheeks, the head of dark hair.

"Lend me a cap of yours, Fred, there's a darling," called Kitty, "and
we'll be off. Alice is in one of her tantrums, and she won't let me into
our room nor give me my hat and jacket. If your mother were there it
would be all right."

Fred only thought that Kitty looked remarkably pretty. It did not occur
to him as at all queer that she should want to walk a couple of miles in
this erratic dress. He went downstairs, accommodated her with a small
cap which bore the college coat of arms in front, and the two were soon
hurrying along the roads at a rapid rate in the direction of Elma's
house.

There were two ways to Elma's home. One way was by crossing a wide
common, cutting off a certain corner, walking down a by-street, and so,
by a series of short cuts, reaching Constantine Road. By the other and
slightly longer way you had to pass an open thoroughfare in the center
of which blazed, with its shining lights and its gay exterior, a large
public-house called the "Spotted Leopard." Now the "Spotted Leopard" was
by no means a nice place to pass at night. Men considerably the worse
for drink were apt to linger about the doors. Gossiping and idle fellows
would congregate just by this special corner, ready to take up any bit
of fun or nonsense which might be coming, meaning no special mischief,
but being decidedly disagreeable to meet at night.

Fred was as careless a schoolboy as could be found in the length and
breadth of Great Britain; Kitty was equally reckless, perhaps more so,
if that were possible. That special evening Fred decided that they would
not take the short cut across the common.

"A beastly lonely place at this hour of night," he said, "and the road
is so uneven and there are no lamps. We'll go round by the 'Spotted
Leopard'. You don't mind, do you, Kit?"

"Never a bit," answered Kitty. "Come along, Fred; stretch your legs. I
must get to see Elma Lewis to-night as quickly as possible."

Fred walked fast, and Kitty laughed and talked and danced by his side.
Now that she was in action she forgot her fears; her volatile spirits
rose once again to a height. She entertained Fred with numerous stories
relating to Paddy Wheel-about, Laurie, and Pat, and invited him to come
to Castle Malone for the whole of the summer holidays, assuring him that
the fishing would be splendid, the cycling superb, the riding such as
would make your eyes water, and the shooting and the hunting when that
season began all that could stimulate the least ambitious of boys. And
when Kitty spoke she was apt to illustrate her words, dancing now in
front of her companion, now keeping by his side, now lingering a little
behind him, all the time gesticulating with eyes and lips and gay
motions. She was like a restive young colt--beautiful, excitable. The
boy felt that he had never had such a charming companion before.

All went well, and Kitty's bizarre dress, her hair tossed wildly over
her head and hanging partly down her shoulders, her little feet encased
in the shoes with the rosettes and steel buckles, the frills on her gay
skirt, her bare arms, failed to attract any special attention. But when
they got into the neighborhood of the "Spotted Leopard," a blaze of
light fell full across her. She was a remarkable enough figure to be out
at this hour, and when joined to the somewhat peculiar spectacle, the
wild-looking boys--for they were little more--who had congregated round
this special corner, saw the college cap on her head, they made a rush
forward and the next moment had surrounded her.

They began to laugh and to make facetious remarks. It was all done in a
second. Kitty stood stock still as if some one had shot her. He gay
manner ceased on the instant, she drew herself erect, and the next
moment aimed a blow straight from the shoulder at the nearest of the
men, knocking him over as completely as though he had been a ninepin;
then taking hold of Fred's arm--who had come to her rescue, although the
poor lad had not the least idea what to do--marched away, her face as
crimson as her gay silk blouse.

"Well, Kitty, you did that splendidly," he said.

"The impertinent wretches! Don't speak to me about them," answered
Kitty. But just then she came face to face with a more serious
obstacle. This was no less a person than Miss Worrick herself.

Now if there was a prim mistress in the whole length and breadth of
England, it was Matilda Worrick. She liked girls to be neatly dressed;
she could not bear to see them out at what she called inclement hours.
She would have thought it the height of impropriety for Kitty and Fred
to walk together at such an hour; but when in addition to this Kitty
went out in a dress which Miss Worrick would have thought very
unsuitable for home, when she wore a boy's college cap on her head, and
when she had so far distinguished herself as to have been for a moment
the center of a lot of low noisy, rough men, Miss Worrick felt that the
moment had come for her to interfere. She grasped Kitty Malone firmly by
the arm.

"What are you doing, Miss Malone?" she said. "How dare you be out at
this hour?"

"How dare you interfere?" answered Kitty, who, excited already, could
not for a moment brook Miss Worrick's interference.

"I shall march you straight home," said the mistress. "If Miss Sherrard
knew of this she would expel you from the school. You are a very wicked
girl. Fred Denvers, you can go home or go on with your walk, just as you
like, but I have charge of Miss Malone; she belongs to the Middleton
School, and I must see her home before I go a step further."

Poor Kitty felt staggered.

"I really meant no harm," she said. "I cannot imagine what you are
talking about. I could not get my hat and jacket, and as it was most
important that I should see Elma Lewis, Fred promised to take me to her
house. Please don't ask me to return now with you, Miss Worrick, I
really cannot come."

But Miss Worrick was inexorable. She grasped Kitty very firmly by the
arm, turned abruptly in the direction of home, and walked forward with a
firm step. There was no help for it; Kitty Malone must accompany her.
They soon found themselves back again at the Denvers' house. Mr. and
Mrs. Denvers were out, but Miss Worrick inquired for Alice.

"Ask Miss Alice to come to me immediately," she said to the servant.

The girl looked pityingly at Kitty, who was a prime favorite with her,
and then went away to fulfill her errand.

The instant Alice got this somewhat startling message, she forgot her
lesson, unlocked her bedroom door, and flew downstairs as fast as she
could. Miss Worrick was standing in the center of the drawing-room.
Kitty was leaning up against one of the window-curtains. Kitty's face
was red, her hair was tossed in wild confusion, and her dark eyes seemed
to flash fire.

"Alice," said Miss Worrick, coming straight up to Alice when she
appeared. "I must ask you to take charge of Kitty Malone."

"Why so?" asked Alice in some astonishment.

"Just do what I say. Your father and mother are out. Kitty is not to
return to school to-morrow until she hears from Miss Sherrard. In the
absence of your parents I put her in your charge, Alice. She has behaved
disgracefully, and I shall have the great pain of reporting what I have
just witnessed to our head-mistress to-morrow."

So saying, Miss Worrick walked quickly out of the room and out of the
house.

"Well, thank goodness, she's gone--the old cat!" cried Kitty.

"Now, Kitty what have you done?" said Alice. "Oh, this is terrible!
Fresh scrapes! We seem to live in constant hot water. What is the matter
now, you headstrong and dreadful girl?"

"Nothing is the matter," replied Kitty, "absolutely nothing. It is all a
storm in a teacup. But if any one is to blame you are the one."

"I?" cried Alice. "What next?"

"Well, you are. You would not give me my hat and jacket. I have a nice
plain hat and a jacket to match. I should have put them on if you had
not locked our bedroom door, and prevented my coming into the room,
which is just as much mine as yours. As it was imperative for me to see
Elma Lewis immediately, I asked Fred if he would walk round with me to
her house, and I wore his college cap. When we were passing the 'Spotted
Leopard' a lot of rough, rude boys rushed out and began to make
impertinent remarks about my dress. I just gave one of them a black eye
and knocked him over. The next moment I found myself under the fire of
Miss Worrick's anger."

"And small wonder," said Alice. "Kitty, what is to be done? Before you
came here I thought myself a respectable girl--all we Middleton girls
did; and now for such a fearful thing to happen. Why, it will be all
over the place in the morning. They will talk of it everywhere. Oh,
Kitty, you have disgraced me for ever."

Here Alice burst into tears.

"Good gracious!" cried Kitty, "what are you crying about? I did nothing;
it was the rude men, or boys, or whatever you like to call them, who
were to blame."

"You did nothing, going out in that dress?" cried Alice--"that red
blouse, and your arms bare, and with Fred's college cap on your head. I
should not be a bit surprised if Fred were expelled; he will certainly
get into an awful scrape. Oh dear! oh dear!"

"I cannot imagine what you are talking and crying about," said Kitty.
"But there; I have got a headache, and am going to bed. I suppose there
is no chance of my--Oh, poor Laurie! What a wicked girl Elma Lewis is!"

Kitty rushed up to her room. Not that she was frightened--that was not
her way; but she saw that disagreeable things might be pending. In the
meantime her most anxious thoughts were for Laurie. What would happen if
she could not send him the money by an early post?




CHAPTER XIII.

COVENTRY.


Early the next morning Mrs. Denvers was a good deal surprised by
receiving a letter from Miss Sherrard. It ran as follows:

"DEAR MRS. DENVERS: I have just heard an extraordinary story from Miss
Worrick with regard to Kitty Malone. She met Kitty with your Fred at a
late hour last night just outside the 'Spotted Leopard.' She was not
wearing an outdoor jacket, and had the college cap on her head. In
consequence, she was spoken to impertinently by some men outside the
public-house, and when Miss Worrick came up had just knocked one of them
down. Miss Worrick says, further, that Kitty showed her great
impertinence; and, in short, that the whole affair was wrong and
disgraceful. It is my painful duty to look thoroughly into this matter,
and I should be glad if you would bring Miss Malone to Middleton School
this morning in order that I may do so.

"Yours very truly,

"EMMA SHERRARD."

"My dear Alice," said Mrs. Denvers, as her daughter entered the room,
"what does this letter mean?"

Alice read Miss Sherrard's letter hastily.

"It is exactly as I feared, mother," she said.

"Exactly as you feared, Alice! What do you mean?"

"I always told you that Kitty would be certain to get into trouble
sooner or later. Well, she got into trouble last night."

"But what occurred?"

"What occurred!" said Fred, who came into the room at that moment. "I
thought you would be talking about poor Kitty. I will tell you exactly
what did occur mother; but first I want to say something else. Kitty is
just as nice a girl as we ever had in the house. She has not a low nor a
small thought in her, but she is excitable, and she has high spirits;
and yesterday evening, when I went into the drawing-room, I found her
there alone, and in no end of a fret because one of her brothers in
Ireland had got into trouble. He had written to her; but she would not
tell me what he said. For some extraordinary reason, which none of us
know, it seems that Elma Lewis can get him out of his trouble, I cannot
pretend to explain what this means; but such is the fact. Poor Kitty was
wild to see Elma, and she asked me if I would walk over to her house
with her. Of course I promised to do so, for it was difficult not to be
good-natured to the poor thing."

"At what hour was this, Fred?" interrupted Mrs. Denvers.

"It was rather late, I will own, mother--about half-past nine."

"Go on, my dear boy. What happened then?"

"Now it is Alice's turn to get into your black books," continued Fred,
darting a malicious look at his sister. "She doesn't like Kitty, and
nothing that Kitty can do or say is right in Alice's eyes."

"Fred!" interrupted Alice--"Mother, you have no right to listen to him."

"I am bound to hear both sides of this story, Alice," said Mrs. Denvers.
"Fred shall tell his side first. Go on, my boy."

"When I arranged to go with Kitty, she ran upstairs to the bedroom which
she shares with Alice to get her jacket and hat; but Alice had locked
the door, and wouldn't let her in. I heard her crying out and begging of
Alice to do so, or, at least, if she would not, to throw her hat and
jacket out of the window; but no! good nature was not to be expected
from my amiable sister. So then Kitty ran down again, and said that as
the night was warm it really didn't matter a bit; and she asked me to
lend her a cap. I took one from the peg in the hall, never seeing that
it was one of the college caps with the coat-of-arms in front, and Kitty
popped it on, and off we set. We neither of us gave a thought to her
dress, and we walked as fast as possible, chatting and laughing all the
way. All went well till we got in front of that horrid 'Spotted
Leopard,' and there were several lads round the door. I suppose Kitty's
dress attracted them as well as her pretty face, and all in a minute
they surrounded her. Such awful cheek! But do you think Kitty would put
up with their impudence? I never saw a girl like her! She just aimed a
blow straight at one of the fellows and knocked him over as if he were a
ninepin. I can tell you she had the laugh on her side; and I don't
believe we would have heard anything more about it if that mean,
spiteful old cat, Miss Worrick, hadn't been coming round the corner. She
ran up to Kitty, and took possession of her, and marched her off home,
and put her, forsooth, into Alice's custody. That's the explanation of
Miss Sherrard's letter, mother."

"Dear, dear!" said Mrs. Denvers, "it was a most imprudent thing to do.
But of course, the poor child meant no harm."

"I should rather think she didn't," cried Fred. "The one you ought really
to blame is Alice. No one would have looked at Kitty, nor thought of her
one way or the other, if Alice had let her get her hat and jacket; but
what was she to do when she was locked out of her own bedroom?"

"But she know very well that she was breaking rules," said Mrs. Denvers.
"None of the Middleton girls are allowed to go out so late in the
evening except with a suitable escort; and she certainly ought not to
have gone in the dress you have described, my boy. It was all
thoughtlessness; but she will get into sad trouble, I fear."

"Of course it was thoughtlessness," said Fred; "and the poor thing was
bothered, dreadfully bothered, about that brother in Ireland."

"I see, mother," said Alice, "that you are determined to take Kitty's
part, whatever happens. She has bewitched you, like all the rest of the
household."

"Whom have I bewitched now?" asked Kitty, who entered the room just
then.

"Oh, my poor, dear child," said Mrs. Denvers, "you have got into a
terrible scrape. See this letter which I have just received from your
head-mistress."

Kitty eagerly seized the letter. She was looking pale, and not like her
usual self. There were heavy black lines under her eyes. The poor girl
had spent most of her night crying. The thought of Laurie was resting on
her soul; she was very anxious about him, and, in consequence, very
miserable.

"I always said that I hated England," she cried, coloring as she spoke.
"Oh, I know, dear Mrs. Denvers, that you are a jewel; and as to Fred, he
is no end of a darling; and Mr. Denvers is as nice as a man could be.
But there's Alice, and she doesn't like me; and Miss Worrick can't bear
me; and half the girls at school don't understand me, and, for the
matter of that, I don't care for them; and I don't understand your
stiff, proper English ways. I am far and away too wild for England. In
Ireland we would only laugh at such a thing as happened last night. What
does it matter what sort of dress I go out in and at what hour I go, if
I am doing right all the time? I wanted to do something for Laurie, for
my dear, dear Laurie, who is in terrible trouble. Please, Mrs. Denvers,
let me go home again. Let us both go to Miss Sherrard this morning, and
tell her that it is all no use; Kitty Malone was born wild, and wild she
will remain to the end of the chapter. Let me go home; please let me go
home."

"My poor child, I must not yield to you," said Mrs. Denvers. "You have
been sent to us to be made----"

"Oh, don't begin it," cried Kitty. "Don't begin to talk about all the
things you have got to make me, and which, to be plain, none of you will
ever succeed in doing, for I was not half nor a quarter as wild in
Ireland. I was considered in some ways the steady one of the family; but
here, why, I am provoked every minute of the day, and I--I can't stand
it much longer."

"Well, sit down now and eat your breakfast," said Mrs. Denvers, "for we
must soon hurry off to school. Miss Sherrard will want to see us
immediately after prayers."

Kitty seated herself, but she had little appetite for her food.

"Why don't you eat?" said Fred, who sat next to her. "Let me help you to
some of this porridge; it's jolly well done this morning, and you always
like it, don't you?"

"Yes, yes; but I have got a lump in my throat and I can't swallow,"
answered Kitty. "Thank you all the same, Fred. There are some chocolates
in my room if you like to steal up in the middle of the day in case I am
locked up, as twenty to one I shall be for this misdemeanor. There are
some chocolates and some rock and toffee. You'll find them in my
left-hand drawer in the corner. I spent a whole sovereign on sweets, as
I told you a few days ago."

"Oh, thanks. Kitty, you are a brick," whispered Fred back in return.

"You can take as many as you like, Fred, old boy, for you are a comfort
to me. I'll tell Laurie about you when I go back to Ireland."

"Come, come, my dears, no whispering," said Mrs. Denvers. "Kitty, if
you don't care for your breakfast, perhaps you will go up to your room
and make yourself tidy for school."

"Oh, am I not tidy now?" asked Kitty, jumping up and running to the
glass in the overmantel to survey herself. "By the way, do you like my
frock? it is quite new. Don't you think this crimson cotton with the
white sash very effective? It is cool, and yet it's gay. I belong to the
Tug--Oh! I must not mention that. I never did know such a place for
awful secrets as England. I am drawn up every minute by remembering that
I must not mention something. But how do you like my dress, Mrs.
Denvers?"

"Well, dear, I prefer quieter colors; but we will say nothing more about
it just now. Get your hat, Kitty; put on your outdoor shoes and your
gloves, and come down immediately, for it is time for us to start."

As soon as Kitty had left the room, Alice turned to her mother.

"Are you going to encourage her in all her follies?" she asked.

"My dear Alice, I don't encourage her in her follies; but there is no
use in pulling the poor child up short every moment. She expresses
herself quite correctly when she says that she is wild; she is not
broken in. But to break in Kitty Malone too thoroughly might also break
her heart, and that would never do."

"Break her heart! I don't believe she has got one," said Alice. "But,
there, I can't talk any longer on the subject."

It occurred to her that if she started immediately for school she might
call for Bessie Challoner, and tell her what had occurred. Bessie's
sympathy would be very sweet, and Alice determined to secure it if
possible. Accordingly she left the house, and at about a quarter to nine
found herself at Bessie's house. Bessie was standing on the steps
drawing on her gloves.

"Why, Alice, what has brought you?" she cried; "and where is Kitty?"

"Oh, don't mention Kitty, if you don't want to rile me beyond
endurance," said Alice.

"I always do rile you when I mention her," answered Bessie; "but where
is she all the same?"

"With mother--she is coming to school with mother."

"With your mother--to Middleton School! What do you mean?"

"Only that mother has to bring her. She has got into no end of a row."

"Has she? Oh, I am sorry," said Bessie.

"Come out, Bessie," said Alice. "It is a little early to get to school,
but we may as well walk slowly, and I will tell you all about it as we
go along."

This Alice did, enlarging much upon Kitty's dress, her crimson blouse,
her bare arms, the college cap on her head, and her little shoes with
the buckles and rosettes.

"She must have looked very pretty," said Bessie.

"Bessie! you really are enough to distract any one. Don't you see the
impropriety of it? Don't you see that this will get all over the place?
People will say that a Middleton girl dressed so unsuitably, so loudly,
that--Oh, don't you see it?"

"I don't see anything in it except a silly, foolish, girlish act,
uncommonly like Kitty Malone," said Bessie. "You are determined to make
mountains out of molehills, Alice."

"No, I am not," said Alice. "Anyhow," she added in a tone of triumph,
"Miss Sherrard thinks it disgraceful, and so does Miss Worrick. I
suppose you will not go against the opinions of your own mistresses,
will you, Bessie?"

"No, no; only I am sorry," said Bessie.

At that moment the two girls reached the school. Gwin Harley was just
driving up in her pony-chaise, and Elma, as usual, was hovering near.

"Come here, Elma," said Bessie. "We have something to tell you."

"What is it?" asked Elma eagerly.

"It is this," cried Alice. "Kitty Malone has got into the most awful
scrape. She went out last night with Fred in her red blouse--you know
that silk blouse she is so fond of wearing?"

"I know; it is sweetly pretty," said Elma.

"Oh, there you are, praising everything she does! Well, anyhow, she wore
it, and her arms were bare to the elbow, and she stuck one of the
college caps on her head. What will Dr. Butler say? She went with Fred
to see you, by the way, Elma. She seemed in an awful hurry to find you.
She was in trouble about her brother, and she said you could help her."

"Oh, nonsense!" said Elma. But she had an uncomfortable feeling as the
words were said. Her thoughts naturally flew to the eight pounds which
Kitty had lent her. Was it possible that Kitty wanted that lovely, that
beautiful money back again? Elma had felt almost as if she were living
in fairyland from the time that money had been in her possession. She
would part with it whenever the day came with extreme reluctance.

"Well," she said, "I cannot imagine what she wanted with me; but what
happened?"

"Some rough boys outside the 'Spotted Leopard' were rude to her, and she
knocked one of them down; then Miss Worrick came up and took her back to
our house; and Miss Sherrard has written this morning to say that mother
is to bring Kitty up to school, and that she must have the whole thing
explained. There's a nice state of things!"

At that moment the great gong was heard, and the girls were obliged to
troop into the school. Prayers were conducted as usual in the great
hall, and Elma, Gwin, Alice, and Bessie looked in every imaginable
corner for a sight of Kitty Malone. She was not present, however, and
they were obliged afterward to go to their class-rooms without having
caught sight of her beaming and brilliant face.

Meanwhile Mrs. Denvers and Kitty were waiting for Miss Sherrard in the
head-mistress' private sitting-room. Kitty went to the window and looked
out.

"I like Miss Sherrard," she said, turning to Mrs. Denvers as she spoke.
"I am really sorry to annoy her. It is about a fortnight ago since she
spoke to me in this very room; she spoke so kindly, and told me that I
had got talents. I was astonished, for I thought she meant cleverness,
and I have always been told that I am a dunce; she said that she knew I
had good abilities, and that besides I had plenty of other
talents--nice dress, and good looks." Kitty colored and flashed a
half-defiant, half-roguish glance at Mrs. Denvers. "She also spoke about
my money as a talent. Oh, dear, I felt half-conceited, half-delighted
when I left her, and I made up my mind that I would be good; but it
seems useless, more than useless. Oh, my poor money, my poor money! I
have got none of it left now, or at least scarcely any."

"My dear child, no money!" exclaimed Mrs. Denvers. "Impossible. When
you spoke to me last you had about fifteen pounds. Kitty, my dear, it is
wrong for you to squander money in that fashion."

"But I haven't squandered it, Mrs. Denvers, not really. I have not got
it with me, it is true; but most of it is safe, only I must not talk
about that. There's another secret for you. What an awful place England
is! Oh, dear, dear! I am in a muddle about everything. I can't bear to
stand in this room and remember Miss Sherrard's talk. Fancy her saying
that even my dress was a talent! Now there's something in favor of my
nice red cotton and my dear red silk blouse; and fancy her saying still
more that my looks, my pretty face, was a talent! Mrs. Denvers, do you
think me pretty, very, very, very pretty?"

"No, Kitty dear, not so wonderfully pretty as that; but you have an
attractive face. Miss Sherrard is quite right; beauty is a gift,
although it used to be my old-fashioned idea that the less girls were
told about their looks the better."

"Oh, but that's all exploded, love," cried Kitty. "In these days girls
are told when they are pretty just as much as they are told when they
are clever. Now, I'm not clever, not a bit. I'm a dunce, an out and out
dunce; but at any rate I've got a pretty face, and I promised that I
would use my talents for--for the best--" Here she lowered her face and
a thoughtful and beautiful expression came into the great big eyes. "But
it's no use," she added. "I am bothered entirely every day of my life,
and I am just going from bad to worse."

"Hush, Kitty, you must not talk in that way Hark! I think I hear Miss
Sherrard's step." As Mrs. Denvers spoke the door was slowly opened and
Miss Sherrard, accompanied by Miss Worrick, came in. Miss Sherrard was
just about to speak; but before she could utter a word Kitty rushed to
her.

"I have failed, darling; I have failed entirely," she gasped out, "I
meant to do right, but I did wrong; I have become worse and worse,
although I cannot see the wrong myself. But Miss Worrick has found it
out. I want to give up the school, darling, and to go back to Old
Ireland. They don't think so badly of me in Old Ireland, and they'll let
me dress as I like and go out when I like; and--and, I am not fit for
England, dear. Please write to dad and tell him so--tell him I am a
failure as far as England is concerned. He'll understand, dear old man.
He'll be sorry, but he'll understand. Let me go home again, please, Miss
Sherrard--let me go home!"

"No, Kitty, I shall do nothing of the kind," answered Miss Sherrard.
"You must not kiss me just now, my dear; no, I am not pleased at all.
You did very wrong to go out as late as you did last night. You broke
one of the strictest rules of the school, and have brought discredit
upon us all. Miss Worrick, will you please relate exactly what
occurred?"

Miss Worrick now stood up and made as much as she possibly could of poor
Kitty's little escapade in front of the "Spotted Leopard." The story so
described made anything but a pleasant picture. Miss Sherrard who was
tenacious with regard to the school, and most anxious that each and all
of her girls should bear the highest character for quiet and orderly
behavior, was deeply annoyed.

"Kitty," she said, "I have always been strangely unwilling to punish
you. I have never ceased to remember that you have not been brought up
like most of the girls here--that you have enjoyed a freer, wilder life.
On that account I have tried to be very patient with you, my dear; but I
am sorry to say that I have no alternative now. I must punish you, and
severely. For the next week you are to stay in during the morning
recess, and after school is over will remain here day by day to learn
different tasks which will be set you. Further, my dear--and this, I am
sure, will be the most severe part of your punishment--your school
companions are absolutely forbidden to speak to you, and you must give
your word of honor that you will hold no communication with any of them
until the week has expired."

This very severe sentence made poor Kitty quite collapse. She sat down
on the nearest chair and her rosy face turned pale.

"Oh, I cannot give my word of honor," she gasped. "I must speak. I must
at least speak to Elma Lewis."

"You are not to speak to any of your companions, with the exception of
Alice Denvers, in whose house you live," said Miss Sherrard. "Kitty, if
you disobey me, I shall have to expel you, and then indeed you will be
disgraced for life. My dear you must bow to my authority--you are to
speak to no girl in the school. I trust to your honor to obey me in this
particular. If you are expelled--and it will certainly happen if I find
that you are not keeping your word--you will be branded for life."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE LOST PACKET.


After parting with Kitty, Miss Sherrard went back to the school. As she
did so, she said a few words to Miss Worrick. The result of this was
that all the girls were summoned to appear in the great central hall.
When there they were told very briefly--Miss Sherrard standing by her
desk as she spoke--that Miss Malone was in disgrace.

"Miss Malone has done something which obliges me to put her into
Coventry for a week," said the head-mistress. "Her schoolfellows are
forbidden to have any intercourse with her. If she attempts to speak to
any girl belonging to Middleton School, with the exception of Alice
Denvers, in whose house she is living, that girl holds communication
with her at her own peril. Such a girl stands a grave chance of being
expelled from the school."

Miss Sherrard then descended from her platform, and the usual work of
the morning went on.

It may easily be guessed that Kitty Malone, and Kitty Malone only, was
the subject of conversation during recess. What had she done? Why was
Miss Sherrard so very severe on her? It was not often that a Middleton
girl was given such a very terrible punishment. Alice who knew all about
it, and Bessie, who knew a little, were therefore in immense request.
Girls came up to these two in groups to find out what was the matter;
and when they heard from Alice the very glaring account of what Kitty
had really done on the previous night, they listened with open mouths,
giving vent to their feelings in different ways. The larger number
pronounced Kitty's conduct to be the height of all that was disgraceful.

"Is it true," said one, "that she really wore the college cap? Oh, what
will Dr. Butler say if he finds it out? Alice, you cannot mean that she
had bare arms, bare from the elbows? Oh, impossible!"

"But Alice," said another, "tell me, did she really, really, knock one
of those horrid boys down?"

"Yes; like a ninepin, so Fred says," replied Alice. "Oh, it was
disgraceful. Don't talk of it any more; my cheeks burn whenever I think
of it."

"But after all, Alice"--said Gwin, who came up at that moment. Gwin's
tone sounded quiet, stately, penetrating; it rose above the din which
the other girls were making. "After all, Alice, don't you think that you
were to blame too? Why did you not let Kitty get into your room and
hers? If she wanted to go for a walk it was surely natural enough to ask
for her hat and jacket; you refused to give them to her."

"Of course I refused," said Alice, who did not at all wish to share any
of poor Kitty's blame. "Kitty knew perfectly well that she was breaking
one of the school rules as well as one of our home rules by going out at
such an hour--it was between nine and ten o'clock. As to her going
without her hat and jacket, such an idea never entered my wildest
dreams. No; bad as I thought Kitty, I did not think her bad enough for
that. There is no excuse for her. She is well punished, and for my part
I cannot but rejoice."

"For my part," said Gwin gravely, "I am extremely sorry. I like Kitty; I
like her much. She has her faults of course; she is different from any
of the rest of us; she is wild and daring and eccentric; but she is also
the soul of honesty and candor. She is very affectionate and very
generous. She has not been brought up in the least as we have been.
Things we think wrong are not considered wrong by Kitty Malone. As she
herself expresses it, she is a little bit wild. Oh, I am sorry for her,
dreadfully sorry; and I think Miss Sherrard has been too severe. I
wonder at Miss Sherrard. I thought she understood Kitty. She spoke to
mother so kindly about her yesterday; she said there was a great deal of
good in the Irish girl, as she called her; and also said that she was
very glad that I was her friend. Although Miss Sherrard does not know
any of the rules of the Tug-of-war Society, she naturally knows that we
have formed it. She told me that she could not express how pleased she
was at our having asked Kitty to become a member. Girls, I wish I could
speak to Miss Sherrard. I think I will. It will break Kitty's heart to
be kept in Coventry for a week."

"I doubt if she has a heart," said Alice. "It is all very fine to talk
of her affectionate ways; for my part I call them nothing but impetuous.
She is vain, conceited, and selfish; and provided she gets her own way
does not care what prejudices she rides roughshod over. Oh, I have no
patience with her."

"But," said Bessie Challoner, who was standing stolidly by, looking
very determined and very quiet, "what did Kitty want out at that hour?
Kitty with all her faults, would not break the rules unless she had a
strong motive. What could have been the matter?"

"And why did she want to see you, Elma?" said Gwin. "Can you throw any
light on the subject?"

Elma colored first and then turned pale. Several pairs of eyes were
immediately fixed on her; one girl looked at the other, and a few nodded
significantly. Elma observed the looks and turned away in hot fear.

"I don't know what she wanted with me," she muttered.

The rest of the school hours passed as usual, and just before dinner,
when the great school broke up for the day, Kitty was still the subject
for conversation. Gwin lingered a little behind the others, and Bessie
stopped to ask why she was doing so.

"I have almost made up my mind," she said, "to plead with Miss Sherrard
for Kitty."

"Oh Gwin; how noble of you. I respect you, I do from my heart; but I
tell you what. Would it not be better for us to do something of this
sort? Why should not all the Tug-of-war girls plead for her? That would
seem more effective and stronger, would it not? Suppose we wrote a
letter, a sort of round-robin, and sent it to Miss Sherrard, begging of
her to forgive Kitty this time; and taking upon ourselves the
responsibility of her future conduct. Oh, I say, Gwin, could we not do
it?"

"It is a splendid thought," said Gwin; "much--much better than my
talking to Miss Sherrard alone. Look here, Bessie; could we not manage
to have a meeting of the Tug-of-war at my house this evening? Oh,
there's Elma; I'll ask her at once. Elma come here."

Elma who was just shouldering her books preparatory to leaving the
school, turned when she heard Gwin's voice.

"What is it, Gwin?" she asked; her manner was a little nervous.

Gwin hastily repeated Bessie's daring suggestion.

"Oh, I'll come of course," said Elma; but there was a certain amount of
apathy in her tone.

"And I will secure Alice; I am getting quite to dislike Alice, though,"
said Bessie.

Gwin promised to write to the other girls at once, and it was finally
arranged that a meeting should be held at Harley Grove that evening
between four and five o'clock.

Elma walked home alone, musing much over the aspect of affairs.

"I wonder what Kitty did want with me," she said to herself. "Doubtless
it had something to do with that money. Kitty was in despair, so it
seems. Oh, there's Fred Denvers; perhaps he can tell me something?
Hullo, Fred!"

Elma stopped; Fred was on his way from college; he was whistling a gay
air, and did not see Elma until he had almost reached her side.

"Hullo, Elma," he answered; "how are you?"

"Oh, I am very well, Fred, thank you; but have you heard about Kitty
Malone?"

"How everybody does cry out Kitty Malone; it will soon be sung by the
birds in the air," said Fred; "Kitty Malone! Kitty Malone! What's the
matter with her now?"

"Oh, she has got into the most awful scrape; of course you know what
occurred last night?"

"Rather!" said Fred. "I was with her. I say, Elma, she is about the
pluckiest girl I ever met. Didn't she hit out straight from the
shoulder; and didn't that fellow go down like a ninepin! I don't believe
he is able to see out of his eye to-day. Why, that little hand of hers
is as hard as iron. Who taught her the art of boxing like that? She's a
born fencer! She's a splendid girl. I never met any one like her."

Elma did not feel so much annoyed at this praise of Kitty as Alice would
have been; but all the same it was scarcely gratifying to her. After
reflecting for a moment, during which Fred was preparing to continue his
swinging pace toward his home, she said suddenly: "But where was she
going, Fred?"

Fred's big blue eyes lit up with a sudden light of intelligence.

"What a fool I am!" he said. "You perhaps can throw light on this
mystery. She wanted to see you, Elma. I cannot imagine what about. You
know how fond she is of her brother Laurie? Well, it seems that Laurie
got into some sort of scrape; and Kitty, poor girl, she was in a way
about it; fretting like any thing, and she said no one could help her
but you. Can you tell me what she wanted with you? She was in a rare
hurry to get to your house."

"Of course I cannot tell," answered Elma. "Who could be responsible for
the vagaries of Kitty Malone? I thought I would ask you. I thought
perhaps you would know. Of course they are talking about it at school,
and they are wondering what I can have to do with it. It is anything but
pleasant for me I can tell you."

"Oh, you'll manage well enough; you'll fight your own battles. Well,
what have they done with her at the school? You look quite mysterious."

"I forgot I had never mentioned it to you. They have sent her to
Coventry; Miss Sherrard has done it. We are none of us to speak to her
for a week."

"Whew!" said Fred, rounding his lips for a prolonged whistle. "Well,
that won't bother Kitty much; I don't suppose talking to you would be
much of a loss to her."

"But you don't understand, Fred. It's the disgrace, and Gwin Harley
thinks it will break her heart; and--But I must not tell you any more; I
must hurry home."

"Poor Kitty! Anyhow, there's no embargo put on my talking to her," said
Fred to himself. "Poor old Kit, poor old girl; I'll make it up to her if
I can."

Fred ran home as fast as he could, and Elma continued her way.

"There's no doubt of it," she said to herself; "she wants that money.
She will manage, Coventry or not, to ask for it. She promised me
faithfully that she would never tell that I borrowed it from her; but,
being an Irish girl, she is scarcely likely to keep her word. Now that
she is in trouble for some unknown cause, she is certain to blab it
out. Did she not say herself that she could never keep a secret? Oh
dear, what an awful mess I have got into. If it gets to be known that I
borrowed eight pounds from Kitty I shall be expelled. If there is a rule
that the Middleton governors are strict about, it is that by which the
girls are forbidden to borrow money from one another; and eight pounds
is such a large, large sum. All my future will be ruined if this is
known. I had better give her back all the money that is left, and at
once. It would be the safest plan. I can at any rate let her have seven
sovereigns; and perhaps if she has that, she will not say anything
whatever about the matter. How miserable I shall feel without it; but
anything, anything is better than the dreadful fact getting to Miss
Sherrard's ears that I broke one of the strictest rules of the school,
and borrowed eight pounds from Kitty. The Tug-of-war Society would never
again have anything to do with me. I should have the poorest chance of
remaining in the school. It would get to Aunt Charlotte's ears. Yes,
yes; all my future depends on keeping this thing dark. I must get rid of
that dreadful money as quickly as possible. I thought my luck was going
to turn; but it is far too good to be true that I might keep such a
large sum of money safely. Poor Kitty! yes of course, I'm sorry for her;
but she is certain to tell on me. She would think nothing of getting me
into the most terrible scrape. I--I am bound to think of myself first."

At this point in her meditations Elma reached the house in Constantine
Road. She ran up the steps, let herself in with a latchkey, and went
straight to her room. She opened the drawer where she kept Kitty's
precious sovereigns and put in her hand to take out the little paper
parcel. More than once since she had possessed this money had Elma
examined that little packet, getting up early in the morning to gloat
over it, looking at it the last thing at night; but always taking care
that Carrie should be sound asleep. It gave her comfort, the comfort
almost of a miser to gaze at her gold. She used to forget at these
supreme moments that the gold was in reality not hers at all. She used
to forget everything but the delightful sense of possession. She felt as
if she could never spend the money, as if she must hoard it and hoard it
just for the mere pleasure of looking at it. She knew the exact corner
of the drawer where she kept it; no one ever dared to meddle with Elma's
drawers. She kept the rest of the family more or less in awe of her. As
to Maggie, she was honest as the day. But what was the matter? Search as
she would she could not find the precious little packet. She looked
frantically here, there, and everywhere. Soon she had removed the drawer
from its case and had tumbled all the contents on her bed. Nowhere was
the money to be found. Elma's face turned white as a sheet. She trembled
from head to foot. In the midst of her meditations Carrie entered the
room.

"My dear Elma, what is the matter?" she cried.

A glance had shown her what was really wrong. A smile crossed her face.
She walked deliberately across the room and flung herself on her bed.

"How hot it is," she said with a pant.

"Dear me, Carrie, why are you so incorrigibly lazy?" said Elma. "Not
that I care--I am in dreadful trouble I------"

"You look like it," said Carrie. "What is the matter?"

"I am looking for some money."

"Money? What money are you likely to have?"

"Well, it so happens that I have some--a good deal. Carrie have you seen
it?"

"Have I seen what?" asked Carrie in a provokingly drawling voice.

"Why, my money. How did you think I got that dress, that dress which you
are racking through at such a furious pace?"

Carrie was attired in the pale blue nun's-veiling. It was Carrie's way
to have a dress and to wear it morning, noon, and night, destroying all
its freshness. The nun's-veiling was already dirty and draggled-looking.

"How do you think I got that dress that you made such a fuss about if I
had not money to pay for it?"

"I am sure I couldn't tell, and what's more, I didn't care," said
Carrie. "What is vexing you now, Elma? Oh! what a commotion you are
making in your poor drawer!"

"I have just lost seven sovereigns and--Carrie, I see by your face that
you do know something about it. Is it possible that you stole the
money?"

"How dare you accuse me of such a thing?" said Carrie, flaring up in
apparently most righteous indignation--- in reality she was enjoying
herself immensely. She had made up her mind not to tell Elma the truth
at present. By and by she would tell, after she had well frightened her
sister, but certainly not yet.

"I know nothing whatever about it," she said, caring little for the lie
which she was telling. "I am sorry you have lost it; but how did you get
it?"

Elma was silent, shutting up her lips tightly. The dinner-gong sounded,
and the girls went down to their midday meal.

Carrie soon perceived that Elma was in real trouble. With all her low,
idle, careless, and unprincipled ways, at the bottom of her heart she
was fond of her sister. She made up her mind to visit Sam Raynes that
evening and get him to return the money.

"Poor old Elma," she said to herself. "I don't want to be too hard on
her. It is not the fun I expected when she looks at me with such
miserable eyes. It would certainly not do for her to get talking to
Maggie."

"You leave the matter to me. I may have a clue," she said, when dinner
was over. "But rest assured on one point, Maggie has nothing to do with
it, nor has mother."

Here Carrie ran upstairs, to put on her things preparatory to returning
to her pupils.

Elma was now alone. The hour was three o'clock. At half-past four she
was to meet Gwin Harley and the rest of the Tug-of-War girls. In the
meantime she knew she could not possibly have any peace of mind until
the seven sovereigns were discovered.

Mrs. Lewis had gone up as usual to her room to lie down. She had a
headache and was in very low spirits. Elma glanced at her once or twice
and determined not to worry her; but Maggie she considered her lawful
prey. She had given Carrie no promise, and felt sure that Maggie and
Carrie between them were at the bottom of the mystery. She determined to
go into the kitchen and terrify Maggie into confession.

That young woman was busy giving sundry touches to the charming toque
with which she intended to electrify her young man on the following
Sunday.

"Maggie," said Elma, "I wish to speak to you."

"Oh lor! miss, how you startled me," cried Maggie. She jumped up as she
spoke, dropping Kitty's violets to the floor. They were so natural, so
beautiful, so exactly like the real flowers, that more than one girl had
remarked upon them, and among these had been Elma. As they lay on the
by-no-means-too-clean kitchen floor, she stooped now to pick them up.

"Where did you get these?" she asked in a sharp voice.

"Oh, Miss Helma, they're mine, and you have no right to 'em," was the
quick reply.

"Where did you get them, Maggie? You're a bad girl; you must have stolen
them."

"I steal 'em! I like that," said Maggie, turning first crimson and then
very white. "They was give to me by the young Irish lady."

"By Miss Malone, Miss Kitty Malone?"

"Yes, miss; the prettiest young lady I ever clapped eyes on; she give
'em to me herself."

"Look here, Maggie," said Elma, "the violets don't matter. Let us talk
of something else. Do you know anything about some money which I keep in
my drawer upstairs? Now look me straight in the eyes. I miss that money,
and you know I can call in the police and have your boxes searched. Do
you know anything about it? If you'll tell me the truth I'll be merciful
to you. Last night I had seven sovereigns in my drawer, but now they are
gone. Did you touch them, Maggie? Tell me the truth and at once."

"I touch your money, miss! I didn't know you had any, that I didn't."

Poor Maggie's face was a study. Perplexity, despair, indignation swept
over it in a sort of terror.

"Miss Helma, you're cruel to talk to me like that," she cried. "Me touch
your money! No, that I didn't. Oh, miss, is it the money Miss Malone
come about? Is it gone?"

A wild hope flashed through Elma's brain, to be discarded the next
moment. Could Kitty have come to the house and visited her room and
taken away her own money herself?

"What do you mean about Miss Malone?" she cried.

"She come here miss. Oh, Miss Helma, don't look at me so scornfully. She
came here yesterday and asked for you and when I told her you was out
she writ a letter, and said you was to have it the moment you come in,
and that it was as important as the Bank of England. Yes, that she
did--and she laid it on the blotter in the dining-room. She was the
prettiest young lady I ever set eyes on, and she took them violets out
of her cap and give them to me. She was in an awful way, and said she
wanted to see you on a most important matter. I don't know what she
wrote in the letter; but it may have been about the money, miss."

"Of course it was about the money," said Elma, who felt more and more
uncomfortable each moment; "but where is the letter, Maggie? Why did I
not get it?"

"You ask Miss Carrie that, miss. She come in, and--. Oh, but I mustn't
tell any more."

"But you must and shall," said Elma. She took hold of Maggie fiercely by
her arm, dragged her forward to the light, and looked her full in the
eyes. "Now, tell me every single thing you know, or I'll summon the
police this moment," she said.

Thus adjured, Maggie fell on her knees and made an ample confession.




CHAPTER XV.

GWIN HARLEY'S SCHEME.


Elma felt nearly driven to distraction. All her future depended on the
character which she was able to maintain at school. She did not, and she
knew it, belong to the best class of girls who attended Middleton
School. Elma's father was a man of bad reputation. He had long ago
disgraced his family, and had been obliged to go to Australia. Mrs.
Lewis was better born than her husband; and when trouble came, a sister,
who had been much shocked at her marrying Lewis, came to her aid. She
did not do much for her; but she did something. This sister, a certain
Mrs. Steward, the wife of a clergyman in Buckinghamshire, promised to
look after Elma, who was the cleverest and most presentable of the two
girls. Mrs. Lewis begged that Elma should not be taken away from her;
and Mrs. Steward, angry with herself for what she termed her folly, had
yet yielded to her sister's entreaties. She said she would give Elma
what would be better than a fortune--namely, a first-class education;
and if, when her education was finished, she showed intelligence, and,
above all, a good, sterling, moral character, she would do what she
could to place her in life. Her present intention was, after Elma had
gone through a course of instruction at Middleton School, to send her
to Girton, thus enabling her by and by to take a really good position as
teacher.

All these things Elma knew well. She was an ambitious girl; she
earnestly desired to secure a good position for herself in life. She
hated her sister Carrie's ways, and detested the grumbling, weak sort of
character which she could not but see that her mother possessed. All the
same, she was not really scrupulous nor high-principled; it was only
that the little mean ways and the petty shifts which went on in the
small house in Constantine Road sorely fretted her. Her intercourse with
girls like Gwin Harley and Bessie Challoner could not but raise her
standard. Carrie's manners and ways disgusted her more and more each
day.

Now, as she put on her hat and prepared to walk to Harley Grove, she
could not help thinking, with great bitterness, of the unlooked-for
calamity which had come upon her. She was naturally intensely selfish,
and had no idea of sacrificing herself on this occasion. No matter to
what subterfuge she must be obliged to stoop, she would never, never,
let any of the Middleton girls know that she had broken the rule of the
school, and borrowed money from Kitty. For a Middleton girl to borrow
money at all was a black crime; but for any one to take advantage of
Kitty's innocence, her _naïveté_, her wild, daring, reckless ways would
make the crime all the blacker. Elma, were such a sin to be discovered,
would be, if not expelled from the school, which was extremely likely,
at any rate tabooed on the spot by all the nice girls who went there.
Above all things, she longed for and esteemed popularity. Such a course
of treatment would be intolerable. As a matter of course, Mrs. Steward
would be told of her niece's transaction. Mrs. Steward would say, "Like
father, like daughter." She would cease to patronize Elma. The fees for
her schooling would be withdrawn, and Elma herself must sink to the
level which Carrie had long ago reached.

"It cannot be," she thought; "whatever happens, I must keep this
miserable story from the ears of the girls and mistresses. At the
present moment I am fairly safe. Wild and reckless as Kitty is, she
would not dare to hold intercourse with any of the Middleton girls now.
Alice is the only one allowed to speak to her, and Alice she will
certainly not confide in, for she so cordially hates her. Yes, I know
perfectly well what I am going to Harley Grove for. Gwin is full of
sympathy for Kitty; so is Bessie Challoner. Romantic and silly they both
are; but Alice at least will be on my side. I will oppose the petition
which the Tug-of-war girls intend to send to Miss Sherrard. Kitty must
not be set at liberty until I can return her the money. Carrie has it,
beyond doubt. What she has done with it I don't know; but most likely I
shall be able to give it back to Kitty to-morrow."

Having made up her mind, Elma walked briskly forward. She would she felt
certain, be very unpopular if she opposed the vote which, unless she did
something to prevent it, would be carried by the majority in Kitty's
favor. She was anxious to see some of the other Tug-of-war girls. It was
all-important that a majority should be against Kitty, not for her.

When she arrived at the avenue which led to Harley Grove she met Alice,
and a moment later two other girls of the names of Matilda and Jessie
Forbes came pantingly up.

"Oh, do wait for us," they cried, seeing Elma and Alice linger for a
moment at the gate.

"Alice," said Elma, "before they join us I want to speak to you. Are you
for Kitty, or against her?"

"How do you mean?" asked Alice in some wonder.

"I mean, are you going to vote that this petition should be sent to Miss
Sherrard or are you not?"

"I am going to vote against it, of course," said Alice, with a short
laugh.

"Well, I am on your side; I wish to say so."

"You, Elma! I thought you would never oppose Gwin Harley. You are one of
those people who know where their bread is buttered. Why do you take my
part on this occasion?"

"Because," said Elma, flushing deeply, for, hardened little sinner as
she was, she had not perfect control over her emotions--"because I think
Kitty richly deserves what she has got. It would never do to have this
sort of thing going on at the school. But look here, Alice, if the
petition is not to be sent to Miss Sherrard, we must try and have a
majority on our side. Why should we not secure Matilda and Jessie
Forbes?"

"I never thought of that," said Alice; "but really, Elma, now I come to
consider it, as far as I personally am concerned, I don't much care. It
matters very little to me whether Kitty gets out of Coventry or not. I
shall have to speak to her however the tide turns. You do seem strangely
eager on the subject."

"When I join a certain side I don't wish it to be the losing one," said
Elma, as calmly as she could. "Hullo, Matilda, how out of breath you
are! You need not have run so fast; you could see that we were waiting
for you."

"Well, you see," said Jessie Forbes, who was also panting as she came
up, "we have never yet been to Harley Grove. Is it not a very grand
place, Elma? Was it not kind of Gwin to ask us, and--Oh, of course, we
are full of sympathy for that poor, dear Kitty Malone."

"Why do you pity her?" asked Elma coldly.

"Because the poor darling didn't know any better. Does it not seem silly
to make such a fuss about such a trifle? I can't imagine why Miss
Sherrard has been so very severe."

"I don't agree with you at all," said Elma. "I think Kitty richly
deserves her punishment. Of course," she added, "I don't want to be
really hard on her; but unless she is made to feel shame when she does
an _outré_ and extraordinary thing like she did last night, she will go
on doing similar deeds, and get the whole school into disgrace."

"Oh dear, yes," said Jessie, "that is perfectly true, and I should not
like father to know that one of the Middleton girls had been spoken to
by a rude boy in the street. I really believe he would take us both from
the school."

"If you think so," said Elma, "you ought to oppose the petition."

"Are you going to, Elma?"

"Certainly."

"But you are a friend of hers, are you not?"

"Of course I am. I am very fond of her."

"And you oppose it for her good?"

"Undoubtedly; altogether for her good."

"And Miss Sherrard does know what is right," said Matilda, in a
thoughtful voice. "Miss Sherrard was never a severe teacher. We all love
her dearly."

"And she is very fond of Kitty," said Elma. "I know that for a fact."

"Yes, and so do I know it to my cost," said Alice shrugging her
shoulders. She walked up the avenue as she spoke. Jessie ran after her.

"What side are you going to take Alice?" she asked.

"Miss Sherrard's," replied Alice shortly.

Meanwhile Elma had slipped her hand gently through Matilda's arm, and
looking up into the face of the taller girl, said in her most
insinuating voice:

"I do think, painful as it is, that we ought to take Miss Sherrard's
side. Gwin is so enthusiastic, poor dear, and so is Bessie Challoner,
that they are certain to be led away by their feelings. Now, Miss
Sherrard is the most sympathetic and kindest of head-mistresses, she
would not have given Kitty so severe a punishment without reason."

"That is true," said Matilda. "Only, of course, you see, Elma, I don't
want to go against Gwin. I am so terribly anxious to become her friend.
I admire her so immensely. I don't think there's any other girl in the
school to equal her."

"I should think there isn't," said Elma with sudden warmth.

"I am sorry she has taken Kitty Malone's part--poor Kitty! We certainly
all think her charming; but if father were to hear of it!"

"You would not like him to take you from the school now," said Elma,
"just when you have such a good chance of the literature scholarship?"

"I should think not; it would be a dreadful blow. But he would be--oh, I
cannot tell you how shocked he would be!"

"And he would be more shocked, would he not, if he heard that you had
taken Kitty's part, and had signed the petition against Miss Sherrard?"

"Of course, I never thought of that. I declare Elma, you are clever. I
will mention what you say to Jessie, and tell her that she must go
against the petition."

Elma felt that she had won her point. There would be at least four girls
against Gwin's motion, and probably others would follow their example.

When the girls arrived at the house, they were shown immediately into
Gwin's pretty private study. Gwin was standing by the open window. She
had a book in her hand, but was not reading it. She was looking
anxiously out. There was a perplexed expression on her fine face, and
her large deep gray eyes were full of emotion.

"I am so glad you have come," she said when she saw the girls. "I hope
all the Tug-of-war girls will be present. The more I think of this
affair the more certain I am that it will be the ruin of Kitty Malone."

Elma looked sympathizingly at her friend, Alice frowned, Matilda and
Jessie did not know where to look, nor what to say. If they had not met
Alice and Elma they would have certainly gone heart and soul with Gwin
in the matter.

"Sit down, won't you, girls?" said Gwin. "Tea will be ready in a
moment--are you not thirsty?"

"Yes, it's a very hot day," said Jessie, somewhat timidly.

"And you had a long walk; but it was really kind of you to come. We
won't do anything until some more of the Tug-of-war Society arrive. But
perhaps my letters have not reached the others."

"Oh, I know the Hodgsons are coming," said Matilda Forbes, "because I
met them."

"I am glad of that. Ah, and here is Bessie."

Bessie Challoner at this moment entered the room. She shook hands with
the Forbes girls, whom she had not met before that day, nodded to Alice,
and going up to Gwin began to whisper in her ear.

Gwin looked more anxious.

"All the same I am determined to do it," she said.

"I am certain Miss Sherrard will be very angry," said Bessie. "Had you
really better, Gwin?"

"I certainly had better. I am not afraid of Miss Sherrard, nor twenty
Miss Sherrards, when I think I have a righteous cause. She does not know
Kitty as well as I know her. Ah, here you are," she said as, the
Hodgsons, two rather dowdy, but affectionate girls, came quickly into
the room.

"What's this Gwin?" cried Mary, the elder; "something wrong with that
Irish girl? What can be up?"

"I will explain everything to you after we have had tea. Ah, here it
comes!"

Gwin walked to the table, where the footman now placed tea and cakes,
and began to dispense the refreshments. The girls stood round her
chatting, munching cake and drinking tea. The afternoon sun poured into
the room. Outside it was cool and shady. Gwin went to the window and
drew down the green venetian blinds.

"Now, that is cooler," she said. "Have you all had enough?"

"Yes, thank you," answered one or two.

Gwin rang the bell, and the servant came to remove the tea equipage.

"And now to business," said Gwin. "What I briefly propose to do is this:
Kitty Malone is in trouble. As a member of the Tug-of-war Society, the
rest of the society is bound to support her. I am most anxious that she
should get all the support in our power. She is not like any of us; she
has been differently brought up. What she did last night was the result
of impetuosity and overzeal. She was troubled about her brother, and for
some extraordinary reason thought that Elma could help her. Elma, can
you throw any light on the matter?"

"None whatever," answered Elma in a stout voice.

"She went out with the college cap on and without her jacket, and for
that reason some rough, rude boys talked to her, and she knocked one of
them down in trying to defend herself, and so got into a terrible
scrape. Miss Worrick, it seems, witnessed the transaction, and she told
Miss Sherrard. Miss Sherrard was very much annoyed, and has put Kitty
into Coventry for a week. We are none of us allowed, on pain of instant
dismissal, to speak to her. Now, my proposal is this; that we write a
little petition, and each of us sign it, and then that I take it to Miss
Sherrard. I want to ask Miss Sherrard to allow the members of the
Tug-of-war Society to speak to Kitty. I want to ask her to allow us all
to do our best during her week's punishment to show her that this wild
and erratic way will not go down in England; I want her to allow us to
do our utmost by kindness to overcome Kitty's wild nature. I have
scarcely any doubt, girls, that Miss Sherrard will approve of our
scheme."

"Well, I for one approve of it most heartily," said Bessie Challoner. "I
believe severity would ruin a girl like Kitty. You cannot drive her; she
must be led."

"Thank you, Bessie. I knew you would feel with me. And now, girls, I
will put this thing to the vote. All who are in favor of the scheme hold
up their hands."

The Forbes girls looked tremblingly, with flushed cheeks and glittering
eyes, at Elma and Alice. Their hands went half up and then dropped again
into their laps. It was the fear of their father's displeasure which
prevented their going altogether with Gwin. The Hodson girls immediately
held up their hands; but Alice, Elma, Matilda, and Jessie plainly showed
that they did not mean to sign the petition.

"Is this possible?" said Gwin in a vexed voice. "I surely thought there
was not--Elma, you must be at the head of this. What is your reason for
not joining us?"

Alice looked as if she were about to speak; but Elma jumped at once to
her feet.

"I don't join you because I do not agree with you, dear Gwin. I believe
Miss Sherrard knows a great deal better than we do what is good for a
girl. I am certain she will be much annoyed by our interfering; and for
my part I think a week in Coventry will do Kitty Malone no harm."

"I am surprised and disappointed in you, Elma," said Gwin, "Alice, what
is your feeling?"

"Oh, I absolutely agree with Elma," said Alice. "I think it would be a
rare comfort to take any means to subdue and crush out of sight, even
for one week, that most obnoxious person Kitty Malone. The unfortunate
part is that I shall have to do with her even during her week in
Coventry."

"But surely," said Gwin, in some astonishment, "you two Forbes girls can
have nothing to say against Kitty. It cannot injure you in any way that
we should plead for the mitigation of her punishment."

"Well, the fact is this," said Jessie, standing up as she spoke, and
looking very miserable. "Father is most particular; he is almost faddy,
you know, Gwin--and if he ever heard that a girl from the school did
exactly what Kitty did last night--I mean that she went out so late
against rules, and was dressed in such a queer way, and was obliged to
knock down a rude boy in order to protect herself--why, I think he would
take us from school. Then if father also heard that we had gone against
Miss Sherrard's authority, we--Oh, I cannot say it exactly as I ought;
but Gwin, I would rather not sign that paper."

"All right," answered Gwin in some vexation.

"Then my scheme falls through. Four against and four for. We have only
one other member of the Tug-of-war except poor Kitty herself, and she, I
am afraid, cannot come, as she is ill with a bad cold. Well, I shall see
Miss Sherrard alone and must take my chance."

"Yes, if you please; that would be much the best plan," said Jessie,
sinking down into her seat with a sigh of relief.

Soon afterward the little party at Gwin Harley's house separated. There
was a feeling of restraint over them which Gwin's guests seldom
experienced. They were not at one. It was impossible to talk any longer
on the subject with which their hearts were full. Gwin was anxious to
prepare the exact arguments she intended to use with Miss Sherrard. She
looked relieved when Elma made the first move of departure. Alice jumped
up also with alacrity.

"Good-by Gwin," she said. "I think you are doing wrong to interfered in
this matter. A little punishment will do Kitty Malone no more harm than
it does any other girl. Of course it's not pleasant; punishment never
is. Good-by; take my advice and allow Kitty Malone to shift for
herself."

Gwin made no reply at all to this. She gave Alice a cold nod, and the
four girls who now formed the opposition left the house.

"Good-by to all chance of my friendship with Gwin," said Jessie Forbes
rather miserably as they walked up the avenue.

"Oh, never mind, Jessie, you did the right thing," said Alice. "What is
the good of toadying? I hate toadies. If you are ever to become a
friend of Gwin Harley's you will see that she hates them also, although,
perhaps I am wrong to say that." Here she glanced somewhat significantly
at Elma. Elma colored and turned her head aside.

When they reached the top of the avenue the girls turned each to go
their several ways. Elma hurried home as fast as she could.

"I must get that money by hook or by crook this evening," she said to
herself. "I wonder where Carrie has hidden it. Bad as she is, she would
certainly not steal it from me. Oh, it is safe of course, and I must get
it and manage to convey it to Kitty to-night, and then as far as I am
concerned I don't care how soon the poor thing gets out of Coventry."

When Elma reached home the first person she saw was Carrie. Carrie was
standing on the steps of the shabby little villa in Constantine Road
talking to a fiery-haired young man.

Elma never condescended to have anything to do with Raynes. Giving him a
very cold nod now, she was about to enter the house when Carrie caught
her arm and stopped her.

"Why don't you speak to Sam?" she said. "Sam, this is my sister, Elma."

"How do you do?" said Elma. "I am sorry I cannot wait now; I want to see
mother."

"There's no use in your going in if it's mother you want," pursued
Carrie. "She has gone out for the evening. Mrs. Duncan has asked her to
tea. I am glad of it. A little change will do her good."

"I won't keep you now, Car," said Raynes, turning to Carrie and giving
her a somewhat clumsy nod. He looked askance at Elma, and the next
moment had clattered down the steps, and, turning the corner, was out of
sight.

"What a creature!" said Elma. "I wonder you have anything to do with
him, Carrie. I think, even for my sake, seeing that Aunt Charlotte is
doing so much for me--"

"Now stop that," said Carrie; "I won't have a word of abuse against Sam.
He suits me very well. I'm not a fine lady, and I never mean to be a
fine lady. I shall be very comfortable as his wife some day, and I don't
want you to abuse him. Whether you like him or not, he is going to be
your brother-in-law and--Why, Elma, how tired you look!"

"I am tired and worried, and I want to speak to you," said Elma.

"To speak to me?" answered Carrie, a little alarm coming into her voice
in spite of herself. "What for? Anything special? Are you prepared to
make me a present of another dress; I could do with a white one now the
weather is getting so very hot, and Sam would like me in white. White
with pink ribbons would be a change, or mauve--mauve ribbons look so
sweetly cool with white."

"I am not going to listen to any of your nonsense," said Elma. "I want
to ask you a straight question. Where is my money?"

"Your money? What do you mean?"

"What I say. I have heard the whole story from Maggie, and I can bring
her as a witness. You have put that money in hiding, and I want it at
once. There, Carrie, like a dear old soul, do own up. Let me have the
money without any more delay. Of course you have not stolen it. I know
you have not; but you have hidden it. I wish you would give it back now.
If I can't return it to its rightful owner to-night I shall get into
worse trouble. Do let me have the money back."

Carrie's face also now became pale.

"I wish I could," she said in a frightened voice. "Do you mean to say
that you really want it back?"

"Why, of course. You haven't spent it? Oh, if you have I am
ruined--ruined for life."

"No, I have not spent it; but the fact is I--What a little wretch that
Maggie was to tell!"

"She couldn't help herself; I made her. Now, speak out, Carrie. Oh, we
need not go indoors. Where is the money? Please, please, Carrie, let me
have it at once."

Elma's troubled face, her trembling hands, the anxiety depicted all over
her nervous little figure, could not but show Carrie that there was
something serious in the wind.

"Well," she said, "I am awfully sorry. I--I just did it in a fit of
mischief. I read that letter which Kitty Malone wrote to you, and it
seemed to throw light on some of your actions which had puzzled me of
late. I went to your drawer and found the money, and thought I would
give it to Sam to keep for you."

"To Sam Raynes?" cried Elma, backing a few steps, her voice assuming a
tone of terror.

"Yes. Do be careful, Elma, or you'll fall right down into the area. Why
shouldn't I lend it to Sam Raynes?"

"Lend it?"

"Well, well, it's all the same; I asked him to keep it for me."

"I'll go to him at once and get it," said Elma, preparing to run down
the steps.

Carrie caught her by the arm.

"I'm awfully sorry," she said, "but it's no use, he--he says we cannot
have it for a week, perhaps a fortnight. He is doing a little deal with
it, as he expresses it. He says perhaps we'll have it back doubled."

"What can you mean, Carrie?" Elma knew nothing whatever about
speculation. That will-o'-the-wisp which leads so many astray had not
yet entered into her life.

"You need not look so miserable. Won't you like to have it back again,
not seven pounds but fourteen? and Sam says this will probably be the
case in a week or a fortnight, or at any rate in a month from now."

Elma threw up her hand in despair.

"If I have to wait a month for the money," she said, "I may as well
never have it. Oh Carrie, what have you done? You have ruined me, ruined
me! Carrie, I cannot lead a low, common life like yours; I am not fit
for it. Oh, Aunt Charlotte will never do anything more for me after
this. Kitty wants the money, and I cannot give it to her. Oh, Carrie, to
think that you should have ruined my life!"

Poor Elma covered her face with her trembling hands and went into the
house. She entered the shabby little sitting-room and sank into the
nearest chair. Carrie stood near her in real perplexity and agitation.

"What a pity you didn't confide in me when you brought it home," she
said. "Of course I didn't really want to do you an ill turn, Elma; but
you were so sly and secretive, and--and I thought I would have my joke.
You don't know how precious dull my life is; and when I saw that letter
and felt that you were keeping a nice little hoard of money, all private
and without the knowledge of your sister, it was just too much for me,
and I took it to Sam because I didn't know where to hide it safe in this
house."

"The thing that matters," said Elma, "is the fact that I cannot get it
back. But I must get it; I must see Sam Raynes at once."

"Tell me why it is so bad," said Carrie. "You must confide the whole
thing to me now. There's no use in keeping secrets from your sister."

Thus adjured, and because she was almost distracted, poor Elma did tell.
She described as well as she could the terrible position she would be in
at Middleton School if the whole of this transaction were known. She
managed to a certain extent to open Carrie's eyes.

"Although, I cannot see what they would be so angry about," said Carrie.
"You were offered the money and you accepted it. You never wanted to
keep it; you would have given it back some time; and even if you did
keep that Irish girl out of it for a month, what would it have mattered?
But there--I see you are in a state, and I am sure I don't want to ruin
your life. You, with your high-faluting notions, must not have all your
ambitions dashed to the ground. We'll go together to see Sam, and try to
find out what can be done."

"Yes, let us go at once," said Elma in feverish haste. "I wanted to take
the money to Kitty to-night. At present she cannot tell on me; but she is
quite certain to do so if I don't return it to her at once. Let us go
down to see Sam now."

"All right," answered Carrie; "come along. I dare say we'll find him at
home. I hope we shall."

Five minutes later the girls were standing outside the door of the
Raynes' very humble dwelling. It was opened by Florrie Raynes herself.

"Hullo, Carrie, what do you want now?" she cried. "Oh, and _Miss_
Lewis," with a mocking emphasis on the word "Miss." "To what do we owe
the honor of this visit?"

"I want to see your brother," said Elma brusquely. "He has got some
money of mine, which I must ask him to have the goodness to return at
once."

"Money?" said Florrie, opening her eyes rather wide. "Well, you can see
him for yourselves; but if it's money that is lent to Sam, I--I rather
pity the girl who wants to get it back from him again. Sam is a very
whale on money. He always swallows it wholesale."

With these anything but encouraging words, Florrie threw open the door
of the shabby little smoking-room, where Sam, with a pipe in his mouth,
was lying at his ease. He started up when he saw the girls, removed his
pipe, and going up to Carrie, laid his hand familiarly on her shoulder.

"Well, Car, so you could not do without me," he said with a smile.

"The fact is this," answered Elma, "my sister has told me that she gave
you seven pounds a couple of nights ago to keep for her. That money
happens to have been lent to me, and I want it back immediately. I have
come for it. Will you give it to me, please?"

Sam drew in his breath preparatory to giving a long whistle.

"Highty! tighty!" he cried. "You have very grand airs, Miss Elma Lewis;
but I didn't know that money was borrowed. Ho! ho! this puts a very
unpleasant complexion on things. When dear old Car brought it to me I
thought I might do what I liked with it. Did you not give me to
understand as much Car?" Here he gave Carrie a perceptible wink. She was
very much under his influence, and immmediately too her cue.

"Well, yes, Sam," she answered. "I did say you might speculate with it
if you liked."

"Of course you did, my little girl, and I took the hint and did
speculate with it, and a pretty little deal I made. So if you have
patience, Miss Elma, you will get your money back doubled, then you will
be able to return the principal and have a nice little nest-egg of your
own. Now, what do you say to that? Aren't you awfully obliged to me?"

"I say," replied Elma, "that I want the money immediately. I cannot wait
until you have doubled it, as you call it, whatever you mean by that.
Please let me have it at once, Mr. Raynes. I must have it, I----"

"I am afraid you ask for the impossible," said Sam in a careless tone.
"I have speculated with the money, and the returns will come in perhaps
in a week, perhaps a fortnight, perhaps longer. I say again that you
ought to be obliged to me. It is not every fellow who would take so much
trouble."

Poor Elma gave him a despairing glance. There was evidently nothing more
to be got out of him. She left the house without a word. Carrie followed
her into the street.

"Oh Elma, don't look so miserable," said Carrie. "What is the good of
sinking into despair?"

"Don't talk to me," said Elma, pushing her sister's hand away. "You have
ruined me; that is the sort of sister you are. And I would have done
anything for you, Carrie. When I rose myself and improved myself in the
social scale, when I got my post as teacher, I would have done all in my
power to aid you and mother; but now--now we must all sink together. Oh,
Carrie, to think that I should be ruined by my own sister!"




CHAPTER XVI.

PADDY WHEEL-ABOUT'S OLD COAT.


It was a moonlit evening in the County Donegal, and there was a broad
bar of silver shining in burnished splendor across the beautiful Lake
Coulin. Two boys were standing on the edge of the lake. A
prettily-trimmed little boat was lying at their feet. One, the taller of
the two, was standing with his hand up to his ear, listening intently.

"Ah, then, Pat, can't you stop that shuffling?" he cried to his younger
companion. "I can't listen if you keep whistling and moving your feet.
It is about time for Daneen to appear. Kitty is sure to send the tinos,
dear old girl. Father takes care to keep her well supplied."

"There, I hear Dan's horn; he is coming through the Gap," cried Pat, his
face lighting up. "Stay there, Laurie, and I'll run to meet him. He'll
just be at the other side of Haggart's Glen when I get up."

The younger boy put wings to his feet, and the next moment was out of
sight. The older boy, thrusting both his hands deep into his pockets,
stood staring straight before him into the silver light caused by a full
moon. The white radiance lit up his young person, his pronounced
features, and handsome face. There were gloomy depths in his big black
eyes, although the slightest movement, the faintest play of expression
would cause them to dance with vitality and fun; the petulant
expression, round lips, curved and cut with the delicacy of a cameo, was
very manifest. The lad was built in almost Herculean mould, so broad
were his shoulders, so upright and tall his young figure. With his head
thrown back, the listening attitude on his face, his black hair swept
from his forehead, he looked almost like a young god--all was _verve_,
expectancy, eagerness in his attitude.

"If only Kitty is true it will be all right," he muttered. "Ah, then,
what a fool I was when I allowed the other fellows to tempt me to play
that practical joke on old Wheel-about. I don't think the governor minds
anything else; but he cannot stand our making fun of that poor, old,
half-witted chap. Never again will I do such a thing. I would not have
father know this matter for all the world. Hullo! there comes Pat. I
wonder if he has got my letter."

"Nothing, nothing, and worse than nothing," sang out Pat, extending two
empty hands as he approached.

"No letter for me?" cried Laurie. He stepped out of the light, and
striding up to his brother, laid one of his big hands on the boy's
slighter shoulder. "No letter? But did you really meet Daneen?"

"Of course I did. Don't grip me so hard, old chap. He had only one
letter in his pocket, and that was for Aunt Honora, two newspapers for
father, and a heap of circulars--nothing else whatever."

"But are you certain sure? Surely Kitty would not fail a gossoon when he
was in trouble."

"I tell you, Laurie, there was nothing from her, nor from any one,
except that one letter for Aunt Honora; but perhaps you'll hear in the
morning."

Laurie made no reply; his hands dropped to his sides. The next moment he
dived into his trousers pocket and extracted a few coins.

"Have we enough for a telegram, I wonder?" he said. "Ah, to be
sure--why, we can send one now for sixpence. And I have tenpence here.
I'll wire at once. I say, Pat, we must go to the nearest post office,
and to-night. We will start now; do you mind? We can row across the
Coulin, and anchor the boat at the opposite side, and then it is only
eight miles across the mountains to Ballyshannon."

"But James Dunovan will have shut up the office," exclaimed Pat; "and if
we are absent from supper what will father say?"

"Old Jim knows us; he'll open fast enough when he hears that we two lads
have come on business."

"But they can't send the telegram after the office is shut."

"Don't make difficulties, Pat. I tell you this is a serious business.
You don't want to be banished from the country do you? We'll go
to the post office at once, and see that the message is sent to Kitty
the very first thing in the morning. Come, what are young lingering
for?"

"Supper is waiting, and Aunt Bridget will make a fuss. You know we are
not allowed to be out after ten at night."

"Bother!" cried Laurie. "Well, then, we must go home first. What a
nuisance. We'll have a bite, and then slink out. The dad can think we
have gone to bed. Why, Pat, old boy, I met Wheel-about to-day, and he
was like a mad man. He told me he had collected all that money for his
funeral. What apes we were to touch the coat!"

"Sure, it's unlike Kitty not to write," said Pat. "She is the last in
the world to leave a fellow in the lurch."

"Don't I know that? Who's fault it is it isn't hers, poor old girl.
Something has happened to the letter. Now, Pat, let us get supper over,
for we have no time to lose."

As Laurie spoke he fastened the little boat securely by a rope to a
stone near by, and then the lads turned their backs upon the
silver-burnished lake, and strode into the darkness of a narrow mountain
defile. The path was steep, and they had to scramble up, doing so with
the agility of young ponies.

"It is the thought of Wheel-about that bothers me entirely," said
Laurie, after a pause. "I don't want to have it lying on my soul--upon
my honor I don't--that I turned the poor old chap's brain still
crazier."

"Oh, the money will come along before Saturday," said Pat; "and you know
you told him he must wait until Saturday. Don't you worry, Laurie. Come
on, I tell ye; there's the gong sounding at the Castle."

The deep notes of a very sonorous old gong were distinctly borne on the
breeze; the boys ran, hurrying and panting. A few moments later they had
climbed an almost inaccessible rock, had tumbled over each other up a
lawn, and entered a huge hall, where supper was spread. Squire Malone
was seated at the head of the table; down both sides were crowded
guests and different retainers--Squire Malone's cousins, all of them,
some to the fifth or sixth removed. Miss Honora Malone was at the foot
of the table, and Miss Bridget presided at the tea tray at one of the
sides.

"Sit down, you lads," roared the squire when he saw his sons; "you have
been keeping us waiting. Now take your places and fall to."

The boys dropped into the seats reserved for them without a word. They
were hungry, and enjoyed the abundant fare provided. Miss Honora began
to address them with a volley of words.

"Ah, then, boys," she said, "it is ashamed of you I am. Why should you
come in to supper like that, without your hair brushed or your hand
washed and looking as rough as a pair of young colts? Look at me, now,
how neat I am--I have changed my dress for the evening." As she spoke
she glanced at her thin arms, bare to the elbow, and touched the gold
chain that encircled her scraggy throat. "You'll never get Dublin
manners, you two," she continued, "and what will you do when you go into
society? Ah, it is enough to break the heart to look at ye."

Laurie winked boldly at her; Pat laughed, and helped himself so some
potatoes.

"Dennis," called out the lady, addressing her brother, "don't you agree
with me that it is very bad manners on the part of the boys to come to
supper without so much as washing their hands or brushing their hair?
Ought they not to put on evening clothes now that they are almost
assuming manhood's estate?"

"Oh, leave 'em alone, Honor," was the reply. "Boys will be boys, and
Castle Malone is Liberty Hall. Time enough a few years hence to put on
that high-faluting style. I like 'em as they are: rough diamonds no
doubt, but diamonds all the same."

The old man looked fondly at his sons. He was a picturesque-looking
figure, with snow-white hair.

"What will you do, lads, when I send you to England to school?" he said.

"England, father?" said Pat, turning pale. "It would kill me to leave
the soil on which I was born. Ah, now, father, I could not live through
it; and as to Laurie, why he would--Laurie, you know what you would do."

"Oh, father's joking," said Laurie, but his face went a little white, and
as he drained off a great glass of ice-cold water his hand trembled a
trifle.

"It would not be for the making of our happiness, father," he said, just
glancing at his father. "Pat is right--it would about kill us both."

"You young beggars, kill you, indeed!" cried the squire. "Well, I have
not made my plans yet. I am thinking of it, and you may as well know it.
I have sent the girleen away, and if you can't stand what she can, why,
I don't think you have much grit in you. As to Pat, when he's a little
older he'll have to prepare for the army."

"Ay, and that's a fine polishing up," said Aunt Bridget, bridling as she
spoke, and arranging the set of her very fashionable sleeve. "My jewel
of a lad, you'll know what life is like then. You'll think a deal of
your clothes, and of the sort of thing that will kill the girls then.
Why, if you know how to manage, and with my help I dare say I can
contrive it for you, you'll get easily into the very height of Dublin
society, and be petted, and spoiled, and coaxed no end. I wonder, now,
how that girleen is conducting herself. Sometimes, Dennis when I look at
you and think how your heart is wrapped up in her and how she is so to
speak the jewel of your eye and the core of your heart I wonder how you
had the courage to let her go."

"Don't you worry me about it," cried the squire. "I did it for her good.
Laurie, where are you off to?"

"I have had about enough supper," answered Laurie. Pat also scrambled
to his feet.

"You are as ill-mannered a pair of young cubs as I ever came across,"
cried Miss Honora, now really angry. "Why, the syllabub is coming on
soon, and the trifle, and the cream that I whipped myself. Well, Pat,
you'll have to mend your manners when you get into the army; and as to
you Laurie, you'll never be as good a squire as your father, try hard as
you may."

A loud laugh at the head of the table interrupted the good lady's flow
of words.

"Honora, my woman, you are talking to the air," called out the squire.
"The boys are out of earshot. Bless 'em can't you let 'em be? They are
hearty lads, and I don't think I'll send either of them out of the
country unless they happen to displease me."

Meanwhile the lads had gone down to the lake, unshipped the little boat,
and were by this time half across the Coulin. They soon reached the
opposite shore, jumped to land, pulled up the boat, fastened it, and
started along a long narrow and mountainous path which was the shortest
cut to Ballyshannon. They walked so quickly and the hill was so steep
that they had little or no time for words. Nor were they boys who talked
much when they were alone. Laurie was given to his own meditations. Pat
was always planning some scheme which should circumvent Aunt Honora, who
lived with them, and annoy Aunt Bridget, who nearly lived with them,
although not quite. Aunt Bridget was the most fashionable member of the
family; her real home was in Dublin. She was the one who had worked upon
the squire's feelings until he had decided to send Kitty to an English
school. Pat was not fond of either of his aunts, but he disliked Aunt
Bridget the most. After an hour-and-a-half's brisk walking they reached
Ballyshannon, knocked up the postmaster, who had gone to bed, asked him
to let them in, and confided to him what they wanted. He was a
hearty-looking Irishman, and was soon as much interested in the telegram
which Laurie was to send as the boy was himself.

"You have heard what a scrape I have got into?" said Laurie.

"About that poor, mad fellow?" said James Dunovan.

"Yes; some other fellows and I stole his coat away in a fit of frolic
that day when we were out in the crazy boat on the Coulin. A sudden
breeze got up and the boat upset; and the coat--bad luck to it--sank to
the bottom like a stone. We have tried to get it up, but it is all no
go; it has got right into the mud, and not all the boys in Ireland
could move it. If the squire heard we had played a trick on Wheel-about
he would just do what I don't want him to."

"And what may that be, Master Laurie?"

"Why, Jim, he would banish me to England. You think of that!"

"Ah, to be sure, sir; and it would be a hard punishment entirely, and
all for a boy's freak. But how can you circumvent him, sir? that's the
puzzle, for old Wheel-about is as sly a fellow as walks. He knows his
power with the squire--there's a story about, but I have not got the
rights of it. Anyhow, the squire is always trying to help him. If he
cannot get his coat in which he has hidden all his money he will go
raving mad about the country, and the squire will soon get at the bottom
of the mischief."

"Oh, that's all right," answered Laurie. I saw there was no help for it,
and I took Wheel-about into my confidence. He promised if I gave him ten
pounds by Saturday next to let the matter of the coat slip by. He said
he would never tell."

"I wonder now if the craychur is to be trusted," muttered Jim, in a
thoughtful tone.

"Oh, yes, he is, Jim; don't you meet trouble halfway. If once he gets
the money everything will be as right as possible. But this 'gram must
go off, and you must see to it for me."

"I'll do that, sir, and welcome, the very moment the office opens its
doors in the morning."

"How soon do you think it will reach my sister?"

"Well, to be sure, I expect in about half an hour or an hour at the
most. I often think I'd like to see them messages a-tumbling along the
wires. Do you believe as they go by the wires sir?"

"Oh, I suppose so; I don't bother my head about it. Now, then, Jim, hand
us a form and we'll fill it in. What do you think we had best say, Pat?"

"Make it strong," said Pat.

"Yes, I know that." Laurie stood biting the end of his pencil and
considering the blank form which Jimmy had provided him with.

"We must make it powerful strong," he said after a pause. "If dad hears
this, we two are about done, Pat. He's the easiest old boy in the world,
but when once he takes the bit between his teeth he is just like Slieve
Loon, our new mare. But I must not keep you up Jim; you are wanting to
get back to your bed."

"It don't matter, sir; don't you hurry yourself. I told the wife it was
two of the young gentlemen from Castle Malone, and she said I wasn't to
mind how much time I spent with you; it was only proper respect to the
family."

"All right Jim. Now, then, Pat, what shall I say?"

"Hurry up," said Pat; "if you're not sleepy I am, and the whole house
will be locked up if we are not quick."

"I cracked a pane of glass in our window on purpose this morning," said
Laurie. "I thought it might turn out convenient."

Pat laughed. Laurie, his face flushed, bent over the telegraph form.
After a time, during which beads of perspiration stood out on his
forehead, the following message was transcribed:

"Miss Kitty Malone, care of Mrs. Denvers, Franklin Avenue, Middleton,
London, S.E.--Wake up, old girleen; hurry with the tin.--Laurie."

"That's the time of day," he said. "You read it, Jim. Can you make out
the address plain?"

"Yes, to be sure," answered Jim. "Very well, sir; this shall go. I am
sorry you're in trouble, sir; but I know the squire sends a lot of money
to Miss Kitty, for he is always coming here for postal orders."

"Oh, I am safe to have it," said Laurie. "Well, good-night Jim, and long
life to you."

The boys left the office and retraced their steps across the mountain.
They had gone about halfway home when they were interrupted by a curious
sort of sound, something between a croon and a chant. It came nearer and
nearer, and the next moment a grotesque figure showed clearly in the
moonlight. This was no other than Paddy Wheel-about himself. He was a
tall man, with a long shaggy beard, penthouse eyebrows, and eyes which
were lit now with a fitful and uncertain gleam. He was dressed in rags,
his hat was pushed far back on his head, his hair streamed over his
shoulders. The savage and yet pathetic-looking creature stopped now
before the two boys.

"I say, Paddy, it is all right," said Laurie, going up to him and laying
his hand on his shoulder. "You'll get the tin I promised either
to-morrow morning or the day after. I have just sent a telegram to the
girleen in England. Why, Kitty wouldn't let you suffer; no, not if it
were to break her heart."

A wild and yet softened look came into the man's eyes.

"It is because of the girleen I'm fretting," he said. "Listen, you two,
I feel fit to die sometimes when I think the coat is lost, and it is all
on account of the girleen herself. Why, it was she put in the last patch
and a bit of gold was hidden in it; yes, and she sewed it round with her
own pretty hands, the darling."

"We'll get back the coat some day, see if we don't," said Laurie. "And
meanwhile Paddy, you are safe to have your money on Saturday."

"All right if I do," said Paddy; "if not it is all wrong. I go to Squire
Malone. Yes, I go to Squire Malone; but I'll wait until Saturday. I
promise that much, and I'll keep my word."

"You'll keep your word for Kitty's sake?" said Laurie.

The man nodded; again his eyes softened and changed in expression, the
next moment he had turned on his heel and was out of sight.

"I do believe the only person he cares for in the world is Kitty," said
Laurie. "Do you remember when he was so ill he would only allow Kitty to
visit him? I say, Pat, we must get back that coat somehow; but in the
meantime the ten pounds will keep matters quiet."




CHAPTER XVII.

"WE ARE BOTH IN THE SAME BOAT."


Gwin had explained all her points, and Miss Sherrard had listened to her
with indulgence, sympathy, and comprehension. They were seated together
in Miss Sherrard's charming little sitting-room.

"I am glad you take such an interest in Kitty," she said when the girl
had stopped speaking.

"I do. She is uncommon; she is unlike anybody else," said Gwin Harley.
"I hope," she added, looking anxiously at the head-mistress, "that you
will feel it right so far to mitigate her punishment as to allow the
Tug-of-war girls to talk to her. This seems just the time for a society
of this sort to help its members.

"There's a great deal in what you say, Gwin; but all the same, to my
regret, I am obliged distinctly to refuse your request."

Gwin's face, which had been slightly flushed, now turned pale. She rose
to her feet.

"Don't be hurt with me, dear," said the mistress in a gentle voice. "I
admire you for your kindness, Gwin, and I can also see the thing from
your point of view; but all the same Middleton School is a very
important one; there are from six to seven hundred girls here. Most of
these girls have got parents; all have got guardians and friends. It
would not do for them to know that such a wild and reckless act as
Kitty Malone has perpetrated should be passed over without a severe
punishment. Kitty will live through this week of isolation and be all
the better for it. At the end of that time you Tug-of-war girls can do
all in your power to help her. For this one week I must insist on her
living in Coventry. She will do her lessons, of course, for it would not
be at all wise to give her a holiday; but no girl belonging to the
school with the exception of Alice must speak to her."

"I am sorry; and you will forgive me for saying, without any disrespect
to you, that I think you are wrong," answered Gwin. She now held out her
hand to Miss Sherrard. Miss Sherrard took it and pressed it gently.

"You are a very good girl, Gwin; and I wish with all my heart and soul
that I could grant your request."

Meanwhile Kitty had returned to the Denvers' house in a whirl of
passionate protest and indignation. She could not understand why she had
been punished. The sin she had committed did not seem to be any sin at
all to her. What did it matter how she dressed or when she went out? The
fact that she had broken a very strict rule of Middleton School did not
affect her. She was now seriously unhappy--the fetters with which she
was surrounded tortured her. How could she live through the terrible
week of isolation? And what made her more wretched than anything else
was the fact that she could not see Elma in order to get the money from
her to send to Laurie.

Kitty and Laurie had always been more than ordinary friends. The
thoughts of each were known to the heart of the other. If there was one
person in the wide world whom Kitty loved with passion, almost with
idolatry, it was her handsome brother Laurie. The bare idea that Laurie
should plead to Kitty to help him, and that Kitty would be obliged to
turn a deaf ear to his entreaties was enough to madden the reckless
girl.

The whole of that afternoon she spent in her bedroom, pacing up and down
like a young caged tiger. Mrs. Denvers went to talk to her, but Kitty
would not speak. She would pour out her troubles to no one. Her proud
Irish heart felt as if it would burst from misery; but she would not
stoop to the sympathy of those who, she felt, could not possibly
understand her.

Of all the Denver family, she liked Fred the best; and when he ventured
to knock at her door in the course of the evening she did not refuse to
open it to him.

"Come along downstairs at once, Kitty," said Fred, holding out his hand
to her.

"I would rather stay where I am, Fred, asthore."

"I say it's a beastly shame to have you treated like this."

"Oh, don't begin to sympathize with me," said Kitty; "if you do, I'll
cry the ocean full of tears. I am holding them back hard now. You don't
know what a thing it is when an Irish girl fairly gives way."

"Well, they're beastly hard on you; but I'm sure I would not cry if I
were you," said Fred. I'd just be too proud. But come downstairs to my
den, Kitty; I have made it awfully comfortable."

"Your den?" said Kitty, her eyes lighting up; "have you got one?"

"Yes; it's not in the house; it's in the garden, at the further end.
It's a shed; but I have made it waterproof, and I have got a little
lamp, an oil one; and we can sit there and have a jolly talk."

For a moment Kitty's eyes sparkled with renewed hope. "And I have still
got some chocolates in my drawer," she exclaimed. "We might eat them
together and have a real good time. But oh, that money! it's the money
that's bothering me entirely. Oh dear! dear! I'll let the whole thing
out if I talk any more to you Fred. Fred, it's the true comfort you are
to me, and I'll never forget it to the longest day I live; but I can't
go to that shed with you, gossoon asthore, for if I did I'd let out
everything."

"But why shouldn't you let out everything?" said Fred. "There's
something bothering you, and you're keeping it all to yourself."

"But I promised I wouldn't tell, and I don't want to break my word. I
said when she asked me, 'No; I can't keep secrets;' but then it was put
in such a way that I must keep it. I can't go with you Fred; pray don't
ask me again. Good-by to you, and thank you, thank you."

Kitty ran into her room, shut the door, locked it, and retreated to the
window, to be as far as possible from Fred's insinuating voice and ways.

Mr. and Mrs. Denvers were out again that night, and the time dragged
terribly. Kitty wondered how she was to live through a whole week of
this torture.

"I promised Elma that I would not tell about her asking me for that
money," she said to herself. "I wish I hadn't said so now; but she
seemed so earnest, and I really thought nothing of it at the time. Oh
dear, dear! I wonder she does not bring it to me. She must be the
meanest of the mean. I never liked her; but now I hate her. Poor, poor,
dear old Wheel-about! Don't I know what he is feeling, and what Laurie
is feeling, my broth of a boy, my Laurie, asthore! Oh, to think that he
is in trouble, and I can't help him! How I wish I was back in Ireland
now! This will break my heart--it will break my heart."

Tears filled her eyes; but she was too proud to let them roll over.

"I will keep them back if I die for it," she said to herself. "I am
Kitty Malone, and they will break my heart if this goes on; but I won't
cry. No, that I won't."

While these thoughts were coursing through the poor girl's brain, there
came another knock at the door; an insistent and somewhat fierce one
this time. The handle was sharply turned, and the clear voice of Alice
was heard.

"Open the door at once, please, Kitty," she said.

Kitty crossed the room, turned the key in the lock, and allowed Alice to
enter.

"I must beg of you, Kitty," said Alice, "not to lock the door again."

"And why not, pray? You locked it last night. It was on account of that
I am now in all this trouble."

"Really, Kitty, you are quite too ridiculous; as if I were the cause of
your trouble. You are in trouble because you disobeyed a strict rule;
and my locking the door or not had nothing whatever to do with it. You
are quite the most tiresome, inconsistent girl I ever came across."

"Well, it is nothing to you what I am," said Kitty. She sank down on a
chair by the side of her little bed as she spoke; her expression was so
woe-begone, her face so pale, the droop of her eyes so pathetic, that
Alice was slightly touched in spite of herself.

"I am going to see Bessie Challoner," she said. "If you were different I
would not leave you."

"Oh, never mind me, pray."

"All the same, I would not leave you, Kitty; for remember I am the only
girl belonging to the school who may speak to you for the next week;
but, really, your ways are so unpleasant----"

"And I so infinitely prefer your absence to your company," retorted
Kitty. "So you may go with quite an easy mind."

"Thanks awfully," replied Alice, with a sneer. Her momentary good-nature
had dried up like the dew. She put on her hat, wrapped a shawl round her
shoulders and left the room.

Kitty returned to her place by the window. It was now between eight and
nine o'clock. She had refused both dinner and tea, and was in
consequence feeling weak and faint. There was a giddy sensation in her
head to which she was not accustomed. She did not connect it with the
fact that she was starving, and wondered what was the matter with her.
She was too excited and wretched to feel her ordinary appetite. She had
gone through a great deal, and her nerves were reminding her of the
cruel trick she was playing on them. It was very dull in her room; the
gas jet shed a hideous glare over the place. The room in itself was by
no means pretty, for the paper was the worse for wear, and the paint was
nearly worn through to the woodwork. The hangings to the windows and to
the two little beds were of an ugly drab color; and the view out of
these windows only revealed a narrow street. At Kitty's own home she had
a bedroom in the Castle end; the paper hung in ribbons, the door was
draughty, the bedstead rickety and old; but what a view there was from
the windows! A view of Lake Coulin and the mountains in the distance,
and the park lying verdant and green between the lake and the house.
What a breeze blew in at those windows!

"Oh, I should never be dull if I were locked up in the dear old bedroom
at home," thought the girl. "But here! here it is enough to madden one;
and yet I must stay here, for I cannot talk to the others. I will not
allow Fred to guess my secret. Oh, what a miserable, unhappy, wretched
girl I am! I am a prisoner. Oh, if only Laurie saw me! Dear Laurie; the
darling, the treasure that he is! It would break his heart if he knew
what I am suffering."

There were no books at all interesting to Kitty in the room, so she
could not while away the lagging hours with a novel. As a rule the
arranging of her wardrobe, the trying on of her many dresses, gave her
pleasant occupation; but she was in no humor to make herself smart that
evening.

"I suppose the love of dress is a sin," she said to herself; "although
it is one of the rules of the Tug-of-war Society that the girls are to
be fashionably dressed. Anyhow, it seems to have been my undoing, for if
I had only gone out in somber ugly attire last night I might have the
money now for my darling Laurie; and this heavy, heavy weight would be
off my mind, and I should not be in disgrace at Middleton School--not
that that much matters."

She went to the window, flung it open, and looked out. It was a clear,
starlit night. She could see the sky from between the long rows of
houses. She looked up at it, and then put in her head again.

"I shall suffocate if I stay any longer in this room," she said to
herself. "After all, why should I obey Miss Sherrard? She spoke about my
word of honor; but I have not given it. I was silent--I was silent on
purpose. If I could only see Elma and get my money back all would be
right, and I could really bear the rest of this terrible week. I have a
great mind to risk it and go to her."

No sooner had the thought entered the head of the wayward girl than she
proceeded to act upon it. She put on a long cloak which reached nearly
to her feet, a little cap of blue cloth was secured over her mass of
curling hair, and then going cautiously across the room, she took the
key out of the lock, unfastened the door, shut it behind her, locked it
from the outside, put the key in her pocket, and ran downstairs.

"If the servants or Alice come up they will think I have gone to bed.
What fun if I keep Alice out of her bed for an hour or two!" laughed
Kitty. She was now once more in high excitement and pleasure. It never
took long to raise her volatile spirits. "I hope Fred won't be about. I
don't want to get the poor darling into mischief," she said to herself.
There was no one in sight, however. The younger children were away in
another part of the house, Mr. and Mrs. Denvers were out, the servants
were in the kitchen, Alice was with Bessie Challoner, and Fred was down
in his shed mourning the absence of Kitty, whose bright ways were
fascinating him more and more.

"It's all right," thought the girl. She left the house, and a few
moments later was walking at a rapid pace in the direction of
Constantine Road. The thought of her disobedience, of the daring of her
own act, but added zest and pleasure to her walk.

"How happy I shall be when I get the money," she said to herself. "I'll
coax Fred or Mrs. Denvers to get me a postal order to-morrow, and I'll
send it to Laurie at once. Oh, what a weight will be off my mind! Why,
I'll almost feel inclined to turn good again!"

The walk to Constantine Road was a long one, and Kitty on this occasion
was determined to avoid the neighborhood of the "Spotted Leopard." In
preference she took the short cut across the common. It was very lonely
here, but she had no fear of ghosts or bogies. She walked with her
upright, young carriage, her quick, alert, dancing step. It was ten
o'clock however, before she reached Constantine Road. She ran up the
steps of No. 14, and rang the bell. The door was opened to her by the
servant, Maggie.

"Oh, Miss Malone," cried that young woman, "is that yourself, miss? I
has got into the most terrible trouble."

Maggie's face was flushed and blistered with crying.

"They has took away my wiolets, miss, and I call it a bitter, cruel
shame."

"Never mind that now, Maggie," answered Kitty, "I want to see Miss Elma.
Is she in?"

"That she is, miss, and she shan't escape you this time. Come right into
the parlor, and I'll send her down to you."

Kitty danced into the house. As far as her appearance now went she had
never known a sorrow nor a care in her life. She stood in the center of
the room, waiting impatiently for Elma to appear.

Maggie having shut her in, went cautiously upstairs. Elma and Carrie
were in their bedroom. Carrie was already in bed.

Maggie, who seemed to scent mischief all round, thought she would now
act with considerable guile. She knocked a low and gentle knock on the
panel of the door. Elma came to open it.

"What is it, Maggie?"

"Miss Helma, will you come outside on the landing for a minute?"

Elma went out.

"I have a bit of news about that money, miss. If you'll come right down
to the dining-room I'll tell you there."

"News about my money, Maggie? Oh, impossible!" But hope, ever ready to
dawn in the human breast, could not help rising now on poor Elma's
horizon. It all seemed utterly impossible; but what earthly sense would
there be in Maggie telling a lie.

"I was just getting into bed," she said. "Can't you tell me here?"

"No, miss, it's not me at all; it's news of the money you'll get if you
just come down to the dining-room, and be quick about it."

"Well, _I_ may as well go. Is there anybody there?"

"You go and find out, miss."

"Oh!" thought Elma, "Sam Raynes has repented. He was able to find money
after all, and has brought it to me. This is nice."

"What's the matter, Elma?" called Carrie from her bed.

"Nothing, Carrie. I'll be back in a few moments."

Elma hastily refastened her dress; put up her hands to her hair to
smooth it, and tripped downstairs, full of expectation and hope. Maggie
had relit the gas in the dining-room. Elma bounded into the room.

"Well, Sam," she exclaimed. Then she stepped back a couple of paces; she
was confronted not by Sam, but by Kitty Malone herself.

"Kitty!" cried Elma. There was a faintness in her voice, which Kitty had
no time to remark.

"Yes, Elma, I have come. I have broken my word of honor; but after all,
I never really gave it. I dare say I shall get into a worse scrape than
ever; but I can't help it. I came to you, Elma, because I _must_ have
that money. Will you let me have it now at once please--my eight
sovereigns--will you give them to me now? If I had seen you last night I
should not have been so miserable. I was coming to you when Fred and I
passed the 'Spotted Leopard.' Oh, please, Elma, give me my money at
once!"

Elma's face could scarcely turn whiter. She looked piteously at Kitty.

"I wish I could give it to you," she began; "but----"

"What do you mean; can't you let me have my own money? You have not
spent it, not all of it, have you?"

"Yes, I--I spent it."

"You spent all that money! all those eight sovereigns? Oh, Elma, you
must be joking. Can't you let me have some of it back? Please, Elma,
don't say no. It is for Laurie; he is in the most awful trouble. I must
have the money, and at once."

"I can't give it to you," said Elma. "I am awfully sorry. Sit down,
please, Kitty. Oh, Kitty, you won't tell on me?"

"I don't know what I'll do," said Kitty. "I am nearly distracted."

"But you promised you would not tell. You don't know what an awful
scrape I shall get into if you do. And you--oh, yes--you shall have the
money soon."

"What do you mean by soon; to-morrow? Shall I have it to-morrow?"

"Not quite so soon as that. Give me a week, Kitty."

"I can't," answered Kitty. "It is a case of life or death to Laurie.
Your mother must give it to me if you cannot; but have it I must."

"But you are rich; surely you can manage without it for one week."

"It is not that, and I am unable to explain. Laurie must have the money.
He wants me to help him about something, and I must send it to him
to-morrow."

"I wish I could give it to you," said Elma. "I would do anything in all
the world to let you have it back; but it isn't my fault."

"What did you spend it on? Dress?"

"Oh, in different ways." Elma had made up her mind not to tell about
Carrie and Sam Raynes.

"I'll let her think that I spent the money on finery," she said to
herself. "She is sympathizing about dress. I'll let her think that."

Kitty's hands had dropped to her sides; a look of despair filled her
face.

"What is to be done?" she said. "I never thought for a moment you could
not let me have it back."

"You shall have it in a week; that I promise you faithfully."

"But a week will be no good, Elma. Oh! Elma, Elma, Laurie will suffer
for this. They will take his freedom from him; he will be like a chained
lion; he will lose his spirit; perhaps--perhaps he will die. I cannot
stand it, Elma, I cannot."

Kitty covered her face with both her hands, and the tears which with
difficulty she had been keeping back all the evening burst forth in
torrents. Kitty did not cry as an English girl might. She cried with the
wild, passionate sobs of those who have seldom exercised self-control.
Elma was dreadfully frightened.

"Do stop, Kitty," she said. "You make so much noise; mother and Carrie
will hear you. Carrie will come down."

"What if she does?" cried Kitty. "Oh, Laurie, Laurie! this will break
your heart. You are ruined; ruined for life!"

"There are more than Laurie ruined for life, it seems to me," said Elma.
"Kitty, I am ever so sorry; but if you will only be patient I will try
and think of some plan of helping you. Now, please, please, promise me
one thing--you won't tell that I asked you for this money?"

"Why not? I must tell some one. I must get the money somehow."

"But you made me a promise you would not tell. It is very wrong to break
a promise."

"I don't care whether it is right or wrong. I cannot keep this secret,
Elma. I must remember Laurie, Perhaps Mr. Denvers will lend me the
money. I must think of Laurie first."

"Please, Kitty, listen to me. If you will promise to keep my secret I'll
manage to get you the money somehow."

"But how, Elma?"

"Oh, I'll think out some plan. Do promise me that you'll keep my secret.
It would be my ruin if it were known. Do promise, Kitty; do, please."

"I cannot," said Kitty. She walked restlessly to the door. "I must go,"
she said; "if I don't they will discover that I am out."

"And if they do you'll get into an awful scrape."

"Oh, it doesn't matter; I can't be worse off than I am. My one hope now
is that they will expel me; then I'll have to return to Ireland; and
perhaps I may coax father not to be too hard on Laurie."

"Then Kitty, you have quite made up your mind to tell all about me?"

"I think so. I cannot imagine why it matters."

"But it does, and I must give you the reason. I did wrong, dreadfully
wrong, ever to ask you for that money. I broke one of the strictest
rules of the school."

"What do you mean?"

"It is one of the strictest rules of Middleton School that no schoolgirl
must ask another to lend her money. The governors are terribly
particular. If it is ever known I shall be most likely expelled. Anyhow,
my character will be gone, and I shall be ruined for life. Oh, Kitty,
you have not such a hard life as I have. Do have pity on me."

Kitty stood silent; she was thinking deeply.

"You'll promise; won't you?" repeated Elma.

"I can't say. I scarcely know what I am doing at the present moment."

"Then listen to me. If you tell about the money I'll tell about this
visit. There; don't you see now we are quits."

"You tell! That would be mean of you."

"Yes. I'll tell that you broke your parole."

"But I never gave it."

"Oh, that is only begging the question, Kitty. Miss Sherrard understood
that you had given it. When you came here you broke it. You'll get into
a terrible scrape."

"And you spoke to me, Elma; so you too will get into a scrape."

Kitty's tears stopped like summer rain, and a flash of sunshine flew
across her charming face.

"Poor Elma, you will be in hot water too," she said. "What a muddle
everything is in."

"You see, Kitty, we must cling together, for we are both in the same
boat. I'll do my utmost to get you that money. I am sure I can manage
somehow. But you must not tell."

"All right. I'll keep the secret until after school to-morrow. Good-by,
Elma."

She left the house, and Elma returned to Carrie.

"Who were you talking to all that time?" exclaimed Carrie.

"That unfortunate girl, Kitty Malone."

"You mean to say she was here?"

"Yes; she came about the money. I am miserable about it. I promised to
get it for her by hook or by crook. How can I manage?"

"Look here," said Carrie after a pause, during which she was sitting up
in bed and thinking intently. "You say that Kitty Malone is very rich?"

"Yes, of course she is. She has more money than she knows what to do
with. Why, I tell you, Carrie, the day she lent me those eight
sovereigns I saw fifteen in her purse. Fancy a girl having fifteen
sovereigns just to do what she liked with? I could scarcely realize it.
I took the money before I knew what I was doing. She did tempt me so
sorely when she showed me her purse."

"Oh, I'm not a bit surprised," said Carrie. "If I had been in your shoes
I'd have taken the whole fifteen sovereigns just as soon as the eight.
But listen to me, Elma; I have a plan in my head. I'll talk it over with
Sam to-morrow; perhaps we can get the money; but there's no saying.
I'll talk it over with Sam."

"I wish you would not. I would rather not get it through his means."

"What a dislike you have to him."

"I have. He is not good enough for you, Carrie. Oh, Carrie, dear, I vow
and declare that I'll work for you and mother; I'll work my very fingers
to the bone; I'll do anything for you. Only don't marry that horrid
fellow."

"How excitable you are, Elma, and queer. Sam suits me very well. Oh, if
you don't want his help you need not have it--remember it is your
scrape, not mine."

"It is your scrape, too, Carrie. You stole the money and gave it to Sam
Raynes. You are a thief, and you have ruined your sister."

"If you begin abusing me I shall certainly not stay awake any longer,"
said Carrie; "I'm dead with sleep as it is. Now, do put out the candle,
like a good girl. I'm off to the Land of Nod."

Carrie pulled the clothes over her head and struggled down among the
pillows. Elma stood and stared out of the window.

"I wonder if I could do it," she said at last to herself. "It might be
the best plan; and Gwin is very kind and very rich. I wonder if I dare.
Anything seems better than my present predicament."




CHAPTER XVIII.

"I CANNOT HELP YOU."


Elma scarcely slept that night. At an early hour on the following
brilliant summer's morning she stole softly out of bed, glanced for a
moment at Carrie, as she lay sleeping the sleep of the just, with her
towzled hair tossed about the pillow, and then, getting deftly into her
own clothes, left the room without arousing the sleeper. She had made up
her mind very definitely what to do. Without even waiting to get any
breakfast, she unfastened the hall door, opened it, and stepped out into
the full radiance of the summer's morning. A quick walk brought her in a
little over half an hour to Harley Grove. When she went up the ponderous
flight of steps which led to the principal door of the mansion a clock
far away struck the hour of seven.

"It is terribly early," she said to herself, "terribly early to disturb
her; but it is my only chance. I must have time; I cannot rush this
thing. If she can help me I believe she will; and anyhow, I do no harm
by what I intend to say to her."

Elma rang the bell, but her early summons was not immediately attended
to. Presently a servant girl, who looked as if she might be one of the
under-housemaids, unbolted and unbarred the door, and opened it a few
inches. "When she saw a neat-looking girl, in all probability a
schoolgirl, standing outside she opened it a little further and her jaw
dropped in some astonishment.

"I have come here," said Elma to know if I can see, Miss Harley
immediately on very special business."

"I don't know, miss, I am sure," answered the girl, who was a stranger
in those parts. "I can't say that you can see Miss Harley now, for I
think she is fast asleep and in bed, miss."

"It is of the utmost importance or I would not disturb her," said Elma.
"I have brought a note with me; can you manage in some way to have it
delivered to her? I can wait downstairs in any of the rooms until I get
her answer."

As Elma spoke she slipped a little three-cornered note into the girl's
hand, at the same time placing in it one of her own most valuable and
very few and far between shillings.

"Can you manage it for me?" she said. "It is really of the utmost
importance."

A shilling was a small bribe; but the housemaid was young and
tender-hearted. She looked again once or twice at Elma, who could wear a
most pleasing expression when she chose, and then, ushering her into a
small room to the left of the wide entrance hall, departed slowly
upstairs on her errand.

While she was away Elma fidgeted, walking from end to end of the little
room into which she had been admitted. All depended, or so she imagined,
on her note reaching its destination. She knew Gwin's kind heart; she
was certain that if Gwin received the note, however tired and sleepy
she was, she would at least see her for a few minutes. Elma had worded
it craftily.

"I am in great trouble," she had written. "It is connected with Kitty
Malone. I see my way to helping Kitty if you, Gwin, can help me. But I
must see you now at once. Let me come to your bedroom. I would not
disturb you if it were not a matter of life or death."

This note, sufficiently startling in its contents, was given by the
under-housemaid to Gwin's own special maid. The girl, after some
deliberation, said she would venture to give it to Gwin, early as the
hour was. Accordingly she stole into the shaded bedroom, drew up one of
the blinds, and when Gwin opened her sleepy eyes presented her with the
little three-cornered note on a salver.

"There's a young lady, a Miss Lewis, waiting downstairs. She brought
this note and begged that it should be delivered to you at once, miss. I
ventured under the circumstances to wake you, as the young lady seemed
from all accounts to be in a desperate way."

"What can it mean?" said Gwin. She sprang up in bed, tore open the note,
and read the contents.

"Is my cold bath in the room, Simpson?" she asked of her maid.

"Yes, miss; in your dressing-room."

"Well, I shall dress at once. Go down, please, to Miss Lewis and tell
her that I'll be ready to see her in my study in twenty minutes."

The maid departed on this errand, which brought much relief to poor
Elma.

In less than the time named she was summoned by Gwin's maid to come
with her to Miss Harley's study. There a moment later she and Gwin were
clasping each other's hands. Gwin was in a long white dressing-gown; her
hair streaming over her shoulders.

"Well, to be sure, Elma," she exclaimed, "you are an early bird. Now,
what do you want with me? I am full of curiosity. You are in trouble,
and it is something connected with Kitty Malone?"

"Yes," said Elma. "I am desperate, and I have come on a desperate
errand, Gwin. Can you manage, somehow or other, in some fashion, to let
me have the use of eight pounds for--for say a fortnight?"

Gwin Harley gasped; not only at the magnitude of the sum demanded, but
also at Elma's audacity in asking for it.

"You want eight pounds," She exclaimed. "But, Elma, you know the rule?"

"Oh, yes, I know the rule; and it is because I am fairly desperate I
apply to you. You might lend the money to my sister Carrie; or perhaps
mother would be best. It might be managed so that I didn't appear to
borrow it. I would not ask for it if--if the trouble were not terrible;
and--and the secret belongs to another."

"What do you mean?"

"It belongs partly to Kitty Malone."

"I cannot help you," said Gwin decidedly.

"Why? Oh Gwin, I did not know you could be so cruel."

"You don't understand, Elma. I am surprised that you should ask me. How
could I break one of the strictest rules of the school?"

"Oh, but you need not really break it; I mean it could be managed in
this way: Would not your father lend mother the money? You need not do
it at all; all you have to do is to ask him."

"You must tell me everything, Elma. This is most mysterious. Why do you
want money? Is it for yourself? You must tell me every single thing."

"I cannot tell you, because the secret is not mine."

"You say Kitty is mixed up with this?"

"Yes, yes."

"And you will not tell why?"

"I cannot. I wish I could."

"Then, Elma, I also must be firm. I cannot help you."

"You will not ask your father?"

"How could I? It would be a subterfuge--the whole thing would be a
subterfuge. I must have nothing to do with it. I am sorry, Elma, for I
see you are in great trouble; but I am powerless."

"Then I am ruined," said Elma. She covered her face with her hands, and
the tears trickled slowly between her fingers.

"I wish I could help you," said Gwin kindly. "Is there any other way?"

"No other way. I want eight pounds for a fortnight--I want it
desperately. You could manage to let me have it without breaking the
rules of the school, but you will not."

"I am truly sorry, but--I will not."

"Oh, Gwin, if you would only trust me. We were always friends, were we
not?"

"Yes," answered Gwin slowly. "I have always liked you, Elma."

"We were friends," continued Elma, wiping the tears passionately from
her cheeks; "and I did think last night, when I was in such trouble,
that perhaps you could come to my aid. I thought you would trust me
without my telling you everything."

"I cannot, Elma," said Gwin again.

"Why?"

Elma now looked steadily into Gwin's face. Gwin looked gravely into
hers. After a time Gwin spoke slowly:

"Because," she said--"forgive me, Elma--you are not trustworthy."

"Oh!" said Elma. She turned first pale and then red.

"There is no use in my staying," she said, after a pause. "I am sorry I
got you up so early."

"Oh, that does not matter," said Gwin, in an altered tone. "I would do
what I could to help you; but I cannot do the impossible."

"I see that I was mistaken in you."

"Not at all," replied Gwin. "You found me what I have always been. I am
naturally careful. I never jump to wild conclusions; I am not impulsive.
I have liked you, and I shall go on liking you in the future."

"Even though I am not trustworthy?"

"Yes; I shall like you for what you are. You have always been nice to
me, and I wish to be nice to you. Please understand that this will make
no difference."

"And you won't tell what I came about?"

"No, I shall never mention it. Now, must you go?"

"I must," said Elma.

The full morning light fell upon her face as she spoke, and Gwin
noticed that it looked small, pinched, and thin.

"You must have some breakfast first," she said. She walked across the
room and sounded the bell. The servant appeared in a moment.

"Order breakfast to be served here this morning," said Miss Harley, "for
two, please." The maid withdrew. Gwin opened the window and looked out.

"I am very sorry for Kitty," she said, after a pause.

Elma did not reply. After a time she said slowly:

"Did you see Miss Sherrard last night?"

"I did; but it was useless. She won't retract her mandate."

A sigh of relief came from Elma's lips.

The servant again appeared with breakfast. Gwin poured out tea for her
friend. Elma drank a cup, her throat felt dry. She saw no way out of her
difficulty. She could scarcely bring herself to eat.

A few moments later she was on her way back from Harley Grove. She
hesitated whether to go straight to the school and wait there until nine
o'clock or to return to Constantine Road. After a little reflection she
decided on the latter course. She reached home hot and weary between
eight and nine o'clock. Carrie was seated at the breakfast table; a
letter lay on Elma's plate.

"Why, Elma, what have you been doing out and about at this unearthly
hour?" said Carrie, as she cracked the shell of an egg by no means
fresh.

"Where is mother?" remarked Elma, as she seated herself at the table.

"She has a bad headache. I have sent up her breakfast. Are you going to
see her?"

"No, I think not. I shall just have time to eat something--not that I am
specially hungry--and then start for school."

"There's a letter on your plate. Why don't you read it?"

"I know; it's from Aunt Charlotte."

"Well, well, and you are interested in Aunt Charlotte more than I am,"
said Carrie. "Do read your letter."

Elma somewhat languidly tore open the envelope. The next moment she
uttered an exclamation, and her face went first red and then pale.

"Aunt Charlotte writes to say she is coming here to-day."

"To-day! Good gracious!" said Carrie. "She doesn't want me to stay in,
does she?"

"Oh, no; but this is terribly awkward."

"Why so, Elma? Why shouldn't you ask her to lend you the money?"

"Ask Aunt Charlotte! I may as well put my hand into the fire."

"Well, suppose I were to help you," said Carrie, after a time.

"You, Carrie; how could you?"

"But suppose I were to--I am not the sort of person who does anything
for nothing. What would you give me if I got you out of this?"

"But how could you get me out of it?"

"Why, I suppose by giving Kitty the money."

"Carrie, you talk nonsense. Unless, indeed, you were to persuade Sam
Raynes----"

"Oh, it's useless to worry poor Sam. He has speculated with that money,
and if he doubles it we shall have it back. I think when that time comes
the very least you ought to do, Elma is to give me half of the balance
over and above what you borrowed. That would be three pounds ten, for me
quite a nice little sum. It would keep me in ribbons, gloves, and boots
for a bit. I get such a very small salary."

"Well, the money has not been doubled; it's time enough to talk of our
chickens when they are hatched," said Elma. She rose from her seat,
looking despairingly at the open letter which she held in her hand.

"After all, I may as well take this up to mother," she said.

"One moment before you go, Elma. Would you like me to help you, or would
you not?"

"If you could help me, Carrie, of course I should be obliged."

"And what is the punishment they have inflicted upon that Irish lass?"

"Oh, dear me, Carrie, I told you all about that yesterday; she is in
Coventry--we are none of us allowed to speak to her."

"All the same, you did speak to her last night, don't forget."

"Yes, I could not help myself; but if it was found out it would go hard
with us both."

"Then I am the one to interfere," said Carrie _sotto voce._ "I'll do my
best, Elma, and trust to you to make it up to me when I have got you out
of this scrape."

"I wish you would do something, Carrie; but I don't suppose you can.
It's awful to think of Aunt Charlotte coming now. If I can't help Kitty,
Kitty is sure to tell, and then it will be all over the school. They
won't blame her so much as they'll blame me. Oh dear, dear! if you would
do something!"

"Well, I promise that I just will," said Carrie. "Now go off to school
with an easy mind."




CHAPTER XIX.

KITTY TELLS THE TRUTH.


Early the next morning Kitty received her telegram. It certainly was not
at all calculated to soothe her. She was restless and miserable before;
now her hands shook so violently that she could scarcely eat her
breakfast.

Alice acted somewhat the part of a jailer; she had to convey the
disgraced girl to Middleton School.

"I am ill; I won't go," said Kitty, bursting into tears.

"You had much better come, Kitty," said Alice, speaking almost kindly
for the first time in her life; she really pitied poor Kitty at that
moment. "If you will only take your punishment patiently it will soon be
over, and I know for a fact," she continued, "that many of the girls are
only too anxious to make it up to you by and by."

"Oh, it's not that," said Kitty; "it is because I am so wretched. I have
a great trouble at home; but there, there's no use in talking to you
about it, Alice."

"So you always say," answered Alice. "Whenever I want to be the least
bit good to you, you put me off; but never mind, I am sure I can do
without your friendship. Anyhow, I think you must come to school unless
you are so ill that mother will be obliged to send for the doctor."

"Oh, I don't want that," said Kitty, "I never had a doctor in my life.
If you'll wait for me, Alice, I'll go upstairs and put on my hat."

She rushed to her room, flung herself on her knees for a moment by her
bedside, and uttered a frantic prayer to Heaven.

"Oh! God, in your mercy, keep Laurie from doing anything desperate,"
cried the unhappy girl. She then joined Alice downstairs. Her face was
white; there were heavy black lines under her eyes; she had never looked
prettier, more pathetic, more likely to win sympathy from the other
girls.

At prayers that morning all eyes were directed to Kitty Malone. She was
not allowed to sit with the others, but was given, a place on the bench
with the teachers. Here she faced the rest of the school. It would have
been a cruel position for another girl; but it did not matter to Kitty,
for she saw no one present. Her eyes, with that queer inward look in
them, were gazing straight, not at the scene before her, but at the old
home in Ireland. The squire, whom she so passionately loved, roused to
the last extremity of anger; the boy, whose heart was hers, crushed,
trapped, imprisoned, his liberty taken from him. Kitty trembled from
head to foot; she could scarcely restrain her terrible emotion.

After school she accompanied the others to the classroom, but in
absolute silence. She was given her usual lessons to do, but at a table
by herself. Her punishment was to be carried out in all its fullness;
but, dreadful as it would seem to most, it did not touch her at all
to-day. Her head ached, her eyes felt dim. Laurie's telegram, which lay
in her pocket, seemed to scorch into the very depths of her heart. She
had not even been allowed to answer it; the whole weight of her trouble
lay unrelieved upon her. The poor child was unaccustomed to such
anguish, and her self-control was in danger moment by moment of giving
way.

As she strove to get that dull piece of English history into her head,
as she endeavored to follow the rules of syntax, as the knowledge that
she never, never to the longest day of her life, would understand what
was meant by the possessive case, alongside with these feeble little
efforts to follow her lessons, ran the dark thought of how, by what
possible means, she could help Laurie. And more and more as the time
went on she felt that she could not keep her promise to Elma. Elma had
been cruel to her; she had borrowed her money when she knew she had not
the most remote chance of paying it back; she had spent it according to
her own saying in the most frivolous way. Now, for the first time, Kitty
learned to despise dress. How could Elma spend the money which was to
save Laurie in anything so contemptible as ribbons and finery? Kitty
looked down at her own neatly-appointed clothes; her perfect little
shoes peeped out from beneath the frill of her dress. Notwithstanding
her misery she was as neat as usual in her attire; but now she had no
heart to appreciate gay clothes, good looks, pretty ribbons--any of the
things which usually delighted her. Laurie seemed to cry to her; she
fancied she could hear his voice coming across the waters to her
ears--Laurie, who had always trusted to her, who, strong as he was, was
not quite so strong as Kitty when scrapes and troubles were about. Oh!
if only she could go to him! If only she might relieve her feelings and
tell the exact truth to Miss Sherrard! What kept her back? Nothing
whatever but the thought of Elma. She had given Elma a promise, and,
tempted as she was, she must not break it.

As this thought came to her she remembered that she had only promised
Elma to keep the secret until after morning school. That time would soon
be up.

"Once Miss Sherrard knows I am certain she will help me," thought Kitty,
"though I don't want to excuse myself; yet I know that a great deal of
the blame of my proceedings will be lifted from my shoulders to Elma's.
Why should I go through all the suffering, and Elma sit there looking so
calm, and quiet, and still?"

As these thoughts rushed through Kitty's mind she glanced up for the
first time, and calmly surveyed the great room full of her
fellow-students. As if with one impulse all the girls raised their eyes
and looked back at her. There was pity on most of the faces, amusement
on a few, curiosity on a few others; but on Elma's face alone was an
expression of intense anxiety and misery. Kitty had the kindest heart in
the world. The moment she saw this expression the idea of betraying Elma
melted from her mind.

"She does look wretched," she said to herself. "I must not speak to her;
I dare not, and yet--yet--I should like her to know that I am not going
to be hard on her."

Kitty tore off a piece of her exercise book and managed, when she
thought no one would see, to write a little note to Elma. In this she
said, "Don't be afraid, Elma; I have made up my mind not to tell."

This note she twisted up, and, as the girls were going to the playground
for recess, managed to flash an intelligent glance toward Elma. Elma
approached close to her table, Kitty stretched out her hand, and Elma's
fingers were just about to close over the note, when, by an unlucky
chance, there came a breeze through the window, and the note, for some
inconceivable reason, fluttered from Kitty's hand to the floor. In an
instant Miss Worrick had seen it. She was just stepping forward when
Elma like a flash caught it up and tore it into fragments. She would not
for the world have the note seen. Miss Worrick, filled with anger, came
up to Kitty.

"You are a bad girl, the worst girl I know," she said. "You are not even
honorable. Did you not give your parole that you would not hold
communication with another girl in the school, and yet you have been
trying to communicate with Elma Lewis by means of writing?"

"Writing is not speaking," said Kitty, now standing up very erect and
proud, and replying to Miss Worrick as pertly as she could.

"Don't answer me, miss; you grow worse and worse. Elma Lewis, do you
know anything about that note?"

Kitty looked full at Elma. If she was going to be true to Elma, would
Elma be equally true to her?"

"I know nothing about it," said Elma promptly.

Kitty's eyes filled with withering scorn; an expression of disdain
curled her pretty lips.

"You are quite certain, Elma? Kitty Malone seems to have a great anxiety
to communicate with you. Can you throw any light on the scrape she has
got into?"

"I know nothing whatever about her secrets; I--I have nothing to do with
them," said Elma in an agitated voice, which she endeavored in vain to
render calm.

Gwin Harley, who had stopped on her way out of the classroom, paused to
listen to Elma's words.

Kitty's face was now white as death. She did not glance at Elma; she was
looking the other way.

"Leave us, girls," said Miss Worrick.

The next moment the great classroom was empty, with the exception of
Miss Worrick and Kitty Malone. Kitty was standing upright as a dart.

"Take me to Miss Sherrard; I want to speak to her," she said.

"I am certainly going to take you to her. You are a very, very wicked
girl. I doubt not you will be expelled."

"Oh, I hope I shall," said Kitty. "I should like nothing in all the
world better."

"You would? You are quite incorrigible. Do you know, you wretched girl,
what it means?"

"No," answered Kitty; "I wait for you to tell me. What does it mean,
Miss Worrick?"

"That you are tainted for life, disgraced for life. Wherever you go it
will be always remembered to you that your conduct was so bad at school
that you were obliged to be expelled."

"But that won't matter in old Ireland," said Kitty with a hollow,
forced laugh.

"Yes, it will; it will break your father's heart. There are no people so
proud as the Irish. They can stand a good deal; but any cloud on their
honor----"

"Ah, you are right," cried Kitty, standing still, and a queer change
coming over her face. "Our honor--no one ever touched that yet."

"It will have a nice blow when you are dismissed from Middleton School,"
said Miss Worrick, glad to find a point in Kitty's hitherto invulnerable
armor. "Come with me at once, you bad girl. I must explain your conduct
to Miss Sherrard."

"I have something on my own account to say to Miss Sherrard," answered
Kitty in a proud voice; "something which will explain a good deal."

"I am glad to hear it; but I scarcely think any words of yours can
remove the stigma on your character. But come; I have no time to argue
with you further."

Miss Worrick now led the way into Miss Sherrard's little sitting-room.
Miss Sherrard was standing near the window; she turned quickly when she
saw Miss Worrick, and a displeased and withal a troubled glance filled
her eyes as they rested upon Kitty."

"Anything fresh?" she said, turning to the teacher with a weary
expression in her voice.

"Only just what I expected," said Miss Worrick with bitterness. "Kitty
Malone is not to be trusted. Yesterday she gave her word of honor----"

"I didn't," interrupted Kitty.

"Kitty my dear, allow your teacher to speak."

"She gave her word of honor, or equivalent to it, that she would submit
to the punishment which you rightly inflicted upon her. Well, I found
her just now in the act of smuggling a note into Elma Lewis' hand."

"Oh, but this is very bad, Kitty," said Miss Sherrard. "Did you not know
what your word of honor meant?"

"I never promised anything," replied Kitty. "You spoke; but I was
silent."

"Pardon me, my dear; that is begging the question. You were told that
you were not to communicate with any of your fellow-pupils. Your silence
signified consent. Kitty, I am ashamed of you."

"As you know so much you may as well know all," said Kitty, desperation
in her tone. "I did far worse than you think. Last night I went out
again after dark by myself to see Elma Lewis. I had an interview with
her. I talked to her, and she talked to me. That was not exactly her
fault; for I forced her to speak. Now, you know how very bad I am. Expel
me if you wish. I know you will after this. I am in dreadful disgrace. I
only wish I were dead."

"Leave us, Miss Worrick," said Miss Sherrard.

The door was closed behind the governess; and the head-mistress, taking
one of Kitty's cold hands, led her to a seat near herself on the sofa.

"There is more behind," she said. "Kitty, you must tell me the truth."

"I long to tell you," answered Kitty. "A short time back I had made up
my mind to conceal it because the telling would make another girl
miserable--miserable for life. Now my feelings are changed."

"I am glad that you are at last willing to confide in me," said Miss
Sherrard in a kinder tone. "Tell me everything, Kitty, and as quickly as
you can."

Thus counseled, Kitty's reserve absolutely gave way. The whole miserable
story was quickly revealed: Elma Lewis' request for money; Kitty's
generous response; Laurie's passionate and anguished letter; Kitty's
desire to help him; her reasons, which had almost driven her mad, for
seeking Elma; her desperate resolve at last to go to her late at night;
then Elma's passionate beseeching of her to keep the secret; Kitty's
promise that she would do so until after morning school that day; then
her further resolve, when she saw the look of misery on Elma's face, to
keep it altogether even at the cost of breaking Laurie's heart; then
Elma's conduct when the note was discovered.

"I scorn her now," said Kitty. "I don't regard any promise I ever made
to her. I am glad to tell. She is false, cowardly, and I scorn her. Miss
Sherrard, you know everything; expel me if you must."

"Yes, I know everything," replied Miss Sherrard. She sat still for a few
moments, lost in anxious thought. She blamed Kitty still, but she also
deeply pitied her. Her feelings toward Elma were so strong that she
could scarcely trust herself to speak of them at the present moment.

"My honor is gone, and my heart is broken," continued Kitty. "Of course
you will expel me after this; and, indeed, I want to go home. Please,
Miss Sherrard, let me go home; I cannot stay any longer at school."

"My dear Kitty," said Miss Sherrard, "I am very sorry for you. I am
certainly glad at last to know the truth. You, poor child, have been
more sinned against than sinning. I cannot tell you what I think about
Elma. Such a girl does more mischief in a school than twenty like you.
Stay, my dear; stop crying. Kitty, Kitty, what is it?"

"I feel nearly mad--Laurie is in such trouble. May I not at least answer
his telegram?"

"Yes, here is a telegraph form. Fill in what you like; I will send it at
once to the post office."

"Miss Sherrard, would it be possible for you to lend me the money?"

Miss Sherrard shook her head.

"I could not do it, Kitty; nor would it be right. Your brother has done
distinctly wrong; and if you telegraph to him now I hope you will
counsel him to go straight to your father and confess everything. There
is never the least use in concealment where wrong-doing is concerned, my
dear."

But Kitty's eyes had now blazed again with renewed passion.

"You are not a Malone nor an Irishwoman," she cried. "You do not know
Ireland, or you would not speak in that tone. I counsel Laurie to tell
father what he did to poor Paddy Wheel-about! I counsel him to say that
he took the old man's coat--stole it from him! Miss Sherrard, you don't
know father. Laurie did it, it is true, in a fit of bravado; but father
would never understand. He would be furious, wild; Le would punish him
severely. Oh, I must get that money somehow, in some fashion!"

"Kitty, you are speaking disrespectfully," said Miss Sherrard, "and I
cannot allow it. I am sorry for you, my dear; you are dreadfully
overcome at present. Go home now; I will see you again in the
afternoon."

Poor Kitty left the room without even bidding her teacher good-by.




CHAPTER XX.

AN EYE-OPENER.


In her own room the miserable child fell on her knees, and gave way to a
burst of passionate weeping. She cried as she had never cried in the
whole course of her life before; her tears seemed as though they could
not cease. She was so exhausted at last that, kneeling by her little
bed, she fell into a sound sleep. In her sleep she dreamed that she was
home again; but all was confusion, worry, distress. Laurie was going to
a school in England; Laurie's heart was broken. Old Paddy Wheel-about
was dead; the squire was so upset and so angry that he would not even
allow Kitty herself to comfort him. Aunt Honora was grumbling and going
from room to room in the old Castle. Aunt Bridget was talking about
dress, and scolding Kitty with regard to the state of her wardrobe.
Kitty's head ached, and she felt a sense of irritation.

"And it's so pretty," said Aunt Honora. "Those ruffles round the skirt
are done in such a dainty manner, and--oh, I won't disturb you if you'll
allow me just to take the pattern. I can in a moment--don't move, don't
move!"

Kitty opened her eyes in some bewilderment, and gazed full into the fat
and somewhat red face of Carrie Lewis. It was Carrie's voice she had
heard, piercing through her dreams. It was Carrie who was bending by
her side and holding up a length of her skirt in her hand.

"Oh, don't move, pray; I have just got the set of it; it's very curious
and very fashionable. I know Sam would like it awfully."

"Who are you, and what do you want?" said Kitty, jumping to her feet and
confronting her unwelcome visitor with flushed cheeks and sparkling
eyes.

"I knocked at your door several times, and you didn't answer," said
Carrie; "so then I opened it softly and came in, and you were
half-sitting, half-kneeling by your bed, sound asleep; and your skirt
did look so very fashionable that I was tempted!--oh yes, I have taken
the pattern in my mind's eye. I'll alter my blue nun's-veiling. I can
easily get a bit more of the stuff to match, and it will make it quite
_comme il fait_,"

"But who are you?" said Kitty, who had never laid eyes on Carrie before.

"I'm Elma's sister. Now you know."

"Elma's sister?" said Kitty. "But what have you come to my room for?
What do you want here?"

"To speak to you. I want to help you if you'll let me."

"To help me?" said Kitty languidly. "I would much rather you went away.
You cannot help me; you know nothing whatever about me. I am in great
great trouble, and I would much rather be alone."

"You would not rather be alone if you could be helped," said Carrie. "I
know all about it. You have got a brother in Ireland who has got into a
scrape. Bless you, I know all about the scrapes of young men. Now, poor
Sam Raynes, he----. Yes, what is it, Miss Malone?"

"I wish you would leave me," said Kitty in a haughty tone. "I am not
friends with Elma just now, and I would rather not see any of her
family."

"Yes, but I think you'll see me when I tell you my errand," said Carrie,
in no way abashed by Kitty's manner. She crossed the room as she spoke,
and deliberately placing herself in the one easy-chair the room
possessed, crossed her legs, and leaning back, looked fixedly at Kitty.

"Very well, if you won't go, then I must," said Kitty. "I don't
understand English people. They talk a great deal about manners; but no
Irishwoman, none that I ever heard of, would dream----"

"Oh, bosh! Stop all that," said Carrie in her rudest voice. "I have come
here to help you, and I see that I must explain myself. You want some
money, don't you?"

"Yes; but I cannot get it," answered Kitty.

"Oh, my dear, do just stay still a moment. What a sweet little shoe!
Did you get it at any shop here?"

"No," answered Kitty, interested for the moment in spite of herself.
"Aunt Honora bought these in Grafton Street, Dublin. They have the
nicest shoes in that special shop of any place I know. Do you like it?"

"Oh, it is quite sweet; it is the way the heel is arranged, and that
little buckle."

"Well, never mind about my shoes now," said Kitty, pushing the
attractive little foot well in under her skirt. "What is it you have
come to say? Please say it, and then--go."

"I will, if you wish me to. Look here, I know all about your story. You
are in dreadful trouble, and so is Elma; but I do declare I think poor
Elma's trouble much worse than yours."

"You know nothing about it," cried Kitty, with passion. "Elma in worse
trouble! Oh, if you only could guess!"

"I guess well enough," said Carrie, "and so does Elma. You want money,
which, evidently, as a rule, is as plentiful to you as blackberries on
the hedges in September; and you think, because you cannot lay your hand
on that money immediately, the whole world is going to change. But let
me tell you that Elma and I want money far, far more badly than you have
any idea of. Until you gave Elma that eight pounds, we neither of us
ever in our lives had so much in our possession."

"I didn't give it--you make a mistake--I lent it."

"Oh, it is all the same. Elma had it, and, for practical purposes, it
was just as valuable as if it were really her own."

"Well, I want her to give it back to me now. I surely have a right to
ask for my own money back again?"

"No, you have not--not without reasonable notice. She asked you to lend
her some money--she never asked for eight pounds--you let her take it.
You said she might have as much as she liked. When she explained the
position of things to me, I said: 'Elma, you were a rare fool not to
take the whole fifteen.'"

"You must be a very queer girl," said Kitty, astonished at this
remarkable specimen of young ladyhood.

"Am I? I don't know. I am frank, and I am generally hard-up. I know, if
any one does, where the shoe pinches. Bless you! it would do you good to
open your eyes. You don't know what poverty means--a little house, a
disgusting little house, shabby paper, dirty ceilings, badly-carpeted
floors, the drains wrong, the water-supply as likely to poison us as
not, an invalid mother--"

"Oh, have you a mother? Then, I am sure you are not to be pitied,"
interrupted Kitty.

"Little you know! What good is a mother who is in bed most of the day, a
father who--Well, I need not mention him; he is not in the country at
any rate. No education to speak of; no dress worth considering; toil,
toil from morning till night; and life a mere scramble, a scramble for
bread without butter. That's what our life is!"

Kitty had ceased to fidget; she even sank down on the corner of the
nearest chair. Her pretty figure, her beautifully-appointed dress, her
whole appearance, from the crown of her head to the sole of her foot,
betokened what the other girl could never aspire to, never hope to
have--abundance of money. And yet at the present moment Kitty was
breaking her heart for want of money. No wonder Carrie was puzzled.
Kitty's own eyes were opened to an extent they had never been opened
before.

"Yes, our life is a rough one," continued Carrie; "very rough indeed;
but I don't grumble. I was brought up to it, and use is half the
battle, as perhaps you don't know, but you ought. You'll get accustomed
to doing without your eight pounds after a bit, and never give it
another thought."

"Oh, no, that I won't," said Kitty, now jumping to her feet in her
indignation; "and it is not for myself, it is for----"

"Oh, never mind who it is for. You want it, and you think the world is
going to stand still because you cannot get it. Well, the world won't
stand still. I, who am quite used to doing without money, can assure you
as to the truth of that fact. Would you like to know, now, how I spend
my days? I teach some horrid children in a small private school from ten
to one each morning, and then in the afternoon I go to a family and
teach some more little brats; and I am scarcely paid anything for all
this toil--starvation wages I call it--and I hate it, hate it. But I
have my consolations. I am not overparticular; very small pleasures
content me; and there's a fellow whom I love."

"A fellow whom you love?" echoed Kitty; "is it a brother?"

"Bless you, I'm not likely to put myself out about a brother; not that I
have one, and so much the better, thank goodness. There's a man whom I
love, and a right jolly fellow he is--his name is Sam Raynes. He is not
one of your fine, bread-and-butter gentlemen--not he. He is rough and
ready, and he has his joke, and he isn't too handsome, although some
people admire red hair; but, anyhow, I'm fond of him and he's fond of
me, and some day--I don't know when--when we can scrape enough
together, we are going to set up housekeeping."

"You are going to marry; is that it?" said Kitty.

"Yes; some day we'll marry. Now, you see, that's a bit of fun for me;
and I can go out with Sam on bank holidays and on Sunday afternoons just
like any other girl with her young man. Bless you, I don't mind."

"I wonder what all this is leading up to," said Kitty, with a slight
yawn. "Of course, it is very interesting to you; but I don't care about
your young man."

"No more you do, you haughty little minx; and I wouldn't bother you
about him, for, with all his faults, he's too good to have words wasted
about him to a little independent chit of a thing like you. But, as I
was saying, I'm not talking for nothing, I'm leading up to something.
Now, I am content enough with our lot; but Elma isn't. Elma is quite
different from me--she has got a great deal of refinement about her."

"Has she indeed?" said Kitty in a voice of scorn.

"Yes, she has, and you needn't contradict me. She's a very clever girl,
is Elma. I don't say that she's always as straight as a die--I don't
pretend that she is; but she is a clever girl, and she is fond of her
books, and she's likely to get on--that is, if you don't spike her
guns."

"What do you mean?"

"Oh, well, it's only an expression of mine. I heard Sam use it last
week. I often copy his phrases, they're so fine and full of flourish.
Well, now, if you don't spoil sport, Elma will get into an altogether
different circle from your humble servant. Mother and I will go one way,
and Elma another. Elma, with her grand notions and her set-you-up sort
of airs, will rise in life. She's heartily welcome to go her own way,
and I wish her Godspeed, for she is the only sister I have got."

"I don't understand," interrupted Kitty.

"If you'll let me speak I'll soon explain. You don't suppose that girls
such as I am are often to be seen at Middleton School?"

"Well, I have not seen any like you," said Kitty, gazing from head to
foot at her very peculiar visitor.

"No more you have, bless you; and I'm not the least offended by your
very frank stare. Sam admires me, and that's enough for me. Now, Elma
looks a lady, doesn't she?"

"I suppose so," said Kitty in a dubious tone.

"You suppose so indeed! Let me tell you that Elma is a born little lady,
a real lady, and she looks it, every inch of her. That is why she goes
to Middleton School; but now, who do you think pay for her?"

"How can I tell?"

"Do you think mother, or father, or I? Now, who do you think does? I
should be interested to know your thoughts."

"I cannot really tell you, Miss Lewis."

"Oh, it does sound fine to hear you Miss Lewising me. My name is
Carrie."

"I prefer to call you Miss Lewis."

"Highty! tighty! we are haughty. Well, the person who pays for Elma is
our Aunt Charlotte--a certain Mrs. Steward, wife of the Reverend John
Steward, rector of St. Bartholomew's, Buckinghamshire. There's a grand
enough name for you; and I suppose, being a clergyman, you'll consider
that he is a gentleman and that his wife is a lady. Aunt Charlotte
happens to be own sister to mother; and when Elma made her little
complaint to her she took pity on her; and now she pays all her expenses
at Middleton School. And if Elma does well and nothing disagreeable
comes to Aunt Charlotte's ears, she will send her presently to Newnham
or Girton. Think of that I Elma will be a college girl; she will be an
undergraduate of one of the universities--and some day a graduate; and
then she will get a first-class post as high-school mistress, or
mistress of something or other. But if you tell on her and make things
bad, and the truth gets out--You look pale; are you ill?"

"I am all right," said Kitty. She staggered across the room and poured
some water into a glass.

"I did not eat much lunch," she continued; "and I am--Never mind; go
on."

"Well," continued Carrie, "if nothing comes to Aunt Charlotte's ears to
turn her mind the other way, Elma will be all right; she will move in
your sphere--yes, she will, whether you like it or not. She is just so
clever she is able to do anything. So I have come to say that I hope to
goodness you won't split on her, for it would be mighty cruel of you.
You would ruin her for life, and that would be a nice consolation for
you when you came to die. She did not steal your money, remember; you
gave it to her."

"I lent it to her."

"Oh, how you will harp upon that! But you didn't tell her to a day when
she was to pay it back again."

"No, I certainly did not; but, of course, I expected that she would
return it to me when I asked for it; and then she spent it on dress."

"Spent it on dress? What do you mean?"

"She told me so."

"Oh, naughty, naughty little Elma!" said Carrie, shaking her forefinger
in a very knowing manner "She didn't like to tell about Sam, and so she
made up that story, did she? Well, it was an untruth. She didn't spend
that money on dress; she--well, I will tell you--I stole it from her."

"You!" gasped Kitty, backing away in horror.

"Yes. Good gracious! how scared you are! You don't understand the larks
of girls like me. I didn't mean any harm. I took it and gave it to Sam
to keep for her."

"Then," said Kitty, coming close up to Carrie, her lips parted, the
color flooding her cheeks, her eyes full of light, "then, of course,
you, Carrie----"

"Oh, I'm Carrie now, am I?"

"Yes, you are; but never mind. Then, you, Carrie, can get it back for
me?"

"So I will, all in good time, my pretty little dear. You shall have the
money if you are willing to wait, say a month."

"There's no use at all in that," said Kitty, her voice sounding faint
and far away.

"I am afraid there must be, as far as that eight pounds is concerned.
The fact is, Sam is speculating with the money, and when we get it back
it will be doubled. Elma and I will divide the profits between us, and
you shall have your eight pounds back. Now, I think I have told you
everything except--"

"And, having told me, I wish you would go away," said Kitty. "I don't
know that you have bettered matters in any way. Of course I am sorry for
Elma; but it is only right that you should know something. It would be
well also for Elma to know the truth. I told her yesterday when I went
to your house that I would keep her secret until after morning school."

"Good gracious! You have not blurted out the truth?"

"Wait till you hear. When I was at school this morning I was--oh so
miserable! I could not help thinking of--But never mind; you would not
understand."

"No, no, of course not; pray proceed."

"I was thinking how soon I might tell."

"Nice sort of creature you are!"

"Why will you interrupt me?" said Kitty. "But then I looked at Elma, and
I saw that she seemed very anxious and miserable; and wretched as I was,
I made up my mind to be kind to her. I said to myself I will keep her
secret; and--and I wrote her a note to tell her so. You would not
understand if I said any more; but--but immediately after morning school
she--she was false to me; utterly false. You ask her when you see her
how she received that letter I wrote to her at the risk of getting into
terrible trouble myself. I have been angry, furious, beside myself; and
now Miss Sherrard knows everything."

"You don't mean it?" said Carrie. Her florid face had turned perfectly
white. She bit her lip and looked out of the window. After a time she
looked back again at Kitty, and said slowly:

"You are very cruel, and you have ruined Elma; but after all it is
partly my fault. I ought not to have taken that money. Now, look here,
shall I tell you what I really came for to-day?"

"If you would do so quickly and then go."

"You won't be in such a hurry to part from me when you know the truth.
Now, then, listen. You want some money; I think I see a way to getting
it for you."

"Do you really?"

"Yes, I do; that is, if you on your part will do what I want."

"I will do anything to get the money. I want to send it to Laurie if I
can this evening. There's nothing I would not give you."

"I will remember that small promise presently," said Carrie in a frank
voice. "But now let me tell you what my plan is. You have a great many
clothes, have you not?"

"Yes; but please don't bother me about them now. I was always fond of
pretty dress; but I should not care if I had to wear rags at the present
moment if only I might get that eight pounds."

"If them's your sentiments," said Carrie, "you very soon can have your
wish."

"What in the world do you mean?"

"Why, this. If you'll just allow me to take the pick of your wardrobe I
can take away the things and sell them. I'll soon bring back the eight
pounds--yes, and for that matter ten too."

"Sell my clothes?" said Kitty. She stared at the other girl as if she
did not believe the evidence of her own senses.

"Yes. Did you never hear of a pawnshop, you dear little wiseacre?"

"A pawnshop! Do you think I would allow my clothes to go to a pawnshop?"

"I know nothing whatever about it; but I make you the proposal. I will
transact the business for you if you'll allow me ten per cent, upon it.
I can get you the money."

"Oh, Carrie, it seems such a bitter shame," said Kitty. Her face was
crimson; she went to the other side of the room, opened the window and
put out her head. She wanted the cool air to soothe her scorched cheeks;
her heart was thumping in her breast. Had matters indeed come to this,
that she, Kitty Malone, was to pawn her pretty dresses, her trinkets,
her whatnots! Alas! she could not do it.

"I have often had to do it," said Carrie. "I know just how to manage. If
you'll allow me to select the most suitable of your things, I'll bring
you back the money in no time."

"You are sure?" said Kitty, beginning to yield.

"Certain--sure--positive. But you must allow me ten per cent."

"I know nothing about percentage; but you may take every scrap that is
over after you have got me the eight pounds."

"Very well, that's a liberal offer," said Carrie. "Now, then, I may as
well take a look at your clothes."

"Oh, it seems such an awful thing to do," said Kitty. "Are you sure,
quite sure, that no one will find it out?"

"Not a bit of it; that is, if you'll be quick and not allow that other
girl--Alice, you call her--to come into the room."

"I'll lock the door," said Kitty. She rushed across the room with new
hope, turned the key, and came back again to Carrie.

"I never heard of anything quite so extraordinary in my life," she said.
"And you--you call yourself a lady?"

"No, I don't; I call myself a good-natured lump of a girl."

"Well, perhaps you are; but to pawn one's things! Do you mean that I
will never see them again?"

"Oh, yes; whenever you like to return the money. They'll be kept safe
enough for you. If you don't return the money, of course, they belong to
the pawnbroker; but you have lots of time to think of that. Look here,
I'll pawn them for a month; that will give you heaps of time to look
round."

"So it will," said Kitty. "And are you quite, quite certain that I shall
have the money to-night?"

"Oh, yes, if you won't talk so much, only act. Now, then, open your
wardrobe."

Kitty unlocked the door of the mahogany wardrobe which she shared with
Alice, and Carrie began to pull her choice little garments about.

Kitty went and stood by the window.

"Don't you want to know what I am taking?" said Carrie. "Don't you want
to make a selection?"

"No; I'll leave it all to you. I can't bear to see them. Take--take what
you want."

"Goodness, what a girl!" thought Carrie to herself. "Here's an
opportunity for me."

She made a hasty and very wise selection, choosing the richest dresses,
the most stylish jackets, skirts, shoes, ribbons, gloves--clipping the
feathers out of the hats and the flowers from the toques--throwing in
some of the finest cambric handkerchiefs; and then, taking a sheet of
brown paper which she had put into a basket on her arm when she left
home, she folded the things into it and fastened her parcel with stout
string.

"Here I am," she said; "and this is my parcel. I have looked through
your wardrobe; your clothes are neat, fine, some of them gaudy, but all
good. I can get from three to four pounds for this lot."

"But why don't you take enough to get the eight pounds?" said Kitty, who
had quite made up her mind by this time.

"I could not carry any more. Now, then, open your jewel-case, quick."

"My jewel-case. Oh! I cannot part with my jewels."

"You must, if you want your eight pounds by to-night. I know my
pawnbroker. He won't give five pounds for this little parcel. Now then,
be quick. Oh, there I see Alice Denvers coming up the road with that
other fine young lady, Bessie Challoner. Where's your jewel-case?"

Kitty's face was like a sheet.

"I have not any jewels," she said; "or scarcely any worth mentioning. I
didn't bring any jewels with me. But here's my watch; will that do?"

"Do--rather! Why, it's a beauty. Don't say a word to the others; keep
your own counsel. Now, then, I'll be off to the pawnshop, and you shall
have the money to-night. _Au revoir! an revoir!_"




CHAPTER XXI.

THE LADY FROM BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


Mrs. Steward was a great contrast to Mrs. Lewis. Mrs. Steward was a
tall, thin, rather refined-looking woman. Mrs. Lewis was fat and dumpy,
decidedly untidy in appearance, with a melancholy air and a habit of
constantly indulging in low weeping. Mrs. Steward looked as if she had
never wept in her life; she sat upright as a dart, her movements were
quick, her manners independent; she had a vivacious eye, a somewhat
short nose, thin lips, and a very decided manner.

Mrs. Steward and Mrs. Lewis had a long conversation in the untidy, ugly
little parlor, while they waited for Elma to return from school. Maggie
had been going in and out, glancing with some apprehension at the lady,
and then whisking back to her kitchen to sigh profoundly and mourn for
the violets which were no longer in her possession.

"I should like something to eat," said Mrs. Steward to her sister. "I
thought I would come to you for lunch, Caroline. Have you got anything
in the house--a lamb chop or even cold lamb and salad will do quite
nicely."

"My dear Charlotte," said Mrs. Lewis, laying her fat, tremulous hand
upon her sister's firm but thin arm, "do you think it likely that we
often have lamb chops or even cold lamb and salad for lunch? It is true
that since the Australian meat came in we can now and then indulge in a
very small joint of lamb for Sundays, but certainly on no other day. Ah,
Charlotte, you little know the poverty to which your poor sister is
subjected."

"I know all about it," said Mrs. Stewart, shaking herself angrily, "and
my plain answer to you is this--as you sow you must reap. What else did
you expect when you married that fool of a man, James Lewis?"

Mrs. Lewis made a great endeavor to rise from the sofa, she made a
further effort to look dignified; but all she could really accomplish
was to burst into a fresh wail of low weeping and to murmur under her
breath, "Charlotte, you are cruel to me, you are cruel."

"I don't mean to be, my dear; but really, Caroline, you do annoy me.
Have you no spunk at all in your composition? Are you still fretting
your heart out for that good-for-nothing man?"

"Well, you see, I love him," said the poor wife. "The parting from my
dear husband was a terrible trial. I think of him at all hours both day
and night. I often have an uncontrollable desire to join him in
Australia."

"Pray yield to it," said Mrs. Steward in the calmest of voices, "and
when you go, take that great lout of a Caroline with you. She is as like
you in appearance as one pea is like another. I am ashamed of you. Now,
let us turn to a more congenial topic. Little Elma, I am glad to say,
is made of very different stuff."

"Oh, Elma is a good girl," said Mrs. Lewis. At that moment Maggie came
into the room.

"Have you ordered your servant to prepare any lunch for me?" said Mrs.
Steward.

"Well, really--" Mrs. Lewis looked imploringly and with a vacant eye at
Maggie.

"There's the remains of the salt beef, mum," said that small worthy,
dropping a bob of a courtesy as she spoke.

"I couldn't touch it," said Mrs. Steward with a shudder. "Have you got a
fresh egg in the house?"

"Oh, my dear, nothing of the kind--a fresh egg! Fresh eggs are worth
their weight in gold. We have a stale egg, if you don't mind that."

Mrs. Steward indulged in another shudder even more violent than the
last.

"My good girl," she said then, "pray get me a cup of tea and some thin
toast, and be quick about it. See that the tea is really strong and the
cream fresh."

"Cream!" murmured Mrs. Lewis; but Maggie had withdrawn.

"Well, now, that is comfortably settled," said Mrs. Steward, "and I can
tell you what really brought me to town--I have come about Elma."

"Indeed, and what about her?"

"I mean to take her from you."

"To take Elma away from me, my own dear child?"

"Oh, now, come, Caroline, don't sicken me with your false sentiment. It
is a precious good thing for Elma that she has got an aunt ready and
willing to help her. I have just arranged to send her to a first-class
German school. Her English, I should say, was fair, and she will be
taken as pupil-teacher; she will thus have the advantage of learning
German. I heard of this through a great friend of mine, Fräulein Van
Brunt. She is going to Germany herself next week, and will take Elma, if
you can spare her."

"If I can spare her? But it will break my heart--such a sensible girl
as she is," said poor Mrs. Lewis.

"Come, come, Carrie, no more nonsense; when I explain all the advantages
you will see for yourself how all-important it is that Elma should go.
The school is in the Harz Mountains, a splendid place; magnificent air,
and all the rest. If Elma stays there for two years, I will then have
her home, and send her to Girton as I promised. I will further arrange
that she spends her holidays with me, as I think really--" here Mrs.
Steward glanced round the shabby room--"I think that the less she
remains with her own family for the present the better."

"I see what you mean. I am beneath my own child."

"Beneath her. Well, it is a painful thing to say; but, as you put it so
frankly, I must reply in the affirmative," replied Mrs. Steward. "Ah,
who is this now?"

The door was flung open, and Carrie, very red about the face, and with
her parcel under her arm, entered the room. Her intention was to ask her
mother to accompany her to the pawnshop. It had not been the first nor
the second nor the third time that the unfortunate lady had been obliged
to pawn her things. Carrie thought that her parent could make a better
bargain than she could herself, and she hoped that she would have been
in time to transact this little business before the arrival of her aunt.
She now gave a start of dismay, and, dropping the parcel, sank down on
the nearest chair. As she did so Kitty's watch and chain tumbled out of
the front of her dress, where she had very insecurely fastened them. The
watch was a lovely one, with an enameled back studded with pearls, and
the chain was made of eighteen-carat gold. Owing to a warning glance
from Carrie, Mrs. Lewis refrained from saying a word; but Mrs. Steward
had no idea of keeping her emotions to herself.

"You, I presume, are Carrie," she said, looking at her niece. "Come
here, Carrie, and speak to your aunt."

Carrie advanced as if she were treading on buttered eggs. She held out
one dimpled hand gingerly.

"How do you do, my dear? Allow me to congratulate you on the acquisition
of that very lovely little watch and that splendid chain. Now, I am
devoured with curiosity to know who has given them to you. Surely not
your mother? Surely, Caroline, with all your faults, you have not----"

"Oh, dear me, no," said Mrs. Lewis.

Carrie indulged in a loud laugh.

"Bless us, aunt," she cried, "do you suppose mother can afford to give
me these? No, I--" She grew red and turned away.

Mrs. Lewis fidgeted on her seat, and appeared thoroughly uncomfortable.

"I do not wish to pry into your secrets, Caroline," said Mrs. Steward,
favoring the untidy and vulgar-looking girl with a glance full of
reprehension. "You are at liberty to wear handsome watches and chains
made of the best gold if your mother cares to see you with things so
unsuitable to your class and appearance. Your doings in life are no
affair of mine. But now, as you happen to be my niece, will you have the
kindness to go immediately into the kitchen and tell Maggie, or whatever
the name of your servant is, to hurry with that tea and toast."

Carrie was only too glad to dart from the room. She picked up her
parcel, and resorted to the kitchen.

"Oh, Miss Carrie, I do wish you would help me," said Maggie, who was
flying distractedly about. "There's the kitchen fire all but out, and
the lady ordered toast as crisp as you please. I don't believe we can do
it for her. Wouldn't she be content with thin bread and butter curled in
rolls?"

"Oh, of course she would, and must," said Carrie. "She is in no end of a
temper, and for my part I don't wish to humor her. Yes, of course,
Maggie. I'll cut the bread and butter and make it into rolls, and you
see to the tea."

"Thank you, miss, I'm sure I'm much obliged, and perhaps, miss, you
wouldn't mind taking it into the dining-room, for her eyes do fasten on
to you that fierce that I get all of a tremble, and as likely as not
I'll drop the tray."

Carrie laughed, and being at heart good-natured in her own way, helped
Maggie with some vigor to prepare the tea.

At last a meal, which could not be remarked for its abundance, was
forthcoming, and was brought into the dining-room.

"I ordered toast," said Mrs. Steward in an angry voice.

"I am sorry, Aunt Charlotte," said Carrie; "but the fire happened to be
out in the kitchen. You see," she added, somewhat spitefully, "we are
obliged to economize with coals, and we don't keep a fire up in the
middle of the day."

"Well, I am really so famished that I am content with anything," said
the good lady. "Pour me out a cup of tea at once, my dear, and just put
the bread and butter where I can reach it."

Carrie did so, winking at her mother as she arranged the tray. The next
moment Mrs. Lewis went out into the passage. Carrie followed her,
closing the door behind their guest.

"Mother, I want you to come with me to the Sign of the Three Balls."

"What in the world for, Carrie?"

"I have got to pawn some things, some beautiful things, and I am to get
ten per cent, on the commission. I shall turn over a nice little bit of
money, and you can have your favorite supper. You will come, won't you,
mother? And I'll give you half a crown into the bargain."

"Oh, dear, dear," said Mrs. Lewis, "I wish she had not come! She never
helps me in any way. All she does is to scold me and make me more
depressed than I am already. And she blames me so for marrying your poor
father, Carrie; as if I could help that now. And what do you think she
is going to do? She says she is going to take Elma from us."

"And a good thing, too," said Carrie.

"Carrie, what an unnatural girl you are! Do you mean to say you would be
glad to part from your sister?"

"I would, because I am fond of her, and she has got into the most awful
scrape at school. Don't you put any spoke in her wheel, mother, for
goodness' sake!"

At that moment the latchkey was heard in the lock, and Elma herself
appeared on the scene.

"Oh, good gracious! Elma," cried Carrie, darting up to her sister, and
beginning to whisper vigorously into her ear.

"What?" said Elma, with a start of dismay. "So soon?"

"Yes, yes; she's been here for nearly an hour. She is devouring rolled
bread and butter and tea in the dining-room at present. She asked for
toast----"

"Yes," interrupted Mrs. Lewis, who now came up and began also to
whisper; "yes, and fresh eggs, and cream, and lamb chops, and cold lamb
and salad. I never heard of anything so unreasonable. My poor head is in
an awful whirl. But she has come about you, Elma. She wants to take you
away with her."

"She wants to take me away with her?" exclaimed Elma, starting, and her
pale face flushing.

"And you had better go, Elma, and be quick about it," said Carrie,
giving her a warning glance.

"I don't know what all this means," said Elma, her heart beating
uncomfortably fast; "but I had better go in and see Aunt Charlotte."

"Yes, my love, yes; and while you are talking to her I--What do you
say, Carrie--you and I might go out upon that little matter of business,
might we not?"

"To be sure, mother; an excellent thought. If you stay here I'll run
upstairs and fetch your bonnet, veil, and mantle in a twinkling. Go in
to Aunt Charlotte, Elma; do, for goodness sake, make yourself of use.
More depends on it than you think. If she hears us whispering and
mattering in the hall she'll be out upon us."

Elma instinctively put up her two hands to smooth back her hair, she
straightened her already perfectly neat little jacket, and, drawing
herself up to her full _petite_ height, entered the little dining-room.

Elma was a perfect contrast to her untidy mother and her frowzy sister.
However poorly dressed, she was always the pink of neatness. She was
full of agitation now and nervous fear, but not a trace of these
emotions could be visible in her manner and appearance. She went up to
her Aunt Charlotte, who for her part held out both her arms and, drawing
the girl down, printed a kiss upon her cheek.

"I am really glad to see you, Elma," exclaimed Mrs. Steward. "Sit near
me, my dear; it is a pity you were not in when I arrived. It was the
least you might have done for your aunt, Elma. You had my letter this
morning. Oh, my poor child, I have gone through a dreadful hour! These
vulgar relations of yours grow worse and worse."

"My mother and sister?" murmured Elma.

"Yes; it is a terrible affliction for you. But, my dear, I am going to
relieve you from the strain. I, your aunt, am coming to the rescue.
There, Elma, pour me out another cup of tea, and I will tell you
everything."

Elma raised the teapot, she filled her aunt's cup with fresh tea, added
a little milk, and brought it to her side.

"Thank you, my dear. Now, Elma, you may consider yourself a made girl."

"Made?" echoed Elma, turning her white face to Mrs. Steward.

"Yes, made. What would you say to going abroad?"

Elma's eyes brightened.

"Do you mean on the Continent?"

"Yes, I do, my dear child. To no less a place than the Harz Mountains. I
have heard of a most charming school, fifty times better than Middleton
School; and you are to go there, my dear Elma, at my expense. You will
go as pupil-teacher, and you thus acquire perfect German. Think what
that will mean for you! I propose to leave you in Germany for two years,
and at the end of that time you will return and go to Girton, I being
responsible for all your expenses. My dear, your fortune is made. I have
further arranged with your poor unfortunate mother that you spend the
holidays with me, as it is not to be expected that you can associate any
longer with such a person, nor with that frowzy young woman who calls
herself your sister."

Elma did not speak. This news which would have delighted her at another
and less harassing moment, was now fraught with perplexity and alarm. At
the same time she thought she saw in it a possible means of escape.
Suppose Aunt Charlotte took her away at once, before Kitty had time to
tell what she knew, before Middleton School had time to ring with the
news of her dishonor. Oh, if so, she might indeed be saved!

"Am I to go immediately?" she asked, choking down a strangled sob in her
throat, "or am I to stay at Middleton School till the end of the term?"

"Well, dear, that is the awkward part, for of course you are working
very hard for a prize, are you not?"

"I am working for a small scholarship," answered Elma. "If I succeed in
my examination I shall obtain a scholarship in English Literature worth
ten pounds a year for three years. That would be a very large sum to me,
Aunt Charlotte."

"A large sum to you! I should think it would be a large sum to anybody,"
said Mrs. Steward in a severe tone. "Ten pounds is quite a fortune for
any young girl. Pray don't begin to speak of money in that disparaging
sort of way, Elma; it ill suits your circumstances, my love. But now,
dear, I am sorry to disappoint you--I have heard of an admirable escort;
a certain Fräulein Van Brunt is going to the Harz Mountains next Monday;
it will therefore be necessary for me to take you back to
Buckinghamshire to-night, Elma."

"Oh, Aunt Charlotte, I am glad!" burst from Elma's lips.

"Glad to leave your mother and sister?" said Mrs, Steward, looking
severely at the young girl. "After all, they are the last people you
ought to associate with; but still natural ties, my dear Elma."

"Oh, I am sorry to leave them, I am sorry to go; I am both glad and
sorry," gasped poor Elma. "I have been worried, and am glad to get out
of everything."

"Worried! I suppose with that dreadful sister and your poor, muddled
mother. Her unfortunate habit of weeping has reduced the little brain
she possessed to a state of pap. Of course I know she is not well off;
but all she absolutely could offer me in this house was a stale egg, and
not even toast. Oh, I scorn to complain, but--I know this is not your
wish, Elma. Your ideas were always very different, my dear child."

Elma did not say anything; she was fidgeting with her hand, making a
slight noise with the teaspoon which she was tapping against a saucer.
The noise was irritating to Mrs. Steward's easily-affected nerves.

"That calm of manner which I trust you will acquire after you have had
the advantages which I am giving you will soon show you how very
unpleasant those little tattoos and small noises are, Elma," remarked
the good lady, taking the teaspoon severely out of her niece's hand.
"Yes, my dear, you are to come with me to-night; that is, of course--"

"What do you mean by 'of course,' Aunt Charlotte?"

"After I have seen your head-mistress, Miss Sherrard."

"Do you want to see Miss Sherrard?" asked Elma, a note of alarm in her
voice.

"Certainly; and I am going immediately to the school. You will not be
admitted into the admirable school in Germany without a testimonial from
your present teacher; and I am going to Miss Sherrard in order to
secure one. It will, of course be merely a matter of form my asking for
it, for your conduct has always been admirable--admirable in the
extreme. Miss Sherrard has written to me about you from time to time,
and always spoke of you with affection and admiration. She said your
abilities were good; your moral character without a flaw. I will just
step across to the school now, Elma; and, if you like, you can accompany
me."

Elma hesitated. She did not yet know what had taken place; but when she
had last seen Kitty there was a flash in her eyes the reverse of
assuring. She could only hope against hope that nothing had yet taken
place; that Kitty had still kept her miserable secret. If Miss Sherrard
knew nothing she would of course give her an excellent character; and
she herself would leave Middleton School that afternoon and forever.
Then indeed she might snap her fingers at Kitty and her distress. She
would be saved just at the very moment when she thought her ruin most
imminent.




CHAPTER XXII

STUNNED AND COLD.


"Come, Elma, what are you looking so thoughtful about?" asked Mrs.
Steward in an impatient voice.

"Nothing, Aunt Charlotte," replied Elma, rising to her feet. "I am ready
to go," she added. She sighed as she spoke.

"You must give up that unpleasant habit, my dear child. Nothing
irritates me more than hearing people sigh. It always seems as if they
were discontented and ungrateful to Providence. Now, what have you, for
instance, to sigh about? A singularly fortunate girl, a girl who
possesses an aunt who is willing to take a mother's duties upon her
shoulders. If it were that wretched, vulgar Carrie now, or even my poor
sister herself; but you, Elma, don't let me think that you are
ungrateful to me or I wash my hands of you on the spot."

"Oh, I am nothing of the kind indeed, Aunt Charlotte," replied Elma. "I
always have felt that you--you were more than good to me."

"Well, my dear that's as it should be. I honor your feelings. I often
say to myself and to your uncle-in-law--remember he is not your real
uncle, Elma, but your uncle-in-law, my dear husband, the rector of St.
Bartholomew's--'John,' I say, 'if Elma doesn't show gratitude for all I
am doing for her I shall once and for all give up the human race. I
shall never again expect right feeling from any one." But of course you
are grateful, Elma; you will be the comfort of my old age. You will be
as my own child to me. I--I sometimes think, my dear, that when your
education is finished and you are turned into a refined,
highly-cultivated, highly-trained woman, I will keep you with me. You
shall be my companion, my housekeeper, the one who is to read aloud to
me, to sit with me in the long evenings when my sight begins to fail. My
eyes do ache at times, my dear, I have thought of all that. You will be
my adopted child; not that I can leave you anything in my will, but I
would provide a home for you while I am left in this tabernacle of the
flesh. What do you say, Elma, eh?"

"It is too soon to say anything at present," answered Elma, to whom this
prospect was the reverse of charming. To live as her aunt's unsalaried
companion could not be attractive to her; but she wisely concluded that
sufficient unto the day was the evil thereof, and she had yet to be
educated and brought to that calm of spirit and strain of intellect
which would satisfy Aunt Charlotte.

"Come now at once," said the good lady, who suddenly from being in a
very cross temper became in the best of humor. "We have just nice time
to go across to the school, and then after we have seen Miss Sherrard to
return here for you to pack your things. What do you say, Elma, to our
both staying in London to-night? It would be a pleasant treat for you,
and there may be a few little things necessary to add to your wardrobe,
which I shall have much pleasure in providing you with. Elma, you are in
rare luck. When I think of all I am doing for you I feel that you have
indeed much to be thankful for."

"Yes, Aunt Charlotte," echoed Elma, but her voice sounded faint, and she
brought out her words with an effort.

Leaning on her niece's arm, Mrs. Steward now pursued her way to
Middleton School. Alas! her journey there quickly dissipated her lately
acquired good-humor. She had not gone one hundred yards before she
complained of the dust of the roads, she had not gone two before her
anger was great at the length of the way, and when she found that it was
necessary to mount uphill her complaints became loud grievances--in
short, by the time she really arrived at the school she was in as bad a
temper as Elma had ever seen her in.

"What it is to have a great girl like you hanging on to one, dependent
on one!" she cried. "It was most inconsiderate of Caroline to marry as
she did, and she now even complains when I blame her for it. She is an
extraordinary person. If she had remained single she might have been
living comfortably with me at St. Bartholomew's rectory, and you and
Carrie would never have been in the world plaguing your relatives."

"Well, you see we are in the world," said poor Elma, who felt that she
must just show the faintest spark of spirit. "We did not ask to be
born," she added, "so I don't see that we are to be blamed."

Mrs. Steward favored her with a sharp glance.

"Elma," she said, "if you indulge in pertness I shall wash my hands of
you. Now, here we are. Have the goodness to ring the bell."

The great school door was opened presently by a neat-looking
maid-servant, and Mrs. Steward inquired in a tart voice if Miss Sherrard
was in."

"She is, ma'am," replied the girl; "but she is particularly engaged at
this moment. Oh, is that you, Miss Lewis?" she continued. "Miss Sherrard
is just sending for you, miss; but I don't think the messenger has gone
yet. I'll run and stop him. Will you walk inside, ma'am!"

"A messenger for me!" murmured Elma. She felt terribly uncomfortable;
her face grew whiter than ever.

"Will you have the goodness to tell your mistress that I wish to speak
to her at once," said Mrs. Steward; "that I am in a hurry, and cannot be
kept waiting? Pray mention my name, Mrs. Steward, from St. Bartholomew's
Rectory, Buckinghamshire."

The girl promised to do so, and withdrew. She soon returned to say that
Miss Sherrard would be pleased to see both Mrs. Steward and Miss Lewis
in her private room.

"I wish to see Miss Sherrard alone," said Mrs. Steward. "Remain where
you are, Elma." Mrs. Steward sailed out of the room, and poor Elma sank
down on the nearest chair.

"If Miss Sherrard has sent for me she must know something," thought the
wretched girl. "Oh! how am I to live through it? She will tell Aunt
Charlotte and then all my prospects are over."

Meanwhile Mrs. Steward sailed down the passage with a dignity and
majesty of demeanor which impressed Miss Sherrard's neat handmaid
considerably. The next instant she was ushered into the school-mistress'
presence.

Miss Sherrard looked troubled; she came forward to meet Mrs. Steward
very gravely, and, motioning with her hand to a chair, asked her to seat
herself. Mrs. Steward stared for a moment at the head-mistress, and the
head-mistress stared back at her. At last Mrs. Steward said glibly:

"I am sorry to take up any of your valuable time, Miss Sherrard; but I
think I can explain my errand in a few words. I am about to remove my
niece, Elma Lewis, from the school."

"Indeed, I am heartily glad to hear it," answered Miss Sherrard, visible
relief both in her tone and face.

"What an extraordinary remark for you to make! But I will pass it by,
for I am in a considerable hurry. I have heard of an admirable school in
Germany to which I intend to send my niece. Not that I have the least
objection to your mode of teaching, Miss Sherrard, nor to this very
celebrated school; but of course when it comes to foreign languages you
cannot compare England to the Continent."

"Certainly not," answered Miss Sherrard, who was now staring at the
other lady in some wonder.

"It is my intention to remove Elma to-night," continued Mrs. Steward;
"for although it is not quite the end of term, yet the Harz Mountains
are some distance away, and it would not be possible for a young girl
who has at present no knowledge of the German language to go so far
without an escort. Miss Sherrard, you will be glad to hear that an
escort has been found, a suitable escort, and Elma will leave England
next week. Under these circumstance I propose to take her back to my
husband's rectory in Buckinghamshire to-morrow morning, and she will
leave the school now."

"Indeed! I repeat that this is a most fortunate coincidence. I am glad
to hear it," said Miss Sherrard.

"Your remarks seem to me the reverse of flattering; but I have no time
to ask you to explain them. What I have really come about is this: It is
necessary for Elma to have a certificate from her present mistress in
order to be admitted into the very first-class school in Germany where I
propose to place her. Will you kindly give me a testimonial in my
niece's favor, Miss Sherrard? Just say anything you can to the credit of
her character and general attainments. From your many letters to me I
judge that you have a very high opinion of the dear girl; and I trust,
now that I am doing so much, in starting this young girl in life, that I
shall not go unrewarded. The care of the young is a sad trial, Miss
Sherrard and I doubt not that the looking after Elma will worry me
considerably; but I am not one to shirk my duties, and I am willing to
take all this responsibility, and for the future to regard that young
girl as if she were indeed my own child. But I must have the
testimonial, so will you kindly write it at once."

Miss Sherrard had been sitting with her hands clasped in her lap while
Mrs. Steward was speaking. Once she had lowered her eyes; but during
the greater part of the time they were fixed upon the good lady's face.
A look of consternation, almost akin to despair, flitted now over the
teacher's expressive countenance.

When at last Mrs. Steward ceased to speak, Miss Sherrard still remained
for nearly half a minute quite silent.

"You will perhaps oblige me by writing the testimonial?" said Mrs.
Steward in a very haughty voice. Then she added, perceiving that
something was wrong, and finding it impossible to guess what, "I dare
say you are annoyed at Elma leaving the school so unexpectedly--"

"No, no; nothing of the kind," said Miss Sherrard. "I have told you
twice, Mrs. Steward, that I am glad, very glad of this."

"Your words surprise me; but of course you will write--my time is
precious, I have not a moment to lose."

Miss Sherrard now stood up.

"I cannot give Elma Lewis a testimonial with regard to conduct." The
words came out quietly, firmly, distinctly.

Mrs. Steward sprang to her feet.

"You cannot give my niece a testimonial with regard to conduct?" she
gasped. "Do you know what you are saying what you are doing, Miss
Sherrard?"

"Perfectly well, Mrs. Steward."

"In your letters to me you have invariably spoken of Elma's conduct as
excellent. Miss Sherrard, you surely forget yourself--you cannot be
well; you must be mistaking Elma for one of your other pupils? She has
always been an exemplary girl. You cannot give her a testimonial with
regard to conduct? Am I to believe the testimony of my own ears?"

"I am deeply sorry; I have seldom been more grieved about anything. I am
told that Elma has accompanied you here--if you will permit me, I will
send for her, and explain how matters really stand in your presence."

"Oh, this is intolerable," said Mrs. Steward, clasping and unclasping
her hands in her agitation. "The wicked girl, what has she done? Pray
send for her at once, Miss Sherrard; if she has done anything really
disgraceful I wash my hands of her. If you, her mistress, cannot give
her a certificate, do you suppose that my husband and I will take her
up?"

"It is impossible for me to say, madam. In this emergency to really help
Elma would be a Christian act. She may have been tempted beyond her
strength, but you will be better able to decide when you know the
circumstances."

As Miss Sherrard spoke she rang the bell. "When the servant appeared,
she desired her to bring Elma immediately into her presence. A moment
later the young girl entered the room. She gave a wild and frightened
glance first at her aunt, then at Miss Sherrard, then stepping forward,
fell on her knees.

"Has Kitty told you?" she gasped.

"Yes, Elma. Get up; you cannot kneel to me."

"Rise this minute you wicked girl!" said Mrs. Steward.

Elma staggered to her feet.

"It is all up, then," she murmured.

"I know everything, Elma," said Miss Sherrard. "The knowledge has come
to me as a painful surprise. Your aunt has just asked me to give you a
testimonial with regard to character. I am bitterly pained to say that I
must refuse to do so."

"But what does it all mean," cried Mrs. Steward, "and why am I to be
kept in the dark any longer? Elma, stop twirling your thumbs; stand
back. Now, Miss Sherrard, I have paid the school fees for Elma Lewis for
the last four years, so I presume I am entitled to know all about her.
Tell me what has occurred. Of what she is accused?"

Miss Sherrard then briefly related the story which had been told to her
by Kitty.

It was exactly the sort of tale which would affect a woman of Mrs.
Steward's caliber disagreeably. She listened with a horror-stricken
face. When the school-mistress had finished, she said abruptly:

"What do you propose to do now?"

"It will be necessary for me to explain the whole circumstances of
Elma's wrong-doing to the entire school to-morrow," said Miss Sherrard.
"This is necessary for the sake of Kitty Malone."

"At what hour do you propose to make this very pleasant exhibition of my
niece?"

"After prayers to-morrow morning--I sent for you, Elma," continued Miss
Sherrard, "to tell you, as I thought you ought to be prepared."

"Thank you," answered Elma, her head bowed on her breast. She felt
stunned and cold. The dreadful blow had fallen; but the acute misery
which was immediately to follow was not at present awakened within
her.

"Come, Elma," said Mrs. Steward. She turned to leave the room. Just as
she reached the door she looked back at Miss Sherrard.

"After you have exposed Elma, and ruined her character for life, you
will doubtless expel her?" she said.

"I hope not--I think not."

"In any case she leaves the school, for I pay no more fees. Come Elma."




CHAPTER XXIII.

STARS AND MOON, AND GOD BEHIND.


During the long walk home to Constantine Road the elder and the younger
lady maintained an absolute silence. As soon as they got to the house
Mrs. Steward turned to Elma for the first time and spoke.

"Find out immediately if your mother is in. If she is tell her I wish to
see her. Go; don't stare at me."

Elma went without a word. Her mother was in, and so was Carrie.

"Mother," said Elma, "Aunt Charlotte wants to see you."

"Why, my dear Elma, what is the matter? How queer you look!"

"Don't mind about me, mother, pray; the expression of my face is not
worth considering. Aunt Charlotte is waiting for you in the
dining-room."

Mrs. Lewis gave a profound sigh.

"How very unreasonable of Charlotte!" she said; "she will doubtless be
expecting more tea and cream and fresh eggs, and other impossibilities."

"Oh, go mother, and stop talking," said Elma.

Mrs. Lewis dragged herself up from the sofa on which she was reclining.

"I really don't know what the world is coming to," she said. "Even my
own children are turning out quite disagreeable to me. Dear! dear! what
it is to be a mother! How little those who are fortunate in not
possessing children understand the burden!"

She went, downstairs slowly, and Elma turned to Carrie.

Carrie was standing with her back to her; she was making up something in
tissue-paper.

"Well, Elma," she said, looking up at her sister, "what is up?"

"Everything is up," said Elma.

"What do you mean?"

"Everything is up and everything is over. What are you doing with that
paper, Carrie?"

"I am folding up the money I have just got for Kitty Malone?"

"The money you have got for Kitty Malone! Has--has Sam Raynes returned
the sovereigns?"

"Bless you, poor Sam can't do impossibilities. No; this money has
nothing whatever to do with Sam. I am folding it up, and giving her a
little account with it. We got exactly eleven pounds eleven shillings
for the clothes and the watch and chain. She can redeem them all within
a month if she likes. Here is the pawnbroker's receipt; tell her to keep
it until she does. She can redeem them whenever she cares to pay back
eleven pounds eleven shillings with interest. My commission at ten per
cent, is one pound three shillings and tenpence--that leaves a balance
of ten pounds seven shilling and twopence; it will doubtless get her
nicely out of her difficulty. She ought to be thankful to me to her
dying day. Look here, Elma, if you are worried about things--and I can
guess what is the matter pretty well; for I happen to know that Kitty
Malone made a clean breast of your secret not long ago--you will be glad
to get out of the house. Here, take this money to her, and be off, can't
you?"

Elma still did not speak. That cold, stunned feeling was pressing round
her heart. She did not much care whether she was in the house or not.
Just at that moment, however, a loud slam of the front door caused both
the girls to run to the window. Mrs. Steward had sailed down the steps.
Mrs. Steward with her long train streaming behind her, was walking up
Constantine Road. The next instant Mrs. Lewis burst into the room.

"Well, Elma," she cried, "this is a pretty state of things. Your aunt
has told me everything. What a miserable woman I am!"

"Please, don't scold me," said Elma. "I have had enough scolding during
the last hour to last me my life. Say what you like to me to-morrow."

"But your aunt says she washes her hands of you. How are you to be
educated? How are you to live? How are you to support yourself?"

"I don't know. I don't think it much matters."

"Don't talk in that silly way, Elma; of course it matters. She says too
that you are to be publicly exposed at Middleton School to-morrow, and
your conduct--I must say I could not make out what she was talking
about; I don't see that you did anything very wrong--but your conduct is
to be proclaimed to the school, and that you are to be, if not expelled,
something like it. Elma, this is enough to take all my senses away!"

"Never mind, now, mother; we can talk it all over presently," said Elma.
"Give me the money, Carrie, and let me go."

Carrie handed her sister the little parcel without a word. Elma walked
slowly out of the room.

A moment later she found herself on the dusty road. She reached the top
of the ugly street, and then paused to look around her. To her right lay
the peaceful valley in which Middleton School was situated. A little
further away was the open country, beautiful, verdant, full of summer
splendor. Gwin Harley's house could be seen in the distance.

"If only Gwin had been my friend this morning, all these terrible things
need not have happened," thought Elma. "I have nothing to thank Gwin
for; I have nothing to thank Kitty for. I am a miserable, forlorn,
forsaken girl. There is nothing before me but the most wretched life.
Shall I go to see Kitty? Does Kitty deserve anything at my hands? I have
got ten pounds seven shillings and twopence in my pocket. Why should I
not go right away with the money? I don't think Kitty would prosecute
me; and if she did would it matter? I am so hopeless that I don't think
anything much worse could happen to me. I know I could not stand being
publicly exposed to-morrow at the school. I cannot have those hundreds
of eyes fixed on me; I, who have always been looked up to, respected,
who belonged to the Tug-of-war Society. I cannot, cannot bear it. Why
should Kitty have this money? She has treated me badly. She promised
not to tell. She had no right to break her word. I cannot see her at
present; no, I cannot."

Elma walked down the road. She longed beyond words to get into a fresh
place, to be where there was no chance of meeting a Middleton girl. She
walked faster and faster. Presently she found herself at the little
station; she had not an idea where to go nor what to do. She had no
luggage with her. It would look queer her going away without even a
handbag. It would look very much as if she were running away. All the
girls belonging to Middleton School had to wear a badge on their hats,
and Elma would therefore be known. She would be recognized as one of the
pupils. Nevertheless she thought she would risk it, for the longing to
go away got stronger and stronger.

The railway station happened to be rather empty at this time. She looked
around her hastily, saw no one that she knew about, and went into the
booking-office. She hastily made up her mind to take a ticket for a
large seaport town a few miles distant. She asked for a third-class
single ticket to Saltbury, inquired when the next train came up, and a
few moments later found herself on the right platform waiting for it. It
came in within a quarter of an hour, and Elma took her seat in a
third-class compartment. She was relieved to find that she was in the
company of a good-natured-looking, middle-aged woman who was just
returning to her own home from doing some marketing at Middleton. She
did not take any notice of Elma, who crouched up in the opposite corner,
and sat looking out at the country. The woman left the carriage at the
next station, and Elma continued her journey for the rest of the way
alone. She got to Saltbury within an hour, and stepped out on to the
platform. She had been at Saltbury before with her mother and Carrie.
They had once spent a never-to-be-forgotten week there when Mrs. Lewis
had a ten-pound note in her pocket which she resolved to devote to a
treat at the seaside. Elma wondered if she might venture to go to the
little cottage in the suburbs of Saltbury where she had spent this week.
After reflection, however, she thought that it would not be wise to
venture, for if she were missed it would be very easy to trace her to
Saltbury, and then this cottage would be the first to seek for her in.
Accordingly she went into the more thronged and populous part of the
town. The expensive season had not yet begun, and she presently went
into a neat little house with "Apartments" written on a card in the
window. She asked for a bed for the night. The landlady, a ruddy-faced
young woman, immediately said she could accommodate her, and took Elma
upstairs to the top of the house to show her a neat little bedroom.

"You can have this for half a crown a night, miss," she said. "Are you
likely to make a long stay?"

"I don't know," answered Elma; "I can't be sure. I want the room for one
night, and then I'll let you know."

"Very well, miss, that's quite satisfactory, and I can get in anything
you like in the way of food. If you happened to wish for a sitting-room,
miss--"

"Oh, no, a bedroom will be enough," answered Elma. "I do not care to go
to the expense of a sitting-room."

"You left your luggage I suppose, miss, at the railway station?"

Elma colored and then turned pale.

"No," she said; "I have not brought any luggage with me."

The woman stared, opening her eyes very wide, now giving Elma a full and
particular attention which she had not hitherto vouchsafed to her. She
said nothing further, and Elma went downstairs.

"I'll go down to the beach for a little," she said. "You might have some
tea ready for me when I come back. I am very tired, and should like some
tea and toast."

"And a hegg, miss, or anything of that sort?"

"No, thank you; just tea and toast, please. Nothing more."

The woman stared after her as she went down the street. Elma got as far
as the beach; she then sat down on a bench and gazed out at the waves.
The tide was coming in. The beach at Saltbury was celebrated, and
children were playing about, amusing themselves gathering shells, making
sand-castles, and otherwise disporting themselves after the manner of
their kind. A little boy was wading far out. Elma watched him with
lack-luster eyes. She wondered vaguely how long he would be allowed to
wade, and how deep he might go. He got as far as his knees, and then
turned back. As he was going back he fell, wetting himself and crying
out lustily.

Elma continued to gaze at him with eyes which scarcely saw.

"He thinks he is hurt," she said to herself, "that he has had a
terrible misfortune. How little he knows what real pain means, and what
real misfortune is! Here am I with money in my pocket which does not
belong to me, having run away from home, disgraced for life, miserable
for life. Oh! what shall I do?"

It had been a very hot day, but the evening was chilly, and Elma
shivered as she went back to her lodgings in South Street. She had
brought away no wraps with her, and her thin cotton dress was not
sufficient to keep out the chill of the sea breezes. She thought she
would be glad to get under shelter, to go to bed, to wrap herself up and
cover her face and court sleep. When she got to the door, however, the
young landlady, who was evidently waiting for her, came out on to the
steps.

"If you please, miss," she said, "I am really very sorry, but my husband
thinks----"

"What?" said Elma.

"That as you have no luggage, miss (you know it ain't customary for us
to take in ladies without luggage)----"

"Then you mean--" said Elma, turning very white and pale.

"Yes, miss, I'm ever so sorry."

"You can't give me the room even for one night?"

"We can't really, miss."

"But I can pay in advance," said Elma eagerly.

"I'm ever so sorry, miss; but another lady came just as you left, and
she had a box and a handbag, and everything proper, and as she wanted
the room very badly and as we had her before, we have let it to her,
miss. I am sure I am very sorry not to oblige; but I dare say--There
are a great many other apartments down this road, miss."

"Thank you," said Elma; "it does not matter at all."

She spoke with a voice of ice; pride, a remnant of pride, came to her
aid. She would not let the woman see how distressed she was.

"Good-evening, miss," said the young landlady. "I'm real sorry not to
oblige."

"Oh, it doesn't matter," said Elma; "I dare say I can manage."

She walked down South Street, knowing that the landlady was watching her
as she disappeared. She soon came to a corner where four roads met.
Where should she go? What could she do? Where was she to have shelter
for the night?

It occurred to her that after all there was nothing now left to her but
to return to Middleton. She hurried up to the railway station, and asked
when the next train would start. A porter, who was standing just inside
the station informed her that the last train for Middleton had left five
minutes ago.

"The next will be at seven to-morrow morning," he said.

"Thank you," answered Elma. She would not allow any of the dismay on her
face to appear.

"After all, it is too absurd that I can't have shelter," she said to
herself, "when I have over ten pounds in my pocket. What can the
landlady have meant? Surely, if I pay my way that is all that is
necessary."

But, all the same, she did not like to go and inquire at any other
lodging. She could not stand meeting once again the stony stare of a
landlady when she explained that she had no luggage, none at all. It
occurred to her that she might go into a shop and buy some night-gear
and a small handbag, but she rejected the idea almost as quickly as it
came to her.

"It would only waste the money," she said to herself, "and where is the
use? I suppose I can manage to spend the night somewhere. Thank
goodness, it is a fine summer's night; I might do worse than spend it in
the open air."

She wandered away, and presently passing a small restaurant, went in and
ordered a cup of tea for herself, and some bread and butter. She drank
the tea, but found that to eat choked her. The outlook before her was
more miserable moment by moment. She was driven to such despair that it
seemed of very little consequence to her whether she succeeded in
getting away from Middleton School, from the censorious eyes of the
whole of her world, or not. Everything was up with her. She kept
repeating that moodily, drearily under her breath. Everything was up;
she had not a friend in the wide, wide world.

Having finished her meager meal, she went out again into South Street.
She was horrified when she saw the name at one end of the street. She
did not want to pass by that neat little house which contained that snug
little bedroom where she had hoped to cover her eyes from the light, and
court sleep, in order to get rid of her misery for a few hours.

She had now reached the neighborhood of the shore. The tide was nearly
full in; the great, broad expanse of beach was covered. The children
had all gone home to supper and to bed. The stars were coming out in the
sky; a full moon was riding in majesty across the heavens. It seemed to
Elma, fine as the night was, that the sea moaned in an unreasonable and
very dreadful manner. She had to press her hands to her ears to shut
away the sound of that moaning sea. She determined to go inland. There
was plenty of time, plenty. She could get back to the station by seven
in the morning, wait for the first train which returned to Middleton,
and reach the school after all in time for her exposure.

She turned her steps now countrywise, and after walking for a mile or
two found that she was too weary to go any further. She crept inside a
narrow opening in a hedge, and got into a field. Here she was absolutely
alone; not a human being was in sight. As far as she could tell there
was not a living creature near. She felt the grass; it was heavy with
dew. She had always heard that it was very dangerous to sit down on
grass soaked with dew, but danger now was of no moment to her.

"It would be rather nice to be ill; it would be rather nice to die." She
had nothing left to live for. Her whole life had been a mistake. She had
tried hard to get away from her own set, the set in which she was born.
She had made a mess of it; she had failed. Her own set--the
narrow-minded, the vulgar, the low--were the only ones who could claim
her, who could touch her, who could have anything in common with her.
How terribly shocked Miss Sherrard had been at what she had done. How
disgusted, how coldly, terribly cruel Aunt Charlotte had been; but her
mother had thought very little about it, and Carrie would love her just
as much after her disgraceful conduct as she had done before.

"I belong to them, and they belong to me," thought poor Elma. "My
ambitions were wrong; I shall sink now, and become a second Carrie. No,
I shall never marry a Sam Raynes, but I shall become a sour old maid.
Perhaps I shall do charring some day, there is no saying. I did wrong to
try to raise myself. I----"

She never saw where her fault lay. She was not really repentant for her
wrong-doing. The consequences were terrible, but the sin did not trouble
her.

After a time, terribly exhausted and weary, she lay down just as she was
on the soaking wet grass and fell asleep. She had been chilled and tired
before she slept; but when in the very middle of the night she awoke she
had never known anything like the bitter cold which she experienced. She
could not at first remember where she was; but all too soon memory with
a flash returned to her. She remembered all the events of yesterday. She
knew that she was a runaway, that she had stolen money in her pocket.
She might be arrested and put in prison; there was no saying what awful
fate lay before her. In the dead of night lying there she became really
frightened; she almost felt as if she could scream aloud in her terror.
How empty the world seemed, how hollow! She wished the stars overhead
would not blink at her; she wished the moon would go behind a cloud; she
felt as if God Himself was looking at her through the face of the moon,
and she did not like it. She covered her face with her cold and
trembling hands, and tried to shut away what she felt might be the face
of God Himself.

"I have been a very wicked girl," she moaned, and now, for the first
time, she thought not so much of the consequences as of the sin. Tears
rained from her eyes; she sat up and covered her face.

"God help me! Please, God, don't be too angry, with me; I am the most
miserable girl in the world," she faltered.

After that frightened cry or prayer she felt more comfortable; and now,
staggering to her feet, she saw, standing about ten yards away, and
looking at her fixedly out of its large and luminous eyes, a brown cow.
There were several more cows in the field, and this one had come up, and
was gazing inquiringly at her. The motherly creature could not imagine
what desolate and queer young thing this was, up and awake in the middle
of the night. Such creatures as Elma, in the cow's experience, were not
to be seen at these inclement hours. It lashed its long tail slowly from
side to side, and kept gazing at her; and Elma looked at it, and her
nervous terrors grew worse. The cow had horns; suppose it came near, and
tried to horn her. She was not a country girl, and did not understand
country creatures. A bitter cry of abject terror rose from her lips. She
darted past the animal, rushed out by the way she had come into the
field, and found herself once more on the highroad.

The cow, its curiosity very faintly tickled by the appearance of Elma on
the scene, placidly resumed its feeding, and the terrified girl ran as
if she had wings to her feet up the highroad.

In after days she was never able to tell how she spent the remainder of
that night; but the longest hours only herald in the dawn, and at last
the sun arose and the worst of her fears were over. The sun warmed her,
and took away the dreadful feeling of chill which she was experiencing.
She wandered about, sitting down now and then, too feeble, too tired,
too utterly depressed to have room even for active fears, and at last
the time came when she might again present herself at the station.




CHAPTER XXIV.

SUNSHINE AGAIN.


When Carrie left her, Kitty Malone was buoyed up with a certain degree
of hope. Carrie had spoken with confidence; she had assured her that her
clothes were worth money. Never before, much as she prized pretty
things, had they seemed so valuable in poor Kitty's eyes. If Carrie
would really keep her word it would be possible for Kitty to send Laurie
the money which he wanted that evening. Could she do this her worst
anxieties would be laid to rest, and she felt that it would be even
possible for her to try to be good once more. As things were at present,
she cared nothing at all about being either good or bad. Every thought
of her mind was fixed upon Laurie; if he were saved she would be good;
if not--if he indeed, the darling of her heart, went to the
dogs--nothing mattered.

Kitty was too restless and miserable to go down to the rest of the
family. She walked up and down, up and down her bedroom, watching and
longing for Carrie. Now and then she would rush to the window, putting
out her head and shoulders and half her body, to watch if by any chance
Carrie might be coming up the street. That red-faced, fat,
uninteresting-looking young woman now represented all Kitty's hopes.

When darkness set in, however, when the hours first struck nine and
then ten, poor Kitty gradually saw the last star in her firmament
expire. "Without doubt Carrie had failed to pawn the things.

"And I thought them so good," whispered Kitty to herself. "Aunt Bridget
would be sure to choose nice and expensive things. Perhaps they were too
good for the people who come to the pawnbroker for their clothes. That
must be the reason; but I wonder Carrie did not come back to tell me."

Presently Alice bustled into the room, and, opening the door of the
large wardrobe which the girls shared between them, began to make active
search for a neat little jacket which she wanted to put on. She was
going out for the evening, and wished to wear it when she was returning
home. Search as she would, however, she could not find it, and presently
turned to ask Kitty if she had seen it.

"Dear me, no," answered Kitty, starting and blushing. "Is it not in the
wardrobe?"

"No," replied Alice. "And I remember I hung it on this peg. Where can it
possibly have disappeared to? Don't you know anything about it, Kitty?
By the way, how wonderfully empty the wardrobe looks! Have you been
putting your clothes back into your boxes?"

Kitty, who had been standing in the middle of the room looking the very
picture of despair, now burst into a hearty peal of laughter.

"What are you laughing about?" asked Alice.

"I am awfully afraid it has happened," she cried.

"What do you mean?"

"Why, that your jacket has gone to the pawn."

"Kitty!" cried Alice, looking at the Irish girl in some alarm, "have you
gone mad?"

"No, Alice; but I am dreadfully afraid all the same that it has
happened; indeed, there can be no doubt of it."

Kitty laughed again. She often cried when she laughed and now the tears
ran down her cheeks.

"Well, this is too funny!" she gasped between her paroxysms of mirth.

"I don't think it funny at all. I think you must have taken leave of
your senses. Kitty, please, explain yourself."

"I will try to, Alice. Oh, don't frown at me so horribly, or I shall go
off into fits of laughter again. This is the simple truth. I wanted
money very, very badly. I could not get it, and Carrie Lewis--"

"Carrie Lewis? Who is she?" asked Alice.

"Oh, don't be so ridiculous, Alice. Of course you know who Carrie Lewis
is. She is Elma's sister. She came here to-day."

"How very interesting! What a nice set of people you seem to be getting
to know! I wasn't aware that you were acquainted with any of the Lewises
except Elma."

"Well, I am acquainted with Carrie now, and I rather like her. She is
great fun, much more fun than you are. She is vulgar, of course; but
really that does not matter. She called to see me, and as I happened to
want money she suggested pawning some of my things for me. I conclude
she took your jacket by mistake with the rest."

Alice was so stunned absolutely by this news that no words would come
to her. She stared at Kitty, her face growing whiter and more
wooden-looking each moment. Then, without vouchsafing a syllable of
reply, she left the room, banging the door behind her.

"There, I have given her a good settler," thought Kitty; and for a
moment the feeling that Alice was as uncomfortable as she was herself
gave her a certain sense of satisfaction.

The last post brought a letter from Laurie. It was brief, and was
written in frantic hurry and despair.

"My dear Kitty," wrote the boy, "what has come to you? I am looking for
a letter by every post, but none arrives. I shall not be able to give
Wheel-about the money I promised him on Saturday, and I know he will not
keep my secret any longer. When father hears it, all is up. If I don't
receive that money by Saturday morning I shall run away to
sea.--LAURIE."

The letter fluttered from poor Kitty's fingers to the floor. She felt
stunned; there was a cold weight now at her heart, which made it almost
impossible for her to move or even think. If Laurie did not get the
money by Saturday morning he would run away to sea. This was Thursday
evening. There was still time, just time, to save him. Oh, if only
Carrie would come! How dreadful, how terrible of her to fail Kitty at
such a moment as this! Laurie was just the sort of boy to do what he
said. The longing to go to sea had been one of the innermost cravings of
his heart for many years. If he did so, the squire would never forgive
him. His career would be ruined. Bad and awful as an English school in
Kitty's opinion would be, the fate which he now had mapped out for
himself would be much worse. The cruel, cruel sea might even drown him.
Kitty might never behold her Laurie again. He was the joy of her heart
and the light of her eyes. She uttered a piercing cry, and fell down
half-fainting by her bedside. She lay so for the greater part of an
hour, then struggling to her feet got into bed without undressing, and
pulled the bedclothes well over her head.

When Alice came in very late that evening she thought that Kitty was
asleep, and did not disturb her; but all during the long hours of that
miserable night poor Kitty lay awake, her heart beating loud, terrible
visions passing before her eyes. Toward morning she fell into a troubled
sleep, to awake again quite early. Her head ached badly, her pulses beat
too quickly; she could not stand her hot bed any longer. Springing up,
she went into the bathroom, turned on the cold water, and refreshed
herself with a bath. She felt really desperate and quite impervious to
all ideas of discipline. She made up her mind to go to the Lewises,
knock up Carrie, and demand an account of the property which she had
confided to her on the previous day. Even still there was just--just
time to save Laurie, for if she could catch the early post he would
receive his money on Saturday morning.

Kitty found herself at Constantino Road between seven and eight o'clock.
The blinds of Carrie's bedroom window were still down, for the Lewises
were not early risers. Maggie however, was up, and when Kitty rang the
bell she opened the door for her.

"Miss Malone!" she cried.

"I want to see Miss Carrie at once," cried Kitty. "Is she up, Maggie?"

"Not she, miss. She's sound asleep and in bed. But I'll run up and tell
her that you are here. Please come into the dining-room, Miss Malone."

Maggie threw open the door of this by-no-means luxurious apartment, and
then ran upstairs to inform Carrie of Kitty's unexpected arrival.

"Now, what can be up?" thought Carrie. "Surely she is satisfied. I did
very well for her."

She dressed herself hastily, and in five minutes was standing by Kitty's
side.

"What is it?" she asked. "Are you not pleased? Elma took you the money,
did she not? She must have stayed with one of the Middleton School girls
for the night, for she never returned home; but she took you the money.
I thought I did very well by you. Were you not satisfied?"

"She took me the money?" cried Kitty, turning pale. "No; that she did
not. I never had any money. What do you mean, Carrie?"

"What I say," answered Carrie. "Oh, do sit down, Kitty; you look quite
ghastly. I gave Elma ten pounds seven shillings and twopence to give you
I got eleven guineas for your things, including the watch and chain.
After I deducted my ten per cent., the balance for you was ten pounds
seven and twopence. I thought you would be delighted. Did she not take
you the money early yesterday evening?"

"No. I have never seen her."

"But she left here quite early on purpose. She said she was going
straight to your house. I sent you plenty of money, did I not?"

"How much did you say?" asked Kitty, putting her hand up to her forehead
in a distracted way.

"Ten pounds seven and twopence. You only really wanted eight pounds, did
you not?"

"I had a little money of my own, and eight pounds would have done," said
Kitty in a low voice; "but----"

Here she sprang forward and gripped Carrie by the arm. "What does it
mean, Carrie--what does it mean? Elma never came near me; I never, never
saw her last night."

"You never saw her? Elma never went to you?"

"No, never. Do you think I would tell an untruth? I never saw her, not
since early school yesterday. Oh, Carrie, tell me what it means?"

"I cannot. I must say it looks very queer," said Carrie. She frowned,
turned her back partly upon Kitty, and supporting her fat chin on one of
her dimpled hands, began to think deeply. The more she thought the less
she liked the aspect of affairs.

"Carrie, what does it mean?" cried Kitty, reiterating her words in a
kind of frenzy of agitation.

"Oh, stop talking to me for a minute, Kitty! I must think this out."

Carrie walked to the window, pulled up the blinds, threw the sash up,
and allowed the fresh morning air to blow upon her hot face. After a
time she turned round and faced Kitty.

"You may well look pale," she said. "I confess I am as bewildered as you
are yourself. Of course Elma may have been taken ill--she had a
dreadful shock yesterday."

"How?"

"You are silly to talk like that. Don't you know?"

"You mean because I told about her?"

"Well, it turned out very badly, as badly as possible. You did tell, and
when you did so you ruined her. If you had only kept that precious story
to yourself, even for twenty-four hours, little Elma would have been
made--made for life; but you ruined her."

"Oh do please tell me what you mean! My head is going round in a whirl;
I can scarcely follow you."

"You can pull yourself together if you like. This is what happened. I
told you, did I not, yesterday, that Aunt Charlotte pays Elma's fees at
Middleton School?"

"I think so, but I don't quite remember."

"That is so like you. I always said you were selfish."

"Think what you like, Carrie; but please tell me everything."

"Oh, I'm quite willing. This is the story. Aunt Charlotte came here
yesterday. She had heard of a splendid school in Germany, where Elma was
to be sent as pupil-teacher. She wanted Elma to leave Middleton School
at once, as she had found an escort to take her to Germany; but before
Elma could be admitted into this new school it was necessary for her to
have a certificate from Miss Sherrard. Now you see daylight, don't you?
My aunt, Mrs. Steward, went to see Miss Sherrard, taking Elma with her.
Elma did not know that you had put a match to the mine, and of course
Aunt Charlotte knew nothing about it. When Miss Sherrard was asked to
give Elma a certificate for conduct, she refused point-blank. Of course
the mine exploded. Elma was called in, and all your nice, miserable
story told to Aunt Charlotte. Elma is to be publicly exposed at
Middleton School to-day; and Aunt Charlotte has washed her hands of her
forever. There! that's what you have done. We have much to thank you
for, have we not?"

Kitty's face had grown whiter and whiter.

"You blame me very much for what I am not to be blamed for," she said
after a pause.

"That's what you think. You're an Irish girl, and you think nothing of a
promise. You promised Elma you would not tell. You lent her the money,
and you promised you would not tell about it. You broke your promise,
and you have ruined her for life. There! that's what has happened. I
wish you joy of the nice state your conscience must be in."

"You are very bitter to me, Carrie; but you cannot quite see my side of
the question. I would not have told about Elma if Elma had been in the
least true to me, but she was not, not a bit. All the same, I am
terribly, terribly sorry for her. I would not have got her into this
scrape if I had known."

"Ay, you had no thought, you see. You just blurted out everything."

"I am very miserable," said poor Kitty. She clasped her trembling hands
together, and tears slowly welled into her beautiful dark-blue eyes.
Carrie watched her with anxiety.

"There, now I like you," she said, after a pause "You look awfully
pretty with those tears in your eyes, and----"

"Pretty, do I?" said Kitty. For a moment a pleased smile flitted across
her face, but then it faded; the present anxiety was too intense for her
to give much thought to her personal appearance.

"Where can Elma be?" she said.

"Ah, that's the dreadful part. I don't know. She went out of the house
with your money. She evidently never took it to you. I am sure I cannot
think what has happened to her."

"And my money is gone?" said Kitty.

"So it seems--that is, unless we can find Elma. It is all very dreadful,
very horrible. I suppose the plain English of the matter is this"--here
Carrie gulped something down in her throat--"that she--she stole your
money and has run away with it."

"Carrie, you cannot think so!"

"It is what I have to think," answered Carrie. "It is a mighty
unpalatable truth, I can tell you. I suppose, now, your next step will
be to prosecute her to send the police after her, and have her locked
up. Then you will ruin me too, for Sam Raynes--not that he is
overparticular, nor that he cares twopence about refinement, or anything
of that sort--would not care to marry a girl whose--whose sister was put
in prison. That's your next step isn't it, Kitty Malone?"

"I won't stop to listen to you," said Kitty; "you are too terrible."

She ran to the door, opened it, and the next moment found herself in
the street. She walked fast, ugly words repeating themselves in her
ears. Carrie had been very blunt, and had given the petted, half-spoiled
girl some home truths to think about. Had she really been unkind in
telling about Elma? Oh, what was right and what was wrong? What was the
matter? Could she ever, ever, in the whole course of her existence, have
a light heart again? She walked up the street, little caring what she
was doing or where she was going. At the next corner she came plump upon
Elma herself, who was coming slowly, very slowly in the direction of
Constantine Road. When she saw her, poor Kitty gave a sudden shout.

"Oh, Elma!" she said, "how glad I am--how glad I am!"

"What do you mean?" said Elma. Her voice was faint.

"I thought I might never see you again. I thought--I don't know what I
thought--but you have come back."

"I ran away, and I have come back again," said Elma. "You can punish me
if you like, Kitty; things can never be much worse than they are." Here
she staggered, and would have fallen had not Kitty held her up.

"How dreadfully bad you look! But oh, the relief of seeing you again!"
said Kitty. "Where have you been? What have you done?"

"I scarcely know what I have done, or where I have been. I have a noise
in my head, a queer noise. My head aches so badly it seems as if it
would never leave off again. I am going to school, and they are going
to expose me. It was all because you told, Kitty. And here is nearly
all your money." Elm a put her hand into her pocket. "I must tell you
everything, Kitty; for nothing really matters now. I meant to take that
money. I meant to steal it all, but when it came to the point I found I
could not. Here is most of it back. I spent three shillings on my fare
to Saltbury and back, and sixpence on tea last night. That leaves ten
pounds three and eightpence. Here, count it, won't you, Kitty? Take it
in your hand. Here are the ten sovereigns, and the three shillings, and
the sixpence and twopence. Have you got them all right? I must owe you
the balance, but I'll pay you soon--soon."

Elma's voice sounded weaker and weaker. Kitty clasped the money; her
small fingers closed over it, her eyes grew bright, a flaming color rose
into each of her cheeks, and it was as if new life was put into her.

"How bad you look!" she cried; "but oh, how happy I am to have this
money! Never mind for a moment what you meant to do; I have it now, and
I forgive you with my whole heart. Let us go straight to the nearest
post office. I must get a postal order lor eight pounds immediately.
Come, Elma, come."

"But what do you mean? Why should I go with you?"

"Because you must--because I am not going to part with you--not yet.
Come, come at once. Oh, how dead tired you look! You are not to go back
to that dreadful little house of yours--not yet. Here is a nice-looking
restaurant. You just go straight in, and I'll go on to the post office
and send off the postal order to the dear old boy. He is saved now, and
I am saved; nothing--nothing else matters. Dear Elma, of course I
forgive you; pray don't look so miserable. I felt fit to die five
minutes ago, but now I am as well and jolly as possible. Here, Elma,
come into the restaurant and wait."

Kitty had clutched hold of Elma's arm, and now she dragged her into a
large, bright-looking restaurant, which they were just passing. The next
moment Elma found herself seated by a small marble table. Kitty was
ordering tea or something, Elma could not quite make out what, nor did
she care. Everything was dreamy and unreal to her.

"I'll be back in a minute, Elma," cried Kitty. Her flashing eyes smiled
as they glanced at Elma. Elma tried to smile back, but could not. The
next moment Kitty was out of the place. She was back again in less than
a quarter of an hour.

"I have done it," she cried, "and my heart is as light as a feather. I
have sent off the postal order to Laurie; he will be saved now. Oh, it
is so comforting; and we have a little over two pounds for ourselves."

"For ourselves--what do you mean?" said Elma.

"Why, of course, we'll divide it and have a jolly time. Aren't you going
to have your breakfast? I'm as hungry as a hawk."

As Kitty spoke she poured out a cup of tea, added milk to it, and pushed
it toward Elma. Elma drank it off, and when she had done so the confused
feeling in her head got a little better. Kitty then began to speak in a
low, excited whisper.

"Let us do something," she said. "Let us do something quite mad and
wild and jolly. We have got out of our scrape."

"You have; but I am in it up to my neck," said poor Elma. "Oh Kitty, I
am a miserable, wretched girl!"

"Never mind, you are going to be a jolly girl now, the jolliest girl in
the world. Do you think because I am happy again that I am going to
leave you to all this misery, particularly after that nice blunt,
determined Carrie of yours telling me that it was my fault, and that I
would repent it to my dying day? Look here, Elma, did you say that you
wanted to go back to Middleton School this morning?"

"I have to. I am to be exposed, you know."

"Not a bit of it. Neither you nor I will go to that hateful school; let
us run away."

"Run away? But I have run away and come back again."

"Let us do it over again."

"Kitty, what do you mean?"

"What I say. I have heaps of money; let us get back to Saltbury and enjoy
ourselves, Elma. Why can't we take the next train? No one will prevent
us; no one will guess where we are. We will have a nice time, a really
nice time. Say 'Yes,' Elma, won't you?"

"But would you really go with me?"

"Why not? I am the wild Irish girl, and you are the naughty English
girl; let us go off together."

"Well, it does sound tempting," said Elma, her eyes sparkling. "Kitty,
it is wonderful of you not to give me up."

"Oh, I am not the sort of girl to give up a friend when she is in
trouble. You have made it right for me, and the sun is shining again,
and I am as happy as the day is long. Elma, you must come."

"It does sound tempting--I wish my head did not ache so badly."

"It will be better when you get to the seaside."

"Perhaps so, and then I need not go to Middleton School."

"You need never go there again. Oh, don't waste any more time over
breakfast. We can eat when we get to Saltbury. I want to get off before
Alice and Carrie or any of them begin to miss us. Let us go to the
railway station; it is not far off."

Kitty's eager and impetuous words earned the day, and in a quarter of an
hour's time the girls found themselves speeding away to Saltbury.

"We have indeed burned our boats now," said Kitty, with a laugh; "we
have both run away. Now they have something really to scold us about;
but never mind. I never felt, more jolly in my life."




CHAPTER XXV.

KITTY "GO-BRAGH" (FOREVER).


But Kitty's happiness was very short-lived, for long before they got to
Saltbury Elma was really so ill that she could not hold up her head.
Kitty had never seen such severe illness before. She was not easily
frightened; she had plenty of pluck when a real emergency arose, and she
now determined to do her best for her companion.

"It is all the worry and the misery she has undergone," thought Kitty to
herself; "but now that my mind is at rest she will see what a good
friend I can be to her." When they got to Saltbury she immediately
ordered a cab, and desired the man to drive her to the nearest hotel.

"Oh, Kitty!" gasped poor Elma, "they won't take us in, because we have
no luggage, you know."

"I'll manage it," said Kitty; "no luggage--what does that matter?"

She followed Elma into the cab, and a few moments later the girls found
themselves at the door of a neat little inn facing the sea. Kitty jumped
out and went straight to the bar.

"I want a nice, quiet bedroom," she said, "with two beds in it."

"Certainly, miss," said the woman, glancing into Kitty's bright face.

"It must be a very quiet room," continued Kitty, "for my companion is
ill; she has a bad headache, and we must send for a doctor immediately."

"Yes, miss. I'll send the porter out to bring in your luggage."

"That's the annoying part," said Kitty; "we have no luggage."

The woman looked dubious, and turned to glance at a man who approached.

"Two young ladies want a room," she said in a low voice. "One of them is
ill, and--they have no luggage."

"Then in that case, miss, I am very sorry----" began the man.

But Kitty interrupted him.

"Don't say those words," she began. "I know exactly what you are going
to say, but please don't. We have no luggage, for we--we have run away
from school. There now, I have confided in you. Here's father's card. He
will be responsible for us. Please show us to your very best room
immediately."

As Kitty spoke she took a card out of her sealskin purse and handed it
to the woman.

"Dennis Malone, Castle Malone, County Donegal," was inscribed on the
small piece of pasteboard. It evidently had a good effect, but a still
greater effect was produced by the sparkling and lovely eyes of the
handsome girl who spoke in a tone of quiet assurance.

"Father will be so grateful to you for taking us in," she continued. "It
would be terrible, you know, if you allowed us to wander about the
streets. I am going to telegraph to him now, and he will arrive here, I
have no doubt, within the next twenty-four hours. I have not much money
with me," added Kitty frankly, "but father will bring plenty--plenty when
he arrives."

Again the man and woman whispered together, and now approving and
interesting glances turned in Kitty's direction. The woman presently
said:

"Very well, miss, we'll do our best for you. Will you follow me, miss?"

She took Kitty and Elma upstairs and showed them into the best room in
the house. In a very short time poor Elma found herself in bed, with
Kitty bending over her, kissing her now and then, and whispering kind
words in her ears.

"I have managed beautifully with the people of the hotel," whispered
Kitty. "And now, darling, you'll be made so comfortable. I am going to
make up to you for--for what Carrie said I did."

"But you did nothing; it was I who was bad, very bad," cried Elma.

"Oh, don't begin to get remorseful now, while you are ill. Wait, at
least until you are better. I have ordered some fruit and jelly and ice,
and I have asked the landlady--isn't she a dear--to send for the
doctor."

"It seems like a dream," said Elma. "Is it possible that everything has
changed so completely, and you--you, Kitty Malone--you to whom I have
acted so badly, are good to me?"

"Yes, yes, I mean to be good to you; but don't begin to fret about your
sins until you are better. Leave unpleasant things alone. Go to sleep,
Elma; go to sleep."

Kitty went out of the room and stood and reflected for a few moments on
the landing.

"Here's a state of things," Kitty said to herself; "but on the whole I
rather like it. I knew I should be good in emergencies; I felt that it
was in me. I am afraid poor Elma is going to be downright ill. I suppose
I did wrong to run away--perhaps I did; but I am so relieved about
Laurie that nothing else seems to matter now. I will telegraph
immediately to the dear old dad and ask him to come right away here at
once. When I see him and know that Laurie is really saved, I'll just
tell him everything. Oh, yes, that is the only--only thing to do."

Kitty went straight to the nearest post office, and in an incredibly
short space of time the following message was being carried across the
wires to Castle Malone:

"AT THE SIGN OF THE RED DOE, SALTBURY.--You will be surprised, father;
but I have run away from school. I will tell you everything when I see
you. I am here with a sick girl who has also run away. We have very
little money; and I, your Kitty, want you dreadfully. Come to me as
quickly as you can.

"KITTY MALONE."

"Bless him," said the girl to herself. "He may be angry for a minute,
but this message will bring him on the wings of the wind. Now that it
has gone off I wonder ought I to let them know at Middleton?"

Kitty reflected earnestly over this problem. She quickly, however, made
up her mind to keep her secret to herself.

"A little suspense will be rather good for Alice than otherwise," she
thought; "and although Mr and Mrs. Denvers may be anxious about me, they
can but telegraph to father; and as he will know my address already it
won't put him into a taking. Miss Sherrard too can bear it; and as to
Carrie, I am really sorry for poor old Carrie, and I should not much
mind having her here; but I think until father comes I will look after
Elma my lone self, as they say in Ireland."

Having made up her mind, Kitty went back to the hotel and asked the
landlady, with whom she was now great friends, to send for the best
doctor in the neighborhood.

Dr. Marchand arrived in the course of the morning, and pronounced Elma
to be ill, but not alarmingly so.

"Your young friend is suffering from considerable shock," he said, "and
has evidently also taken a severe cold; but with care and nursing she
will in all probability soon get relief--that is, if the strain from
which she is suffering is taken off her mind."

"Oh, I think I can manage that," answered Kitty, nodding to the doctor
in a very bright and frank way. Her dark-blue eyes were shining like
stars; the color in her cheeks, the set of her beautiful head on her
lovely neck, the very arrangement of her clothes fairly bewitched that
good man. He had seldom seen such sparkling eyes nor such a beautiful
dimpled mouth. Kitty's manner completely won Dr. Marchand over to her
side, as it had already done the good people at the hotel.

After getting innumerable directions from the doctor, she went
downstairs to consult with her land lady.

"Now, Mrs. Stacey," she said, "I must buy lots of things, and I wonder
if you can help me. I have telegraphed to father to come here; but until
he does I have only this much;" here she opened her purse and tumbled
the contents on to the landlady's palm.

Mrs. Stacey started back in some astonishment. Really this was a very
fascinating young lady; but she had never met anybody quite so--so out
of the common.

"You can reckon it up if you like," said Kitty; "you will see that it
does not come to two pounds. Now, do you know of a shop that would trust
me--give me credit, I mean--for some things?"

"What sort of things, miss?"

"Oh, clothes, and a couple of trunks. You see, we are not respectable
without trunks, are we?"

"Oh, yes, Miss Malone, you are."

"But do you know of such a shop? Please think very hard, Mrs. Stacey."

"Williamson's round the corner will oblige you to any extent, miss, if
you mention my name."

"Then I'll go there immediately. Thank you; how very nice you are!" said
Kitty.

"Of course I ought not to be nice to you, miss, for it ain't right--no,
that it ain't--to encourage runaways."

"When you know our story you will be quite glad you encouraged us,"
laughed Kitty.

"Then perhaps you'll confide in me, miss."

Kitty colored and thought for a moment.

"I think father must know it first," she said. "And now I must rush
away to get the things that poor Elma requires."

During the course of that day it could scarcely be said that Kitty
Malone was without luggage; for two new trunks presently made their
appearance, full to the brim with all sorts of dainty clothing both for
Elma and herself.

"Elma," she cried, dancing into the sick-room, "I have got two of the
most charming hats you ever laid eyes on. Mine is sweetly becoming to
me, and I am sure yours will suit you equally well; they are both big
white leghorns, with great bunches of black feathers in front. Won't
they look sweet with our new muslin dresses? Mine is pink, but I thought
blue would suit you best. I expect dad to-morrow evening at the latest;
and I am going to meet him at the station in my new hat and dress. There
will be no doubt about his forgiving me when he sees me in them."

Just then there was a tap at the door, and Kitty, rushing to open it,
found a telegram awaiting her. She tore it open and read the following
words:

"Starting from Dublin by the night-boat, with you to-morrow.--DENNIS
MALONE."

"There, didn't I say he was a darling--the best, best darling in the
world?" cried the excited girl. "Oh, won't he have a _caed mille
afaltha;_ won't he? Elma, I am almost beside myself."

"I don't know what you are talking about," said Elma. "What do you mean
by those queer words?"

"_Caed mille afaltha_? Oh, they are the Irish for a hundred thousand
welcomes. We put them over our arches and everything when people are
coming home. Oh, they don't speak a half nor a quarter of what our
hearts are full of. Oh father, father, the joy--the joy your poor little
Kitty feels at the thought of seeing your darling face again!"

That night again Kitty lay awake, although Elma slept. Strange thoughts,
strange and new, were coursing through the young girl's brain.
Everything had been a failure, and yet she felt bright and happy and
like her old self once more.

"It is the thought of seeing father," she said to herself. "I was never
fit for England. England and its ways will never suit me, never, never;
but when I see father I shall be all right. Oh, to think that he is
really coming, and that Laurie is saved! I must, of course, tell father
everything; but he won't be angry with Laurie when I tell him the story
in my own way."

Accordingly early the next morning Kitty dressed herself in the
fascinating leghorn hat and slipped on the pink muslin dress, and, with
a bunch of roses at her belt, sallied forth to the railway station. She
soon found the right platform, and paced up and down in a fever of
impatience waiting for the train. As she was doing so, flaunting her
pretty little person in a somewhat aggressive way and causing some
prim-looking ladies to gaze at her with anything but approval, a hand
was laid on her arm, and turning she saw, to her amazement, the
extremely indignant faces of Miss Sherrard and Miss Worrick.

"Well, Kitty, after this!" said Miss Sherrard,

"Oh, please don't scold me just now!" said Kitty, with a little gasp;
"wait until he comes."

"Until who comes?"

"Father. I am expecting him by this train."

"I am relieved at that," said Miss Sherrard. "I shall have a painful
tale to tell him."

"So you may, Miss Sherrard. You may tell him everything; but please let
me tell him my story first. You must, you shall; I insist."

The girl's eyes were flashing; she was trembling all over. Just when her
happiness seemed to be at its height, for Miss Sherrard and Miss Worrick
to appear!

"Oh, and there's the train!" she cried. "He will be here in a minute;
let me see him first. Oh, the train, is stopping, and there he is; I see
him at the very end; there he is with his white hair and--let me go, let
me go!"

She rushed from Miss Sherrard's retaining arm and flew up the platform,
and a moment later the owner of the pink dress and leghorn hat was being
clasped tightly, tightly to the breast of the magnificent-looking old
gentleman, almost a king in his way, who had suddenly stepped on to the
platform.

"Father, you'll protect me--they have come, they have followed me. You
will let me tell you my story first? Father! father! oh, feel how my
heart is beating!"

"Why, Kitty, asthore; Kitty, Kitty, my own. What is it, Kit? I say, Kit,
what is wrong?"

"Nothing, nothing now that you have come; but let me tell you my story
first."

"Your story first--why, of course, Kit."

"They are there; speak to them; tell them you will see them afterward.
We are staying at the Sign of the Red Doe; tell them that you will see
me first and then you will see them."

"Introduce me to them, Kitty, and calm yourself. Come, Kitty, come."

"Yes, father, yes; it is all right."

Kitty's terrible excitement subsided; leaning on her father's arm, she
approached the platform where Miss Sherrard and Miss Worrick, both
looking rather confused, were standing.

"This is my father, Miss Sherrard," said Kitty, introducing Dennis
Malone, who took off his hat with a grand sweep.

"I am relieved to see you," began Miss Sherrard.

"Pardon me one moment, madam," said Malone; "but Kitty here would like
to tell me her story first. You are her school-mistress, the lady with
whom I have had the pleasure of corresponding?"

"I am, and I have a very, very painful tale to tell you."

"You shall tell me your story afterward."

Here the owner of Castle Malone caught sight of Miss Worrick, and gave
her a bow even more deferential than he had bestowed upon the
head-mistress.

"I am sorry to put you off even for a few moments, ladies," he said;
"but you see this little girl, she--she must come first. However badly
she has behaved, she--she is my only girl, you understand, and I--I must
hear her story first. Will you meet us both within an hour at the Sign
of the Red Doe? Then everything can be explained."

"I wonder if that dreadful girl is to go unpunished in the end," said
Miss Worrick to Miss Sherrard, as they both slowly went to the nearest
hotel to wait until the time arranged to meet Kitty and her father at
the Sign of the Red Doe."

"It seems like it," said Miss Sherrard. "But what a splendid old man!
Perhaps after all it may be the best thing for Kitty Malone not to
punish her, Miss Worrick."

"Oh, Miss Sherrard! I cannot approve of your very lax opinions. Surely
punishment for such terrible wrong-doing--"

"Yes, she behaved badly, but not so badly as Elma, I think we must wait
to hear the whole story explained; at present we are more or less in the
dark."

"And now, Kit, what is it?" said the squire, when he and his daughter
were ensconced in the little sitting-room at the Sign of the Red Doe.

"Do you mind if I give you one of my real big hugs first?" said Kitty.

"To be sure not, alanna--oh, acushla macree! it is like flowers in May
to see you again."

"There! I am better now," said Kitty, after she had bestowed one of her
most violent hugs upon her father. "Let me sit on your knee and I will
tell you everything."

At the best it was a sad story, a story full of wrong-doing, full of
impulse, full of passion; and although Kitty tried hard to make Elma's
part of it as light as possible, the squire's eyes blazed and a
thundering note came into his voice as he listened.

"That's a bad girl, Kitty," he cried; "and you ought to have nothing to
do with her."

"But that's exactly it, father--that's what I am coming to. If you
won't let me have anything to do with Elma, why--why, you must punish me
terribly. I want you to let me--to let me make Elma my real friend."

"That sort of girl your friend? Not if I know it," said the squire.

"But, please, father, do let me plead for her. I have done her injury,
and she--she has never had advantages like the rest of us."

Then Kitty began to coax, and few, very few people could coax like this
Irish girl. Not only with her voice, but with her eyes, with a smile
here and a frown there, she set herself to bring old Squire Malone to
her way of thinking. And as always from the time she was a tiny child
she had been able to twist this old lion round her little finger, so she
twisted him now.

"You have got to do it, father," she said at last. "You have got to
forgive Laurie, and you have got to forgive Elma, and----"

"Bless the boy, it was just like his recklessness, Why didn't he come
and tell me? He wasn't afraid of his old father, was he?"

"Well, father, you know you are very fierce when you like."

"Tut! tut! Kitty, don't you begin to scold."

"No; I won't--not if you yield to me. Full and free forgiveness for the
whole three of us; for your Kit----"

"Bless you, child, I have forgiven you already."

"Ay, didn't I know it--didn't I say he was a dear old thing? Now,
Laurie--you won't say a word to him?"

"I'll give him a right good scolding."

"Why, then, dad, your scolding never did anybody any harm; your bark is
worse than your bite, you know; but there will be no school in England
for him, that's what I mean."

"Well, it doesn't seem to have succeeded with you, asthore."

"No more it did. Why, it was breaking the heart in me entirely."

"So you want to come back with me again?"

"That I do, and never, never be a polished lady with manners to the
longest day of my life."

"You want to be Wild Kitty still?"

"Wild, wild, the wildest of Kittys to the end of the chapter."

"And what will your aunts say?"

"Never mind; what you say is the important thing."

"It shall be as you please, Kit. I am sure I have missed you sore, very
sore."

"And now, what about Elma?"

"Yes; what do you want me to do for her?"

"I want her to come back with me to Castle Malone for the rest of the
summer."

"Oh, heart alive! child; but I don't think I could take to that sort of
girl."

"Yes, you will, if I take to her. Now, dad, must I begin it all over
again?"

"No, no; anything to please you, Kit."

"And at the end of the summer, as you have plenty of money, and as I am
sure she has repented most bitterly will you send her to Girton?"

"Oh, come, come; I make no promises."

"But I know it is all right, and I am going to rush up to her and tell
her everything. Oh, and here come Miss Sherrard and Miss Worrick. You
shall see them without me."

"I declare, upon my word, Kitty, you are the most extraordinary
creature. How am I to face the good ladies?"

"Here they are, father. Please, Miss Sherrard, come in; father will see
you, and Miss Worrick too."

Kitty flung open the door, and the head-mistress of Middleton School and
her subordinate found it closed behind them. They had a short interview
with Squire Malone--very short. It ended by Miss Sherrard and the squire
shaking hands most heartily.

"You did your best for her, and I am awfully obliged to you," said the
squire. "But, after all, she is too wild for England; she had better
stay in her own land."

"I believe you are right," said Miss Sherrard.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Kitty, by L. T. Meade

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD KITTY ***

***** This file should be named 9986-8.txt or 9986-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/9/8/9986/

Produced by Kevin Handy, Dave Maddock, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
