Project Gutenberg's The Boy Scouts of the Eagle Patrol, by Howard Payson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Boy Scouts of the Eagle Patrol

Author: Howard Payson

Posting Date: March 8, 2009 [EBook #12112]
Release Date: April 22, 2004

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOY SCOUTS OF THE EAGLE PATROL ***




Produced by Sean Pobuda.  HTML version by Al Haines.








THE BOY SCOUTS OF THE EAGLE PATROL


By

Lieut. Howard Payson




CONTENTS

       I  SCOUTS ON THE TRAIL
      II  A CRUISE TO THE ISLAND
     III  BOY SCOUTS TO THE RESCUE
      IV  SAM IN DIRE STRAITS
       V  THE BULLY SPRINGS A SURPRISE
      VI  AN ISLAND MYSTERY
     VII  SOME STRANGE DOINGS
    VIII  THE STOLEN UNIFORMS
      IX  THE HYDROPLANE QUEERLY RECOVERED
       X  WINNING THE CONTEST
      XI  A FORTUNATE DISCOVERY
     XII  JACK FORMS A PLOT
    XIII  THE  "FLYING FISH" ON HER METTLE
     XIV  THE EAGLES IN CAMP
      XV  THE CHUMS IN PERIL
     XVI  LOST IN THE STORM
    XVII  ALMOST RUN DOWN
   XVIII  JOE DIGBY MISSING
     XIX  SAM REBELS
      XX  THE HUNT FOR TENDERFOOT JOE
     XXI  SAVED BY "SMOKE MORSE"
    XXII  THE ESCAPE OF THE BULLY
   XXIII  SCOUTS IN NEED ARE FRIENDS INDEED
    XXIV  A MEETING IN THE FOG--CONCLUSION




CHAPTER I

SCOUTS ON THE TRAIL


The dark growth of scrub oak and pine parted suddenly and the lithe
figure of a boy of about seventeen emerged suddenly into the little
clearing.  The lad who had so abruptly materialized from the
close-growing vegetation peculiar to the region about the little town
of Hampton, on the south shore of Long Island, wore a well-fitting
uniform of brown khaki, canvas leggings of the same hue and a soft hat
of the campaign variety, turned up at one side.  To the front of his
headpiece was fastened a metal badge, resembling the three-pointed
arrow head utilized on old maps to indicate the north.  On a metal
scroll beneath it were embossed the words: "Be Prepared."

The manner of the badge's attachment would have indicated at once, to
any one familiar with the organization, that the lad wearing it was the
patrol leader of the local band of Boy Scouts.

Gazing keenly about him on all sides of the little clearing in the
midst of which he stood, the boy's eyes lighted with a gleam of
satisfaction on a largish rock.  He lifted this up, adjusted it to his
satisfaction and then picked up a smaller stone.  This he placed on the
top of the first and then listened intently. After a moment of this he
then placed beneath the large underlying rock and at its left side a
small stone.

Suddenly he started and gazed back.  From the distance, borne faintly
to his ears, came far off boyish shouts and cries.

They rose like the baying of a pack in full cry.  Now high, now low on
the hush of the midsummer afternoon.

"They picked the trail all right," he remarked to himself, with a
smile, "maybe I'd better leave another sign."

Stooping he snapped off a small low-growing branch and broke it near
the end so that its top hung limply down.

"Two signs now that this is the trail," he resumed as he stuck it in
the ground beside the stone sign.  "Now I'd better be off, for they are
picking my tracks up, fast."

He darted off into the undergrowth on the opposite side of the
clearing, vanishing as suddenly and noiselessly as he had appeared.

A few seconds later the deserted clearing was invaded by a scouting
party of ten lads ranging in years from twelve to sixteen.  They were
all attired in similar uniforms to the leader, whom they were tracing,
with but one exception they wore their "Be Prepared" badges on the left
arm above the elbow.  Some of them were only entitled to affix the
motto part of the badge the scroll inscribed with the motto.  These
latter were the second-class scouts of the Eagle Patrol.  The exception
to the badge-bearers was a tall, well-knit lad with a sunny face and
wavy, brown hair.  His badge was worn on the left arm, as were the
others, but it had a strip of white braid sewn beneath it. This
indicated that the bearer was the corporal of the patrol.

As the group of flushed, panting lads emerged into the sandy space the
corporal looked sharply about him.  Almost at once his eye encountered
the "spoor" left by the preceding lad.

"Here's the trail, boys," he shouted, "and to judge by the fresh look
of the break in this branch it can't have been placed here very long.
The small stone by the large one means to the left. We'll run Rob Blake
down before long for all his skill if we have good luck."

"Say, Corporal Merritt," exclaimed a perspiring lad, whose "too, too
solid flesh" seemed to be melting and running off his face in the form
of streaming moisture, "don't we get a rest?"

A general laugh greeted poor Bob or Tubby Hopkins' remark.

"I always told you, Tubby, you were too fat to make a good scout,"
laughed Corporal Merritt Crawford, "this is the sort of thing that will
make you want to take some of that tubbiness off you."

"Say, Tubby, you look like a roll of butter at an August picnic,"
laughed Simon Jeffords, one of the second-class scouts.

"All right, Sim," testily rejoined the aggrieved fat one, "I notice at
that, though, that I am a regular scout while you are only a rookie."

"Come on, cut out the conversation," exclaimed Corporal Crawford
hastily, "while we are fussing about here, Rob Blake must be halfway
home."

With a groan of comical despair from poor Tubby, the Boy Scouts darted
forward once more.  On and on they pushed across country, skillfully
tracking their leader by the various signs they had been taught to know
and of which the present scouting expedition was a test.

Their young leader evidently intended them to use their eyes to the
utmost for, beside the stone signs, he used blaze-marks, cut on the
trees with his hunting knife.  For instance, at one place they would
find a square bit of bark removed, with a long slice to the left of it.
This indicated that their quarry had doubled to the left.  The slice to
the right of the square blaze indicated the reverse.

Suddenly Corporal Crawford held up his hand as a signal for silence.
The scouts came to an abrupt stop.

From what seemed to be only a short distance in front of them they
could hear a voice upraised apparently in anger.  Replying to it were
the tones of their leader.

"Seems to be trouble ahead of some kind," exclaimed Crawford. "Come on,
boys."

They all advanced close on his heels--guided by the sound of the angry
voice, which did not diminish in tone but apparently waxed more and
more furious as they drew nearer.  Presently the woodland thinned and
the ground became dotted with stumps of felled timber and in a few
paces more they emerged on a small peach orchard at the edge of which
stood Rob Blake and a larger and older boy.  As Crawford and his
followers came upon the scene the elder lad, who seemed beside himself
with rage, picked up a large rock and was about to hurl it with all his
might at Rob when the young corporal dashed forward and held his hand
up to stay him.

"Here, what's all this trouble?" he demanded.

"You just keep out of it, Merritt Crawford," said the elder lad, a
hulking, thick-set youth with a mean look on his heavy features.  "I'm
just reading this kid here a lesson.  This orchard is my father's and
mine and you'll keep out of it in future or suffer the consequences,
understand?"

"Why, we aren't doing any harm," protested Rob Blake heatedly.

"I don't care what you are doing or not doing," retorted the other,
"this is my father's orchard and you'll keep off it.  You and the rest
of you tin soldiers.  I don't want you stealing our peaches."

"I guess you are sore, Jack Curtiss, because you couldn't get a boy
scout patrol of your own!  I guess that's what the trouble is,"
remarked Tubby Hopkins softly, but with a meaning look at the big lad.

"You impudent little whipper-snapper," roared Jack Curtiss, "if you
weren't such a shrimp I'd lick you for that remark, but you're all
beneath my notice.  All I want to say to you is keep away from my
orchard or I'll give you a trimming."

"Suppose you start now," said Rob Blake quietly, "if you are so anxious
to show what a scrapper you are."

"Bah, I don't want anything to do with you, I tell you," rejoined
Curtiss, turning away, with a rather troubled expression, however, for
while he was a bully the big lad had no particular liking for a fight
unless he was pretty sure that all the advantage lay on his side.

"It was too bad you didn't get that patrol of yours, Jack," called the
irrepressible Tubby after him as the big youth strode off across the
orchard toward the old-fashioned farmhouse in which he lived with his
father, a well-to-do farmer.  "Never mind; better luck next time," he
went on, "or maybe we'll let you into ours some time."

"You just wait," roared the retreating bully, shaking his fist at the
lads, "I'll make trouble for you yet."

"Well," remarked Rob Blake, as Jack Curtiss strode off, "I guess the
run is over for to-day.  Too bad we should have come out on his land.
Of course he feels sore at us; and I shouldn't wonder but he will
really try to do us some mischief if he gets a chance."

As it was growing late and there did not seem much chance of restarting
the "Follow the Trail" practice, that day at least, the boys strolled
back through the woodland and soon emerged on a country road about
three miles from Hampton Inlet, where they lived.

While they are covering the distance perhaps the reader may care to
know something about the cause of the enmity which Jack Curtiss
entertained toward the lads of the Eagle Patrol.  It had its beginning
several months before when the boys of Hampton Inlet began to discuss
forming a patrol of boy scouts.  They all attended the Hampton Academy,
and naturally the news that Rob Blake was going to try to organize a
patrol soon spread through the school.

Jack Curtiss, as soon as he heard what Rob--whom he considered more or
less a rival of his--intended doing he also forwarded an application to
the headquarters of the organization in New York. As Rob Blake's had
been received first, however, and on investigation he was shown to be a
likely lad for the leader, he was appointed and at once began the
enrollment of his scouts.

The bully was furious when he realized that he would be unable to
secure an authorized patrol, and he and his cronies, two lads about his
own age named Bill Bender and Sam Redding, had been busy ever since
devising schemes to "get even" as they called it.  None of these,
however, had been effective and the encounter of that day was the first
chance Jack had had to work off any of his rancor on Rob Blake's patrol.

Young Blake was the only son of Mr. Albert Blake, the president of the
local bank.  His corporal, Merritt Crawford, was the eldest of the
numerous family of Jared Crawford, the blacksmith and wheelwright of
the little town, and Tubby Hopkins was the offspring of Mrs. Hopkins--a
widow in comfortable circumstances. The other lads of the Patrol whom
we shall meet as the story of their doings and adventures progresses
were all natives of the town, which was situated on the south shore of
Long Island--as has been said--and on an inlet which led out to the
Atlantic itself.

The scouts trudged back into Hampton just at twilight and made their
way at once to their armory--as they called it--which was situated In a
large room above the bank of which Rob's father was president.  At one
side of it was a row of lockers and each lad--after changing his
uniform for street clothes--placed his "regimentals" in these
receptacles.

This done the lads broke up and started for their various homes. Rob
and his young corporal left the armory together, after locking the door
and descending the stairs which led onto a side street.

"I wonder if that fellow Curtiss means to carry out his threat of
getting even?" said Crawford as they made their way down the street arm
in arm, for their homes were not far apart and both on Main Street.

"He's mean enough to attempt anything," rejoined Rob, "but I don't
think he's got nerve enough to carry out any of his schemes.  Hullo!"
he broke off suddenly, "there he is now across the street by the post
office, talking to Bill Bender and Sam Redding.  I'll bet they are
hatching up some sort of mischief. Just look at them looking at us.
I'll bet a doughnut they were talking about us."

"Shouldn't wonder," agreed his companion.  "By the way, I've got to go
and see if there is any mail.  Come on over."

The two lads crossed the street and as they entered the post office,
although neither of them had much use for either of the bullies' two
chums, they nodded to them pleasantly.

"You kids think you're pretty fine with your Eagle Patrol or whatever
you call it, don't you," sneered Bill Bender, as they walked by.  "I'll
bet the smell of a little real powder would make your whole regiment
run to cover."

"Don't pay any attention to him," whispered the young corporal to Rob,
who doubled up his fists and flushed angrily at the sneering tone Jack
Curtiss' friend had adopted.

Rob restrained his anger with an effort, and by the time they emerged
from the post office the trio of worthies--who, as Rob had rightly
guessed, had been discussing them--had moved on up the street.

"I had trouble with those kids myself this afternoon," remarked Jack
Curtiss with a scowl, as they wended their way toward a shed in the
rear of Bill Bender's home, which had been fitted tip as a sort of
clubroom.

"What did they do to you?" incautiously inquired Sam Redding, a youth
as big as the other two, but not so powerful.  In fact he was used more
or less as a tool by them.

"Do to me," roared the bully, "what did I do to them, you mean."

"Well what did you do to them then?" asked Bill Bender, as they entered
the clubroom before referred to and he produced some cigarettes, which
all three had been strictly forbidden to smoke.

"Chased them off my land," rejoined the other, lighting a paper roll
and blowing out a cloud of smoke, "you should have seen them run.  If
they want to play their fool games they've got to do it on the property
of folks who'll let them.  They can't come on my land."

"You mean your father's, don't you?" put in the unlucky Sam Redding.

"Sam, you've got a head like a billiard ball," retorted the bully,
turning on the other, "it'll be mine some day, won't it? Therefore it's
as good as mine now."

Although he didn't quite see the logic of the foregoing, Sam Redding
gave a sage nod and agreed that his leader was right.

"Yes, those kids need a good lesson from somebody," chimed in Bill
Bender.

"I think we had better be the 'somebodies' to give it to them,"
rejoined Jack Curtiss.  "They are getting insufferable.  They actually
twitted me this afternoon with being sore at them because I didn't get
my patrol--as if I really wanted one.  That Blake kid is the worst of
the bunch.  Just because his father has a little money he gives himself
all kinds of airs.  My father is as rich as his, even if he isn't a
banker."

"I've been thinking of a good trick we can put up on them, but it will
take some nerve to carry it out," announced Bill Bender, after some
more discussion of the lads of the Eagle Patrol.

"Out with it, then," urged the bully, "what is it?"

In a lowered tone Bill Bender sketched out his scheme in detail, while
Jack and Sam nodded their approval.  At length he ceased talking and
the other two broke out into a delighted laugh, in which malice as much
as merriment prevailed.

"It's the very thing," exclaimed Jack.  "Bill, you're a genius. We'll
do it as soon as possible.  If that doesn't take some starch out of
those tin soldiers nothing will."

Half an hour later the three cronies parted for the night.  Sam went to
his home near the waterfront, for his father was a boat builder, and
Jack started to walk the three miles to his father's farm in the
moonlight.  His way took him by the bank.  As he passed it he gazed up
at the windows of the armory on which was lettered in gilt: "Eagle
Patrol of the Boy Scouts of America."

"That's a slick idea of Bill's," said the bully to himself, "I can
hardly wait till we get a chance to carry it out."




CHAPTER II

A CRUISE TO THE ISLAND


"Whatever are you doing, Rob?"

It was the morning after the consultation of Jack Curtiss and his
cronies, and Corporal Crawford was looking over the fence into his
leader's yard.

Rob was bending over a curious-looking apparatus, consisting of a bent
stick held in a bow-shape by a taut leather thong.  The appliance was
twisted about an upright piece of wood sharpened at one end--which was
rotated as the lad ran the bow back and forth across it.

Presently smoke began to rise from the flat piece of timber into which
the point of the upright stick had been boring and depositing sawdust,
and Rob, by industriously blowing at the accumulation, presently caused
it to burst into flame.

"There I've done it," he exclaimed triumphantly, arising with a flushed
face from his labors.

"Done what?" inquired young Crawford interestedly.

"Made fire in the Indian way," replied Rob triumphantly.

"I thought they made it by rubbing two sticks together."

"Only book Indians do that," replied Rob, "I'll tell you it took me a
time to get the hang of it, but I've got it now."

"It's quite a stunt, all right," commented the corporal admiringly.

"You bet, and it's useful, too," replied Rob.  "I'll put the bow and
drill in my pocket, and then any time we get stuck for matches we'll
have no trouble in making a signal smoke or lighting cooking fires."

"Say, I've got some news for you," went on young Crawford, "did you
know that Sam Redding has entered that freak motor boat he's been
building in the yacht club regatta?  He's out for the club trophy."

"No, is he, though?" exclaimed Rob, keenly interested.  "Then the crew
and skipper of the Flying Fish will have to look alive. I know that
Sam's father helped him out with that boat and put a lot of new
wrinkles in it.  I didn't think, though, he'd have it ready in time for
the races."

The boys referred to the coming motor-boat races which were to take
place shortly on the inlet at Hampton.  Like most of the other lads in
the seashore town, Merritt and Rob had a lot of experience on the water
and some time before had built a speedy motor boat from knock-down
frames.  The Flying Fish, as they called her, was entered for the main
event referred to, the prize for which was a silver cup, donated by the
merchants of the town.  There were several other entries in the race,
but Rob and his crew, consisting of Merritt and Tubby Hopkins,
confidently expected the Flying Fish to easily lead them all.

"I wonder if the Sam Redding can show her stern to the Flying Fish?"
mused Rob.  "I'd like to lake a good look at her."

"Let's go down to Redding's boat yard," suggested Merritt; "she's lying
there on the ways.  I don't suppose any one would object to our sizing
her up."

Rob hailed the suggestion as a good one.

"We can call in for Tubby on the way," he said, as he darted into the
house after his hat.

The boys dropped in at Tubby's house on their way to the water-front,
and received from the stout youth some additional details regarding
Sam's boat.

"She's a hydroplane," volunteered Tubby, "and Tom Jennings, down at the
yard, says she's as fast as a race horse."

"A hydroplane?--that's one of those craft that cut along the top of the
water like a skimming dish, isn't it?" asked Merritt.

"That's the idea," responded Rob.  "They're supposed to be as speedy as
anything afloat in smooth water."

Thus conversing they reached the boat-building yard of Sam Redding's
father and were greeted by Tom Jennings, a big good-natured ship
carpenter.  "Hullo, Tom!  Can we see that new boat of Sam's?" inquired
Rob.

"Sure, I guess there's no objection," grinned Tom, "come right this
way.  There she is, over there by that big winch."

Report had not erred apparently as to the novel qualities of Sam
Redding's speed craft.  She was about twenty-five feet long, narrow and
painted black.  She was perfectly flat-bottomed, her underside being
deeply notched at frequent intervals.  On the edge of those notches she
was supposed to glide over the water when driven at top speed.

"She certainly looks like a winner," commented Rob, as he gazed at her
clean, slender lines and sharp bow.

"She's got wonderful speed," Tom Jennings confided.  "We tried her out
the other night when no one was around.  But I don't think that in
rough water she'll be much good."

"No, I'd prefer the Flying Fish for the waters hereabouts," agreed Rob,
"it's liable to come on rough in a hurry and then a chap who was out in
a dry-goods box, like that thing, would be in trouble."

"What are you calling a dry-goods box?" demanded an indignant voice
behind them, and turning, the lads saw Sam Redding with a menacing look
on his face.  A little way behind him stood Bill Bender and Jack
Curtiss.

"Oh, I beg your pardon, Sam," said Rob.  "I really admire your
hydroplane very much, and I think it will give us a tussle for the
trophy, all right; but I don't think she'd be much good in any kind of
a sea-way."

"That's my business, you interfering little runt," snapped Sam, who,
with Bill Bender and Jack Curtiss to back him, felt very brave; though
ordinarily he would have avoided trouble with the young scouts.  "What
are you doing spying around the yard here, anyhow?" he went on
insolently.

"We are not spying," indignantly burst out Merritt.  "We asked Tom
Jennings if we couldn't look at your hydroplane, as we were naturally
interested in her, and he gave us permission."

"Well, he had no business to," growled Sam; "he ought to be attending
to his work instead of showing a lot of nosy young cubs my new boat."

"They are capable of stealing your ideas," chimed in Jack Curtiss, "and
putting them on their own boat."

"That's ridiculous," laughed Rob, "as I said I wouldn't want to have
anything to do with such a contrivance except on a lake or a river."

"Well, you keep your advice and your ideas to yourself, and get out of
this yard!" roared Sam, waxing bolder and bolder, and mistaking Rob's
conciliatory manner for cowardice.  "I've a good mind to punch your
head."

"Better come on and try it," retorted Rob, preparing for the immediate
onslaught which it seemed reasonable from Sam's manner to expect.

But it didn't come.

Muttering something about "young cubs," and "keeping the boat-yard gate
locked," Sam turned to his chums and invited them to come and try out
his new motor in the shop.

As the three chums had no desire to "mix it up with Sam on his own
place," as Tubby put it, they left the yard promptly, and walked on
down the water-front to the wharf at which lay the Flying Fish, the
fastest craft in the Hampton Motor Boat Club. Rob's boat was, to tell
the truth, rather broad of beam for a racer and drew quite a little
water.  She had a powerful motor and clean lines, however, and while
not primarily designed solely for "mug-hunting," had beaten everything
she had raced with during the few months since the boys had completed
her.  The money for her motor had been given to Rob by his father, who
was quite indulgent to Rob in money matters, having noticed that the
lad always expended the sums given him wisely.

"Let's take a spin," suddenly suggested Tubby.

"Nothing to prevent us," answered Rob; "we've got plenty of time before
dinner. Come on, boys."

The lads were soon on board and examining the gasoline tank, to see how
much fuel they had on hand, and oiling up the engine. The fuel
receptacle proved to be almost full, so after filling the lubricant
cups and attending to the batteries, they started up the engine--a
powerful, three cylindered, twelve-horse affair capable of driving the
twenty-two foot Flying Fish through the water at twelve miles an hour
or better.

Just as Rob was casting off the head-line there came a hail from the
wharf above them.

"Ahoy, there, shipmates!  Where are yer bound fer this fine, sunny day?"

The lads looked up to see the weather-beaten countenance of Captain Job
Hudgins, one of the characters of the vicinity.  He was a former
whaler, and lived on a small island some distance from Hampton.  On his
little territory he fished and grew a few vegetables, "trading in" his
produce at the Hampton grocery stores for his simple wants.  He,
however, had a pension, and was supposed to have a "snug little
fortune" laid by.  His only companion in his island solitude was it big
Newfoundland dog named "Skipper."

The animal stood beside its master on the dock and wagged its tail at
the sight of the boys, whom it knew quite well from their frequent
visits to the captain's little island.

"Hullo, captain!" shouted Rob, as the veteran saluted his three young
friends.   "Where's your boat?"

"Oh, her engine went--busted, and I had to leave her at the yard below
fer repairs," explained the captain.  "I wonder if yer boys can give me
a lift back if yer goin' near Topsail Island?"

"Surest thing you know," rejoined Rob hastily.  "Come right aboard.
But how are you going to get off your island again if your motor is
laid up here to be fixed?"

"Oh, I'll use my rowboat," responded the old mariner, clambering down
into the Flying Fish.  "Say, this is quite a right smart contraption,
ain't she?"

"We think she is a pretty good little boat," modestly replied Rob,
taking his place at the wheel.  "Now, then, Merritt, start up that
engine."

"Hold on a minute!" shouted Tubby.  "We forgot the dog."

Sure enough, Skipper was dashing up and down the wharf in great
distress at the prospect of being deserted.

"Put yer boat alongside that landin' stage at the end of the wharf,"
suggested his master.  "Skipper can get aboard from there, I reckon."

Rob steered the Flying Fish round to the floating landing, to which an
inclined runway led from the wharf.  Skipper dashed down it as soon as
he saw what was happening, and was waiting, ready to embark, when the
Flying Fish came alongside.

"Poor old Skipper, I reckon yer thought we was goin' ter maroon yer,"
said Captain Job, as the animal jumped on board with a bark of "thanks"
for his rescue.  "I tell yer, boys, I wouldn't lose that dog fer all
the money in Rob's father's bank.  He keeps good watch out an the
Island, I'll tell yer."

"I didn't think any one much came there, except us," said Rob, as the
Flying Fish headed away from the wharf and began to cut through the
waters of the inlet.

"Oh, yes; there's others," responded the old man.  "That Jack Curtiss
lad and his two chums are out there quite often."

"Bill Bender and Sam Redding, I suppose you mean," said Tubby.

"Those their names?" asked the captain.  "Well, I don't know any good
uv any uv 'em.  Old Skipper here chased 'em away from my melon patch
the other day.  I reckon they thought Old Scratch was after them, the
way they run; but they got away with some melons, just the same."

The old man laughed aloud at the recollection of the marauders'
precipitous flight.

That Jack Curtiss and his two cronies had made a rendezvous of the
island was news to the boys, and not agreeable news, either. They had
been planning a patrol camp there later on in the summer, and the bully
and his two chums were not regarded by them as desirable neighbors.
However, they said nothing, as they could not claim sole right to use
the island, which was property that had been so long in litigation that
It had come to be known as "No Man's Land" as well as by its proper
name.  The captain was only a squatter there, but no one cared to
disturb him, and he had led the existence of a semi-hermit there for
many years.

The Flying Fish rapidly covered the calm waters of the inlet and was
soon dancing over the swells outside.

"I'm going to let her out a bit," said Rob suddenly; "look out for
spray."

"Spray don't bother a brine-pickled old salt like me," laughed the
captain.  "Let her go."

The Flying Fish seemed fairly to leap forward as Merritt gave her the
full power of her engine.  As Rob had said, it did indeed behoove her
occupants to look out for spray.  The sparkling spume came flying back
in sheets as she cut through the waves, but the boys didn't mind that
any more than did their weather-beaten companion.  As for Skipper, he
barked aloud in sheer joy as the Flying Fish slid along as if she were
trying to live up to her name to her utmost ability.

"This is a good little sea boat," remarked the captain, as they plunged
onward.  "She's as seaworthy as she is speedy, I guess."

"She'll stand a lot of knocking about, and that's a fact," agreed Rob.

"Well," remarked the old man, gazing about him, "it's a good thing that
she is, fer, if I'm not mistaken--and I'm not often off as regards the
weather--we are goin' ter have quite a little blow before yer boys get
back home."

"A storm?" asked Tubby, somewhat alarmed.

"Oh, no; not what yer might call a storm," laughed the captain; "but
just what we used to term a 'capful uv wind.'"

"Well, so long as it isn't a really bad blow, it won't trouble the
Flying Fish," Rob assured him.

"Hullo!" exclaimed the old man suddenly.  "What queer kind uv craft is
that?"

He pointed back to the mouth of the now distant inlet, from which a
curious-looking black craft was emerging at what seemed to be great
speed.

"It's that hydroplane of Sam Redding's, for a bet!" cried Rob. "Here,
Tubby, take the wheel a minute, while I put the glasses on her."

The lad stood up in the heaving motor craft, steadying himself against
the bulwarks by his knees, and peered through his marine-glasses.

"It's the hydroplane, sure enough," he said.  "By ginger, but she can
go, all right!  Sam and Jack and Bill are all in her.  They seem to be
heading right out to sea, too."

"Say!" exclaimed Tubby suddenly, "if it comes on to blow, as the
captain said it would, they'll be in a bad fix, won't they?"

"In that ther shoe-box thing," scornfully exclaimed the old captain,
who had also been looking through the glasses, "why, I wouldn't give a
confederate dollar bill with a hole in it fer their lives."




CHAPTER III

BOY SCOUTS TO THE RESCUE


"Hadn't we better put back and warn them?" suggested Merritt rather
anxiously, for he was alarmed by the confident manner in which the old
seaman prophesied certain disaster to the hydroplane if the weather
freshened.

"No; see, she's heading toward us.  I guess they want a race," cried
Rob.  "We'll slow down a bit and let them catch up."

In a few moments the hydroplane was alongside.  The yellow hood over
her powerful engines glistened with the wet of the great bow-wave her
speed had occasioned, and her powerful motor was exhausting with a roar
like a battery of machine guns.

Crouched aft of the engine hood was Sam Redding, who held the wheel.
Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender were in the stern.  They sat tandem-wise
in the narrow racing shell.

"Want a tow rope for that old stone dray of yours?" jeered Jack
Curtiss, as the speedy little racer ranged alongside.

He did not know that the Flying Fish was slowed down, and that although
the hydroplane appeared to be capable of tremendous speed, she was not
actually so very much faster than Rob's boat.

"Say, you fellows," warned Rob, making a trumpet of his hands, "the
captain says it's coming on to blow before long.  You'd better get back
into the inlet with that craft of yours."

"Save your breath to cool your coffee," shouted Sam Redding back at
him, across the fifty feet or so of water that lay between the two
boats.  "We know what we are about."

"But you're risking your lives," shouted Merritt.  "That thing wouldn't
live ten minutes in any kind of a sea."

"Well, we're not such a bunch of old women as to be scared of a little
wetting," jeered Jack Curtiss.  "So long!  We've got no time to wait
for that old tub of yours."

Before the boys could voice any more warnings, the hydroplane, which
had been slowed down, dashed off once more.

"I don't know what we are to do," spoke up Merritt.  "We can't compel
them to go in, and, after all, the captain may be mistaken."

"No, I'm not, my son," rejoined the veteran.  "I can smell wind--and
see them 'mare's tails' in the sky over yonder.  They're as fall uv
wind as a preacher is uv texts."

"Well, we've done our best to warn them," concluded Rob.  "If they are
so foolhardy as to keep on, we can't help it."

In half an hour more the boys had landed the captain at the little pier
he had built on his island, and to which his rowboat was attached, and
were ready to start back, good-bys having been said.

"Hark!" exclaimed the captain, as Rob prepared to give the order to "Go
ahead."

The boys listened, and heard a low, distant moaning sound, something
like the deepest rumbling notes of a church organ.

"That's the wind comin'," warned the captain.  "Yer'd better be
hurryin' back."

With more hasty good-bys, the lads got under way at once.  As they
emerged from the lee of the island they could see that seaward the
ocean was being rapidly lashed into choppy, white-crested waves by the
advancing storm, and that the wind was freshening into a really stiff
breeze.

"Those fellows must be wishing they took our advice now if they are
fools enough to have kept out," said Merritt, as he slowed down the
engine so as to permit the Flying Fish to ride the rising seas more
easily.

"Yes, I guess they're doing some tall thinking," agreed Tubby, as a
wave caught the little Flying Fish "quartering" on her port bow, and
sent a white smother of spray swirling back over her occupants.

"That's the time we got it," laughed Rob, from the wheel, peering
straight ahead.  Suddenly he uttered a shout and pointed seaward.

"Look there!" he shouted at the top of his voice.  "There are those
three fellows, and they're in trouble, from the looks of it."

The others looked, and beheld, half a mile or so away, on the
roughening waters, the hull of the hydroplane.  She was tossing up and
down like a cork, and apparently was drifting helplessly, with her
motor broken down, in the heavy sea.  Her occupants seemed to be
bailing her; but as they caught sight of the Flying Fish they stood up
and waved frantically.

"Yes, they're in trouble, all right," agreed Tubby.  "And I suppose
we've got to go and get them out of it."

Rob had already put the Flying Fish about and headed her for the
distressed craft.  As they drew near, Sam Redding began shouting:

"Help, help!  We're sinking, we're sinking!"

Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender, drenched to the skin with spray and white
with fright, said nothing, but a look of great relief came over their
faces as the chums' boat ranged alongside.

"I don't want to risk ramming my boat by coming right alongside,"
shouted Rob.  "You'll have to jump for it.  Don't be scared. We'll pull
you aboard."

The three youths on the water-logged hydroplane looked somewhat alarmed
at the prospect, but Rob knew that Jack and Bill could swim.  He was
not sure of Sam, but assumed, from the fact that he had lived by the
sea all his life, that he was equally at home in the water.

The hesitation of Jack Curtiss and his chum was over in a minute, as
the hydroplane gave a plunge that seemed as if it would be her last.
Lightly dressed as they were, in canvas trousers, sleeveless jerseys
and yachting shoes, it was no trick at all for them to swim the few
feet to the Flying Fish.  As they leaped overboard, Sam lingered.

"Come on, Sam," shouted Jack, as the boys lugged the two dripping,
sputtering castaways on board.

"I--I can't swim.  You'll have to come alongside for me," stuttered the
badly-scared Sam.

"All right.  Hold on, and we'll do what we can," hailed Rob, starting
to carry out the risky maneuver of getting alongside the plunging
hydroplane in the heavy sea.

In some never-to-be-explained manner, however, the frightened Sam
suddenly lost his balance in the tossing racing boat, and, clawing
desperately at her bulwarks to save himself, shot over the side.

"He'll drown!" shouted Jack Curtiss.  "He can't swim, and he'll drown."

"If you knew that, why didn't you stand by him?" truculently growled
Tubby.

Without an instant's hesitation, Merritt threw off the jacket he had
put on when it started to blow, and slipped off his shoes. He was
overboard and striking out for the drowning boy before those in the
Flying Fish even realized his purpose.

With swift, powerful strokes he got alongside Sam just as the owner of
the hydroplane was going down for the third time.

As the brave boy seized the struggling, frightened youth he felt
himself gripped by the panic-stricken Sam in a frenzied hold of
desperate intensity.  His arms were pinioned by the drowning wretch,
and they both vanished beneath the waves.

As they went under, however, Merritt managed to get one hand free, and
recalling what he had read of what to do under such conditions, struck
the other boy a terrific blow between the eyes.  It stunned Sam
completely, and, to his great relief, Merritt felt the imprisoning grip
relax.  He could then handle Sam easily, and as they shot to the
surface he saw the Flying Fish bearing down on them, with four white,
strained faces searching the tumbling waters.

In a few moments the unconscious lad and his rescuer were hauled on
board, and Rob, after congratulations, headed the Flying Fish for the
mouth of the inlet, which was still some distance off.

Tubby and Bill Bender laid Sam on his stomach, across a thwart, and
started to try to get some of the salt water, of which he had swallowed
great quantities, out of him.  He soon gave signs of returning
consciousness, and opened his eyes just as Jack Curtiss was demanding
to know if the Boy Scouts weren't going to take the hydroplane in tow.

"Not much we're not," responded Rob.  "I'm sorry to have to leave her;
but this sea is getting up nastier every minute, and there's no way of
getting a line to her without running more risk than I want to take.
We've had one near-drowning and we don't want another."

"If this was my boat, I'd pick Sam's boat up," sullenly replied the
bully.

"You ought to be mighty glad we came along when we did," indignantly
spoke up Tubby.  "You'd have been in a bad fix if we hadn't.  Instead
of being thankful for it, all you can do is to kick about leaving the
hydroplane."

An angry reply was on the other's lips, but Bill Bender checked it by
looking up and saying: "I guess the kid's right, Jack.  Let it go at
that."

The bully glowered.  He felt his pride much wounded at having been
compelled to seek the aid of the boys whom he despised and hated.

"I suppose you'll go and blab it all over town about how you saved us,"
he sneered, as the Flying Fish threaded her way through the tumbling
waters at the mouth of the inlet and began making her way up it.

"I don't think we shall," replied Rob quietly.  "I mean to recommend
Merritt, though, to headquarters for his Red Honor."

"Oh, you mean that cheap, bronze medal thing on a bit of red ribbon!"
sneered Jack.  "Why, that isn't worth much.  You couldn't sell it for
anything but old junk.  Why don't they make them of gold?"

"That 'bronze medal thing,' as you call it, is worth a whole lot to a
Boy Scout," rejoined Rob in the same even tone.  "More than you can
understand."

On their arrival at the yacht-club pier the boys were overwhelmed with
questions, and a doctor was summoned for Sam, who, as soon as he found
himself safe, began to groan and show most alarming symptoms of being
seriously affected by his immersion.

The boys were not able to conceal the fact that they had accomplished a
brave rescue, and were overwhelmed with congratulations.  Merritt
especially came in for warm praise and commendation.

"You will certainly be granted your Red Honor," declared Mr. Wingate,
who, besides being commodore of the Yacht Club, was one of the
gentlemen whom Rob had persuaded to act as Scout Master for the new
patrol.

Merritt escaped from the crowd of admiring motor-boat men and boys as
soon as he could, and hastened home for a change of clothes.  On the
arrival of Dr. Telfair, the village physician, he pronounced that there
was nothing whatever the matter with Sam but a bad fright, and
prescribed dry garments and hot lemonade.

"Don't I need any medicine?" groaned Sam, determined to make the most
out of his temporary notoriety.

"No, you don't," growled the doctor; "unless," he added to himself,
"they put up 'courage' in bottles."

"I suppose those boys will be more stuck up than ever now," said Jack
to Bill Bender, as, having perfunctorily thanked their rescuers, they
started for home with the almost weeping Sam.

"Sure to be," rejoined Bill.  "It's all your fault, Sam, for taking us
out in that fool hydroplane."

"My fault!  Well, I like that," stuttered out Sam.  "You asked me to
come, and you know I wanted to come back when the boys told us it might
come on to blow; but you called me a 'sissy,' and said I was too timid
to own a boat."

"Um--er--well," rejoined Bill, somewhat confused, "that's so. But
anyhow, to return to what we were talking about, it's given those kids
a great chance to set up as heroes."

"Well, we can work that scheme we were talking about last night on them
just as soon as you're ready," suddenly remarked Jack. "That will give
them something else to think about."

"Oh, say, Jack, cut it out, won't you?" pleaded Sam.  "I don't like the
kids any better than you do, but one of them saved my life to-day, and
I'm not going into anything that will harm them."

"Hear him rave!" sneered Jack.  "Why last night, when we talked it
over, you thought it would be a prime joke.  It isn't as if it would
hurt them.  It'll just give them something to study up, that's all.
They think they're such fine trailers and tracers that it would be a
shame not to give them a chance to show what they can do."

"That's right, Sam," cut in Bill; "it's more of a joke than anything
else."

"Well," agreed Sam weakly, "if you put it in that way, I suppose it's
all right; but I tell you I don't like it."

"Why, you'll have the laugh of your young life after we've pulled the
stunt off," remarked Bill.  "When will we do it, Jack?"

"Not to-night, that's certain," responded the other.  "I've had enough
excitement for one day."

"What's the matter with to-morrow night, then?"

"I'm agreeable.  How about you, Sam?"

"I wish you fellows would leave me out of it," rejoined the bully's
timid chum.

"Like they left you out of their patrol, eh?" sneered Bill, knowing
that he was touching the other on a tender spot.

"All right, to-morrow night suits me," snapped Sam, flushing angrily at
Bill's remark--as that worthy had intended he should. "Here's my house.
We'll meet at Bill's 'boudoir."'

"Right you are," chuckled Jack.  "Oh, say, it's going to be the joke of
the century!"




CHAPTER IV

SAM IN DIRE STRAITS


"Kree-ee-ee!"

Merritt paused the next morning in front of Tubby's home, and gave the
"call" of the Eagle Patrol with a not uncreditable resemblance to the
scream of a real eagle.

The cry was instantly echoed--though in a rather thicker way--from
inside the house, and in a minute Tubby, who knew that some one of the
patrol must have uttered the call, appeared at his door, munching a
large slice of bread and jam, although it was not more than an hour
since breakfast.

"Say, you, did you ever hear an eagle scream with his mouth full of
bread and jam?" demanded Merritt, as the stout youth appeared.

"Eagles don't eat bread and jam," rejoined Tubby, defending his
position.  "Have some?"

"Having had breakfast not more than an hour ago, I'm not hungry yet,
thank you," politely rejoined the corporal; "besides, I'm afraid I'd
get fat."

Dodging the stout youth's blow, the corporal went on:

"Heard the news?"

"No--what news?" eagerly demanded the other, finishing his light repast.

"Why, the Dolphin--you know, that fishing boat--picked up Sam's
hydroplane at sea and towed it in.  It's in pretty good shape, I hear,
although the engine is out of commission and it was half full of water."

"He's a lucky fellow to get it back."

"I should say so," replied Merritt; "but it will cost him a whole lot
to reclaim it.  The captain of the Dolphin says he wants fifty dollars
for it as salvage."

"Gee!  Do you think Sam's father will give him that much?" said Tubby,
with round eyes.

"I don't know.  He can afford it all right.  He's made a lot of money
out of that boat-building shop, my father says; but he's so stingy that
I doubt very much if he will give Sam such a sum."

"Why, here's Sam coming down the street now," exclaimed the
good-natured Tubby.  "I wonder if he's heard about it.  Hullo, Sam!
Get all the water out of your system?"

"I'm all right this morning, if that is what you mean," rejoined the
other, with dignity.

"Heard the news about your boat?" asked Merritt suddenly.

"No; what about her?  Is she safe?  Who picked her up?"

"Wait a minute.  One question at a time," laughed Merritt. "She's safe,
all right.  The Dolphin picked her up at sea.  But it will cost you
fifty dollars to get her."

"Fifty dollars!" gasped Sam, turning pale.

"That's what the skipper of the Dolphin says.  He had a lot of trouble
getting a line fast to her, he says, and he means to have the money or
keep the boat."

"Oh, well, I'll get it from my father easily enough," said Sam
confidently, preparing to swagger off down the street.  "I've got to
get my boat back and beat Rob's Flying Fish, and that hydroplane can do
it."

"Can you match that?" exclaimed Merritt to the fat youth, as Sam
strolled away.  "Here he was saved from drowning by the Flying Fish
only yesterday, and all he can think of this morning is to promise to
beat her.  What makes him so mean, I wonder?"

"Just born that way, I guess," rejoined the stout youth; "and as for
the Flying Fish saving him, if it hadn't been for a certain Corporal
Crawford, he--"

"Here, stow that," protested Merritt, coloring up.  "I heard enough of
that yesterday afternoon."

As the boys had surmised, Sam's father was not at all pleased when he
learned that his son wanted fifty dollars.  In fact, he refused point
blank to let him have it at all.

"That boat of yours has cost enough already, and I'm not going to spend
any more on it," he said angrily, as he turned to his work.

"But I can't get the hydroplane back if I don't pay it," urged Sam.
"I've seen the captain of the Dolphin, and he refuses absolutely to let
me have her unless I pay him for his trouble in towing her in."

"I can't help that," snapped the elder Redding.  "What have I got to do
with your boat?  Look here!" he exclaimed, turning angrily and
producing a small memorandum book from his pocket and rapidly turning
the leaves.  "Do you know how much I've given you in the last two
months?"

"N-n-no," stammered Sam, looking very much embarrassed, and shuffling
about from one foot to the other.

"Then I'll tell you, young man; it's exactly--let me see--ten, twenty,
five, three, fifteen and eight.  That's just sixty-one dollars.  Do you
think that money grows on gooseberry bushes? Then there'll be your
college expenses to pay.  No, I can't let you have a cent."

"That means that I will lose my boat and the chance of winning the race
at the regatta!" urged Sam gloomily.

"Well, you should have had more sense than to take that fool hydroplane
out into a rough sea.  I told you she wouldn't stand it.  There, go on
about your own affairs.  I'm far too busy to loaf about, arguing with
you."

And with this the hard-featured old boat builder--who had made his
money literally by the sweat of his brow--turned once more to his task
of figuring out the blue prints of a racing sloop.

Sam saw that it was no use to argue further with his father, and left
the shop with no very pleasant expression on his countenance.

"I'll have to see if I can't borrow it somewhere," he mused.  "If only
I was on better terms with Rob Blake, I could get it from him, I guess.
His father is a banker and he must have plenty.  I wonder--I wonder if
Mr. Blake himself wouldn't lend it to me.  I could give him a note for
it, and in three months' time I'd be sure to be able to take it up."

With this end in view, the lad started for the Hampton Bank.  It
required some courage for a youth of his disposition to make up his
mind to beard the lion in his den--or, in other words, to approach Mr.
Blake in his office.  For Sam, while bold enough when his two hulking
cronies were about, had no real backbone of his own.

After making two or three turns in front of the bank, he finally
screwed his courage to the sticking point, and timidly asked an
attendant if he could see the banker.

"I think so.  I'll see," was the reply.

In a few seconds the man reappeared, and said that Mr. Blake could
spare a few minutes.  Hat in hand, Sam entered the ground-glass door
which bore on it in imposing gilt letters the word "President."

The interview was brief, and to Sam most unsatisfactory.  The banker
pointed out to him that he was a minor, and as such that his note would
be no good; and also that, without the permission of his father, he
would not think of lending the youth such a sum.  Much crestfallen, Sam
shuffled his way out toward the main door of the bank, when suddenly a
voice he recognized caused him to look up.

"A hundred and twenty-five dollars.  That's right, all shipshape and
above board!"

It was the old captain of Topsail Island, counting over in his gnarled
paw one hundred and twenty-five dollars in crisp bills which he had
just received from the paying teller.

"You must be going to be married, captain," Sam heard the teller remark
jocularly.

"Not yet a while," the captain laughed back.  "That ther motor uv mine
that I left ter be fixed up is goin' ter cost me fifty dollars, and the
other seventy-five I'm calculating ter keep on hand in my safe fer a
while.  I'm kind uv figgerin' on gettin' a new dinghy--my old one is
just plum full uv holes.  I rowed over frum the island this mornin',
and I declar' ter goodness, once or twice I thought I'd swamp."

Sam slipped out of the bank without speaking to the captain, whom,
indeed, since the episode of the melon patch, he had no great desire to
encounter.

As he made his way toward his home in no very amiable mood, he was
hailed from the opposite side of the street by Jack Curtiss and Bill
Bender.

"Any news of the boat?" demanded Jack, as he and Bill crossed over and
slapped their crony on the back with great assumed heartiness.

"Yes, and mighty bad news, too, in one way.  She's safe enough. The
Dolphin--that fishing boat--found her and towed her in. But--here's the
tough part of it--it's going to cost fifty dollars for salvage to get
her from the Dolphin's captain, the old shark!"

"Phew!" whistled Jack Curtiss.  "Pretty steep.  But I suppose your old
man will fork over, eh?"

"That's just it," grumbled Sam; "he won't come across with a cent.  I
suppose, if I don't pay for the hydroplane's recovery pretty soon, she
will be sold at auction."

"That's the usual process," observed Bill.

"Isn't there any way you can raise the wind?"

"No, I've tried every one I can think of.  I don't suppose either of
you fellows could--"

"Nothing doing here," hastily cried Jack, not giving the other time to
finish.

"I'm cleaned out, too," Bill also hurriedly assured the unfortunate Sam.

"It looks like everybody but us has coin," complained that worthy
bitterly.  "While I was in the bank trying to get old man Blake to take
up a note of mine for the sum I need, who should I see in there but
that old fossil of a captain from Topsail Island."

"Who grows such fine, juicy melons and keeps such a nice, amiable pet
dog," laughed Jack, roaring at the recollection of the piratical
expedition of which the island dweller had told the boys.

"Ha, ha, ha!" shouted Bill in chorus.  "We'll have to give him another
visit soon."

"But what about the old land crab, Sam?" demanded Jack the next minute.
"What was he doing in the bank?"

"Why, drawing one hundred and twenty-five dollars.  Just think of it,
and we always figured it out that he was poor."

"A hundred and twenty-five dollars!  I wonder what he's going to do
with it?" wondered Jack, with whom money and its spending was always an
absorbing topic.

"Why, I overheard that, too, as I passed by," rejoined Sam. "He's going
to spend some of it for the repairing of his motor, which broke down
yesterday, and the rest he's going to keep by him."

"Keep it on the island, you mean?" demanded Jack, becoming suddenly
much interested.

"That's what he said--keep it in his safe," replied Sam.  "But what
good does that do us?"

"A whole lot, maybe," was the enigmatic reply.  "See here, Sam, you can
win that race if you get your hydroplane?"

"I'm sure of it."

"You are going to bet on yourself, of course."

"Sure.  I've got to raise some money somehow."

"Well, I've thought of a way you can borrow the money to get your boat
back, and when you win the race you can return it.  Come on, lees go to
Bill's den, and we'll have a smoke and talk it over."




CHAPTER V

THE BULLY SPRINGS A SURPRISE


That afternoon, in reply to a notice sent round by a runner, the lads
of the Eagle Patrol assembled at their armory, and on Leader Rob's
orders "fell in" to hear the official announcement of the coming
camping trip.  As a matter of fact, they had discussed little else for
several days, but the first "regimental" notification, as it were, was
to be made now.

The first duty to be performed was the calling of the roll after
"assembly" had been sounded--somewhat quaveringly--by little Andy
Bowles, the company bugler.

Beside Rob Merritt, Tubby and Andy, there were Hiram Nelson, a tall,
lanky youth, whose hands were stained with much fussing with chemicals,
for he was a wireless experimenter; Ernest Thompson, a big-eyed,
serious-looking lad, whose specialty in the little regiment was that of
bicycle scout, as the spoked wheel on his arm denoted; Simon Jeffords,
a second-class scout, but who, under Rob's tutelage, was becoming the
expert "wig-wagger" of the organization; Paul Perkins, another
second-class boy, but a hard worker and a devotee of aeronautics;
Martin Green, one of the smallest of the Eagle Patrol, a tenderfoot;
Walter Lonsdale, also a recruit, and Joe Digby, who, as the last to
join the Patrol, was the tenderest of the tenderfeet.

Rob's announcement of the program for the eight days they were to spend
on the island was greeted with cheers.  The news that turns were to be
taken by two scouts daily at washing dishes and cooking did not awaken
quite so much enthusiasm.  Everybody cheered up again, however, when
Rob announced that the Flying Fish would be at the disposal of the boys
of the patrol.

Corporal Merritt took Rob's place as orator then, and announced that
each boy would be assessed one dollar for the expenses of the camp, the
remainder of the money necessary for the providing of tents and the
provisioning of the camp having been donated by Rob's father, Mr.
Wingate, of the yacht club, and the other representative citizens of
Hampton who composed the local scout council.

Further excitement was caused by the announcement that following the
camp the local committee would pass upon the applications for
promotions and honors for the lads of the Patrol, and that it was
likely that another patrol would be formed in the village, as several
boys had expressed themselves as anxious to form one. The gentlemen
having charge of the local scout movement, however, had decided that it
would be wiser to wait and see the result of one patrol's training
before forming a second one.

"I'm going to try for an aviator's badge," announced Paul Perkins, as
Rob declared the official business at an end.

"Say, Rob, what's the matter with our fixing up a wireless in the camp?
I'm pretty sure I can make one that will catch anything in a
hundred-mile radius."

"That's a good idea," assented Rob; "if you can do it we can get a lot
of good out of it, I don't doubt."

"What's the good of wireless when we've got wig-wagging and the
semaphore code," spoke up Simon Jeffords, who was inclined to doubt the
use of any other form of telegraphy but that in which he had perfected
himself.

As for Martin Green, Walter Lonsdale and Joe Digby, they contented
themselves with hoping that they might receive their badges as
second-class scouts when the camp was over.

"I can take the whole tests except cooking the meat and potatoes in the
'Billy,'" bemoaned young Green, a small chap of about thirteen.
"Somehow, they always seem to burn, or else they don't cook at all."

"Well, cheer up, Martin," laughed Rob.  "You'll learn to do it in camp.
We'll make you cook for the whole time we're out there, if you
like--that will give you plenty of practice."

"No, thank you," chimed in Andy Bowles.  "I've seen some of Mart's
cooking, and I think the farther you keep him from the cook fire, the
better for the general health of the Eagle Patrol."

At this moment there came a rap on the door.

"Come in!" shouted Rob.

In reply to this invitation, the door opened and a lad of about fifteen
entered.  His face was flushed and he bore in his hand a long sheet of
green paper.

"Hello, Frank Farnham," exclaimed Rob glancing at the boy's flushed,
excited face.  "What's troubling you?"

"Oh, hello, Rob.  Excuse me for butting in on your ceremonies, but I
was told Paul Perkins was here."

"Sure he is, Frank," exclaimed Paul, coming forward.  "What's the
matter?  It's much too warm to be flying around the way you seem to
have been.  Come in under this fan."

He indicated an electrically driven ventilator that was whirring in a
corner of the room.

"Quit your fooling, Paul," remonstrated Frank, "and read this circular.
Here."

He thrust the green "dodger" he carried into the other's hand.

"What do you think of that, eh?" demanded Frank, as Paul skimmed it
with delighted eyes.

The circular contained the announcement of a lecture on aeronautics by
a well-known authority on the subject who had once been a resident of
Hampton.  To stimulate interest in the subject, the paper stated that a
first prize of fifty dollars, a second prize of twenty-five, and a
third prize of ten dollars would be given to the three lads of the town
making and flying the most successful models of aeroplanes in a public
competition. To win the first prize it would be necessary for the model
to fly more than two hundred feet, and not lower, except at the start
and end of the flight, than fifty feet above the ground.  The second
prize was for the next best flight, and the third for the model
approaching the nearest to the winner of the second money.

"Now, Paul, you are an aeronautic fiend," went on Frank, "So am I, and
Hiram has the fever in a mild way.  What's the matter with you two
fellows forming a team to represent the Boy Scouts, and I'll get up a
team of village boys, to compete for the prizes."

"That's a good idea," assented Hiram Nelson.  "I've got a model almost
completed.  It only needs the rubber bands and a little testing and it
will be O.K., or at least I hope so.  How about you, Paul?"

"Oh, I've got two models that I have got good results from," replied
the boy addressed.  "One is a biplane.  She's not so speedy, but very
steady; and then I have a model of a Bleriot. I'm willing to enter
either of them or both."

"And I've got a model of an Antoinette, and one of a design of my own.
I don't know just how well it will work," concluded Frank modestly,
"but I have great hopes of carrying off that prize."

"Let's see who else there is," pondered Hiram.

"There's Tom Maloney.  He'll go in, I know; and Ed Rivers and two or
three others, and then, by the way, I almost forgot it, I met Sam
Redding, Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender, reading a notice of the
competition, just before I came up.  Of course, as there is a chance of
winning fifty dollars, Jack is going to enter one, and Bill Bender said
he would put one in, too."

"What do they know about aeroplanes?" demanded Paul.

"Not a whole lot, I guess; but Jack said he was going to get a book
that tells how to make one, and Bill said he'd do the same."

"How about Sam?" inquired Rob.

"Oh, I guess he's got troubles enough with his hydroplane," responded
Rob, whose father had told him at dinner that day of Sam's vain visit
to the bank.

"It would be just like those fellows to put up something crooked on
us," remarked Paul, who had had much the same experiences with the
bully and his chums as his schoolmates generally.

"Oh, there'll be no chance of that," Frank assured him.  "A local
committee of business men is to be appointed to see fair play, and I
don't fancy that even Jack or Bill will be slick enough to get away
with any crooked work."

"How long have we got to get ready?" asked Hiram suddenly.

"Just a week."

"Wow! that isn't much time."

"No; my father told me that Professor Charlton, whom he knows, would
have given a longer time for preparation but that he has to attend a
flying meet in Europe, and only decided to lecture at his native town
at the last moment.  Lucky thing that most of us have got our models
almost ready."

"Yes, especially as this notice says," added Paul, who had been reading
it, "that all models must be the sole work of the contestants."

"If it wasn't for that it would be easy," remarked Hiram.  "You can buy
dandy models in New York.  I've seen them advertised in the papers."

"Well, come on over now and put your name down, as a contestant. The
blanks are in the office of the Hampton News," urged Frank.

"I guess we're all through up here, Rob, aren't we?" asked Hiram.

"Yes," rejoined the young leader; "but you study up on your woodcraft,
Hiram, and devote more time to your signaling.  You are such a bug on
wireless that you forget the rest of the stuff."

"All right, Rob," promised Hiram contritely.  "By the time we go
camping I'll know a cat track from a squirrel's, or never put a
detector on my head again."

Piloted by Frank, the two young scouts made their way to the office of
the local paper, which had already placed a large bulletin announcing
the aeroplane model competition in its window.  Quite a crowd was
gathered, reading the details, as the three boys entered.

They applied for their application blanks and walked over to a desk to
fill them out.  As they were hard at work at this, Jack Curtiss and his
two chums entered the office.

"You going into this, too?" asked the proprietor of the paper, Ephraim
Parkhurst, as Jack loudly demanded two blanks.

"Sure," responded Jack confidently, "and we are going to win it, too.
Hullo," he exclaimed, as his eyes fell on the younger lads, "those kids
are after the prize, too.  Why, what would they do with fifty dollars
if they had it?  However, there's not much chance of your winning
anything," he added, coming up close to the boys, with a sneer on his
face.  "I think that I've got it cinched."

"I didn't know that you knew anything about aeroplanes," responded Paul
quietly.  "Have you got a model built yet?"

"I know about a whole lot of things I don't go blabbing round to
everybody about," responded the elder lad, with a sneer, "and as for
having a model built, I'm going to get right to work on one at once.
It'll be a model of a Bleriot monoplane, and a large one, too.  I
notice that there is nothing said in the rules about the size of the
machines."

Soon after this the three chums left the newspaper office together.

"Say," remarked Paul, in a rather worried tone, "I don't believe that
there is anything said about the size of the models.  Bill may build a
great big one and beat us all out."

"I suppose that the big machines would be handicapped according to
their power and speed," rejoined Frank.  "However, don't you worry
about that.  I don't believe that Jack Curtiss knows enough about the
subject to build an aeroplane in a week, and anyhow, I think it's all
empty bluff on his part."

"I hope so," replied Paul, as they reached his front gate.  "Will you
be over to-night, Hiram, to talk things over?  Bring your models with
you, too, will you?"

"Sure," replied Hiram; "but I've got to do a few things at home after
supper.  I'll be over about eight o'clock or half-past."

"All right.  I'll be ready for you," responded Paul, as the lads said
good-by.

A few minutes later Jack Curtiss and his chums emerged from the
newspaper office, the former and Bill Bender having made out their
applications.  Sam seemed more dejected than ever, but there was a grin
of satisfaction on Jack Curtiss' face.

"Well, we sent the note, all right," he laughed under his breath, to
his two chums.  "He'll have got it by this time, and will be in town by
dark.  You know your part of the program, Sam.  Don't fail to carry it
out, or I'll see that you get into trouble."

"There's no need to worry about me, Jack," rejoined Sam, with an angry
flush.  "I'll get the boat as soon as he lands, and keep it out of
sight till you've done the trick.

"Nothing like killing two birds with one stone," grinned Bill Bender.
"My! what a time there'll be in the morning, when they find out that
there's been a regular double cross."

"Hush!  Here come those three kids now," warned Sam, as Rob, Merritt
and Tubby came down the street.  After what had passed they did not
feel called upon to give the bully and his companions more than a cold
nod.

"Well, be as stuck up as you like to this after-noon!" sneered Jack,
after they had gone by, taking good care, however, that his voice would
not carry.  "I guess the laugh will be on you and your old friend of
the island to-morrow."




CHAPTER VI

AN ISLAND MYSTERY


"Hullo, Hiram; where are you bound for?"

It was Rob who spoke, as Hiram hastened by his house in the early
darkness.

"Oh, hullo, Rob," responded the other.  "I was wondering who that was
hanging over the gate.  Why, I'm going to Paul's house.  I'm going to
talk over that aeroplane model contest with him.  I think that we stand
a chance to win if Jack Curtiss doesn't make good his boast."

"What was that?" inquired Rob.

"Oh, he says that he is going to build an aeroplane that will beat us
all."

"And have it ready in a week?" was Rob's astonished query.

"That's what he says," responded Hiram.  "It all looks kind of
suspicious to me.  Fifty dollars is a large enough sum to tempt Jack to
do almost anything.  Well, so long. I've got to hurry along. I'm late
now."

And the lad hastened away to keep his appointment.

Rob was about to go into the house and get a book, when his attention
was arrested by a figure coming up the street at a smart pace whose
outlines somehow seemed familiar to him.  The next minute his guess was
confirmed, when a hearty voice hailed him:

"Waal, here I am, lad--all shipshape and in first-class trim. Now, what
is it?  What do yer want?  Yer didn't explain in the note, but old
Captain job Hudgins'll always stand by a shipmate in distress."

"Why, whatever do you mean, captain?" exclaimed Rob, amazed, and
thinking that the captain must have taken leave of his wits. "Who do
you mean is in distress?"

"Mean?" echoed the captain, in his turn, it seemed, surprised. "Why,
that note yer sent me.  Here it is--all written on one uv them
new-fangled machines."

Rob took the crumpled paper the old seaman drew out of his coat and
scanned it hastily by the light of the street lamp.  The following note
met his puzzled gaze.

"DEAR CAPTAIN: Please come over and see me at once.  Something serious
has happened at the bank.  I need your aid and advice.

"Yours,

"ROB BLAKE."

"Hum!  The signature is typewritten, too," mused Rob.  "What kind of a
joke is this?  I don't know, but I'll bet anything that Jack Curtiss is
at the bottom of it."

"Well," demanded the captain, "what is it, a bit of gammon?  I'll
keel-haul the man as did it if I can find him."

"It looks like a hoax of some sort," admitted Rob, sorely puzzled; "but
I can't for the life of me see the object of it. Come into the house a
minute, captain, and we'll try to figure it out."

Seated beneath the lamp in the library of his home, Rob scrutinized the
letter closely, but could find absolutely no indication about it to
betray who could have typewritten it.

"How did you come to receive it?" he asked suddenly.

"Why, old Hank Handcraft come out in that crazy launch uv his and guv
it ter me," rejoined the captain.  "I ought ter hev told yer that in
the first place, but I was all took aback and canvas a-shiver when yer
tole me yer never wrote it."

"Hank Handcraft," repeated Rob.  "He's that queer old fellow that lives
in a hut away down the beach?"

"Yes, and a bad character, too," replied the captain.  "He used ter be
a smuggler, and done a term in jail fer it."

"Well, it's pretty certain that he didn't write this," said Rob. "He
couldn't get hold of a typewriter, even if he could use one. What did
he tell you about it?  Did he say who gave it to, him?"

"No, he just handed it ter me, and says: 'A young party in Hampton says
ter give yer this and hurry.'  I was just gettin' my supper when I
heard his hail of 'Island, ahoy!'  I hurried out, and there he was in
that old teakettle uv his, at the end uv my wharf."

"And he left before you read the note?"

"I should say.  He hurried right off ag'in."

"Well, I don't see any way to get at the bottom of this mystery but to
go and see old Hank himself," mused Rob, after a period of thought.
"What do you think, captain?"

"That's the tack ter go about on, youngster," agreed the man of Topsail
Island; "but if yer are goin' down ter his place at this hour uv night,
we'd better take somebody else along.  He's a bad character, and I'm
only a feeble old man and yer are a lad."

"I'll go round by Merritt Crawford's house," proposed Rob; "then we'll
pick up Tubby Hopkins.  I guess we can handle any trouble that Hank
wants to make, with that force on hand."

"I guess so," agreed the old man. "I must say I'd like ter get ter the
bottom uv this here mystery.  'All fair and above board' is my motto.
I don't like these secret craft."

The two young scouts were both at home, and after brief explanations
the four started off at a lively pace for Hank Handcraft's hut, which
was situated about two miles along the beach.  As they hastened along,
Rob explained to the others in more detail the nature of their mission,
but though they were as much mystified by the sudden summons of Captain
Hudgins as Rob and the captain himself, they could hit upon no
plausible explanation for it.

It was a little over half an hour before they reached the dilapidated
hut where old Handcraft, a beach-comber, made his dwelling place.  A
short distance off the shore they could see by the moon, which had now
risen, that his crazy old motor boat lay at anchor.  This was a sign
that Hank was at home.  Lest it be wondered that such a character could
have owned a motor boat, it may be explained here that the engine of
Hank's old oyster skiff had been given him by a summer resident who
despaired of making it work.  Hank, however, who was quite handy with
tools, had fixed it up and managed to make it drive his patched old
craft at quite a fair speed--sometimes.  When it broke down, as it
frequently did, Hank, who was a philosopher in his way, simply got out
his oars and rowed his heavy craft.

As an additional indication that the hut was occupied, light shone
through several of its numerous chinks and crannies, and a knock at the
door brought forth a low growl of: "Who's there?"

"We want to see you," said Rob.

"This is no time of night to call on a gentleman; come to-morrow and
leave your cards," rumbled the gruff voice from inside the hut.

"This is serious business," urged Rob.  "Come on, open that door, Hank.
This is Rob Blake, the banker's son."

"Oh, it is, is it?" grumbled the voice, as the clank of the door-chains
being taken off was heard from within.  "Well, I ain't had much
business deals with your father lately, my private fortune being
somewhat shrunk."

With a muffled chuckle from the speaker, the door slowly opened, and
Hank, a ragged figure, with an immense matted beard, long tangled hair
and dim blue eyes, that blinked like a rat's, stood revealed.

"Come in, come in, gentlemen," he bowed, with mock politeness. "I'm
glad to see such a numerous and representative party.  Now, what kin I
do you for?"

He chuckled once more at his little jest, and the boys involuntarily
shrank from him.

There was nothing to do, however, but enter the hut, and Hank
accommodated his guests with a cracker box apiece as chairs.  On a
table, roughly built out of similar boxes, a battered old stable lamp
smoked and flared.  A more miserable human habitation could not be
imagined.

"Hank," began the captain, "speak me fair and above board, mate--who
give yer that letter ter bring ter me ter-night?"

"What letter?" blankly responded Hank, a look of vacancy in his shifty
eyes.

"Oh, yer know well enough; that letter yer give me at supper time."

"Captain, I'll give you my davy I don't know what you're talking
about," returned the beachcomber.

"What!" roared the captain: rising to his feet and advancing
threateningly.  "Yer mean ter tell me, yer rapscallion, that yer don't
recall landin' at Topsail Island earlier ter-night and givin' me a note
which says ter come urgent and immediate ter see young Rob Blake here?"

"Why, captain," calmly returned Hank, with an indulgent grin, "I really
think you must be gettin' childish in your old age.  You must be seeing
things.  I hope you ain't drinking."

"You--you scoundrel, you!" roared the old captain, almost beside
himself with rage, and dancing with clenched fists toward Hank.

The beach-comber's filthy hand slipped into his rags in a minute, and
the next instant he was squatting back on his haunches in the corner of
the hut, like a wildcat about to spring.  In his hand there glistened,
in the yellow rays of the lamp, a blued-steel revolver.

"Don't get angry, captain.  It's bad for the digestion," grinned the
castaway.  "Now," he went on, "I'm going to tell you flat that if you
say I came to your island to-night, you're dreaming. It must have been
some one else.

"Come on, boys," directed the captain, with an angry shrug. "There's no
use wastin' time on the critter.  I'm inclined ter think now that
there's somethin' more than ordinary in the wind," he added, as they
left the hut, with the half-idiotic chuckles of its occupant ringing in
their ears.




CHAPTER VII

SOME STRANGE DOINGS


It was not far from midnight when the boys, sorely perplexed, once more
reached Hampton.  The main street had been deserted long since, and
every one in the village had returned to rest.

The boys left the captain by the water-front, while they headed up the
Main Street for their respective homes.  Rob remained up, pondering
over the events of the evening for some time, without arriving at any
solution of them.  He was just about to extinguish his light when he
was startled by a loud:

"His--s--st!"

The noise came from directly below his open window, which faced onto
the garden.

He put out his head, and saw a dark figure standing in the yard.

"Who is it?" he demanded.

"It's me, the captain, Rob," rejoined the well-known voice.  "I
wouldn't have bothered yer but that I saw a light in yer window."

"What's the trouble, captain?" asked the boy, noting a troubled
inflection in the old man's voice.

"My boat's gone!" was the startling reply.

"Gone!  Are you sure?"

"No doubt about it.  I left her tied ter the L wharf when I come up
from the island, and now there ain't hide nor hair uv her there."

"I'll bet anything that that fellow Curtiss is at the bottom of all
this," cried Rob.  "I remember now I heard some time ago that he was
thick with that Hank Handcraft."

"I don't know what ter do about it at this time uv ther night," went on
the distressed captain, "an' I can't go round waking folks up ter get
another boat."

"Of course not," agreed Rob.  "There's only one thing for you to do,
captain, and that is to put up here to-night, and in the morning we'll
see what we can do."

"That's mighty fair, square, and above board uv yer, lad," said the
captain gratefully.  "Punk me anywhere.  I'm an old sailor, and can
aways find the softest plank in the deck."

"You won't have to do that," said Rob, who had slipped downstairs by
this time and opened the door; "we've got a spare room you can bunk in
to-night.  I'll explain it all to father in the morning. Perhaps he can
help us out."

"Gee whiz! almost twelve o'clock," exclaimed Hiram Nelson, looking up
at the clock from the dining-room table in Paul Perkins' house.  The
chamber was strewn with text books on model aeroplane construction and
littered with figures and plans of the boys' own devising.  "How time
flies when you're on a subject that interests you."

"Yes, it's a good thing it's vacation time," agreed Paul.  "We wouldn't
be in much shape to work at our books to-morrow, eh?"

"I should say not!" rejoined Hiram with conviction.  "Well, so long,
Paul.  I guess we've got it all figured out now, and all that is left
to do is to go ahead."

"That's the idea," responded Paul.  "We'll get the prize for the glory
of the Eagle Patrol, or--or--"

"Bust!" Hiram finished for him.

Hiram's way home lay past the bank, and as he walked down the moonlit
street he thought for a minute that he perceived a light in the windows
of the armory.

Almost as he fancied he glimpsed it, however, it vanished, and the lad
was convinced that he must have been mistaken, or else seen a
reflection of the moonlight on the windows.

"Queer, though," he mused.  "I could almost have sworn it was a light."

Another curious thing presently attracted his attention.  As he neared
the bank a dark figure seemed to vanish into the black shadows round
the corner.  Something familiar about it struck Hiram, and the next
moment he realized why.

"If that wasn't Bill Bender, I'm a Dutchman," he muttered, his heart
beating a little faster.  "But what can he be doing round here at this
time of night?"

As he put the question to himself, Bill Bender, walking rapidly, as if
he had come from some distance, and had not dodged round the corner a
moment before, suddenly appeared from round the angle of the bank
building.

"Good evening, Bill," said Hiram, wondering if his eyes were not
playing him some queer tricks; "wasn't that you just went round the
corner?"

"Who, me?" blustered Bill.  "You need to visit an oculist, young man.
I've just come from a visit to my aunt's.  It was her birthday, and we
had a bully time.  Sat up a little too late, though.  Good night."

And with a great assumption of easiness, the crony of Jack Curtiss
walked rapidly off up the street.

"I guess he's right," mused Hiram, as he hurried on home.  "But if that
wasn't Bill Bender who walked round that corner it was his ghost, and
all the ghosts I ever read about don't wear squeaky boots."

If Hiram had remained he would have had further cause to be suspicious
and speculative.

The lad's footsteps had hardly died out down the street before Bill
Bender cautiously retraced his way, and, going round to the side
street, upon which the steps leading to the armory opened, gave a
cautious whistle.  In reply a sack was lowered from a window to him by
some person invisible above.

Although there was some little light on the Main Street by reason of
the moon and the few scattering lamps along the thoroughfare, the spot
in which Bill now stood was as black as the proverbial pocket.

"Is the coast all clear?" came down a voice from the window above.

"Yes; but if I hadn't spotted young Hiram Nelson coming down the street
and warned you to put out that light, it wouldn't have been," responded
Bill in the same cautious tone.

"Well, we're safe enough now," came back the voice above, which any of
his acquaintances would have recognized as Jack Curtiss'. "I've got the
rest of them in this other sack.  Here, take this one when I drop it."

Bill made a bungling effort to catch the heavy receptacle that fell
following Jack's warning, but in the darkness he failed, and it crashed
down with quite a clatter.

"Look out!" warned Jack anxiously, "some one might hear that."

"Not in this peaceful community.  You seem to forget that eleven
o'clock is the very latest bedtime in Hampton."

After a brief interval Jack Curtiss himself slipped out of the side
door of the armory and joined his friend on the dark sidewalk.

"Well, what's the next move on the program?" asked Bill.

"We'll sneak down Bailey's Lane--there are no lights there--to Hank's
place.  Sam will be waiting off there with the boat," rejoined Jack.

"Yes, if he hasn't lost his nerve," was Bill's rejoinder as they
shouldered their sacks and slipped off into the deep blackness
shrouding the side streets.

"Well, if he has lost it, he'll come near losing his head, too," grated
out Jack, "but don't you fear, he wants that fifty too badly to go back
on us."

Silently as two cats the cronies made their way down the tree-bordered
thoroughfare known as Bailey's Lane and after a few minutes gained the
beach.

"Say, that's an awful hike down to Hank's gilded palace," grumbled
Bill, "why didn't you have Sam wait for us off here?"

"Yes, and have old man Hudgins discover him when he finds his boat is
gone," sneered Jack, "you'd have made a fine botch of this if it hadn't
been for me."

The two exchanged no further words on the weary tramp along the soft
beach.  They plodded along steadily with the silence only broken by a
muttered remark emanating from Bill Bender from time to time.

"Thank heaven, there's the place at last," exclaimed Bill, with a sigh
of relief, as they came in sight of the miserable hut, "I began to
think that Hank must have moved."

Jack gave a peculiar whistle and the next instant the same light the
boys had seen earlier in the evening shone through the chinks of the
hovel.

"Well, he's awake, at any rate," remarked Jack with a grin, "now to
find out where the boat is."

As the wretched figure of the beach-comber appeared Jack hailed him
roughly.

"Where's that boat, Hank?"

"Been cruising off and on here since eleven o'clock," rejoined the
other sullenly, "ah! there she is now off to the sou'west."

He pointed and the boys saw a red light flash twice seaward as if some
one had passed their hands across it.

"All right, give him the answer," ordered Jack.  "We've got to hurry if
we're to be back before the captain and those brats of boys get after
our trail."

Hank at Jack's order dived into the hut and now reappeared with the
smoky lantern.  He waved it four times from side to side like a
brakeman and in a short time a steady "put-put!" told the watchers that
a motor boat was approaching.

"Now for your dinghy, Hank," urged Jack, "hurry up.  You move like a
man a hundred and ninety years old, with the rheumatism."

"Well, come on, then," retorted Hank, "here's the boat," pointing to a
cobbled dinghy lying hauled up above the water line, "give me a hand
and we'll shove off."

The united strength of the three soon had the boat in the water and
with Hank at the oars they moved steadily toward the chugging motor
boat.

"Well, Sam, you're on the job, I see," remarked Jack as the two craft
ranged alongside and Sam cut off the engine.

"Oh, I'm on the job all right," rejoined Sam, feeling much braver now
that the other two had arrived, "have you got them all right?"

"Right here in this bag, and some more in this, my bucko," chuckled
Jack as he handed the two sacks over to Sam.

"Ha!  ha!  ha!" chortled Bill under his breath as he climbed out of the
cobble into the motor boat, "won't there be a fine row in the morning."

"Well, come on; start up, Sam.  We've no time to lose," ordered Jack as
he and Bill got aboard, "good night there, Hank."

"Good night," rejoined Hank quietly enough, as the motor boat moved
swiftly off over the moonlit sea.  He added to himself, "It won't be a
very 'good night' for you, my lad, if you don't pay me as handsomely as
you promised."

And chuckling to himself till his shoulders shook, Hank resumed his
oars and rowed back to the miserable shanty he called home.




CHAPTER VIII

THE STOLEN UNIFORMS


Rob and his old friend lost no time the next morning in getting down to
the water-front to make inquiries about the captain's missing boat.  To
their astonishment, however, almost the first craft that caught their
eyes as they arrived at the L wharf to begin their search was the old
sailor's motor dory, to all appearances in exactly the same position
she had occupied the preceding night when the captain moored her.

"Have I clapped deadlights on my optics, or am I gone plumb locoed?"
bellowed the amazed captain, as he saw the little craft dancing lightly
on the sunny waters.

"You are certainly not mistaken in supposing that is your boat. I'd
know her among a thousand," Rob assured him.  "Are you quite certain
that she was not here last night, captain?"

"Just as sure as I am that yer and me is standin' here," rejoined the
bewildered captain.  "I've sailed the seven seas in my day, and man and
boy seen many queer things; but if this don't beat cock fightin', I'm
an inky Senegambian!"

The captain's voice had risen to a perfect roar as he uttered the last
words, and a sort of jack-of-all-trades about the wharf, whose name was
Hi Higgins, came shuffling up, asking what was the trouble.

"Trouble," roared the hermit of Topsail Island.  "Trouble enough fer
all hands and some left over fer the cat!  Say, shipmate, yer hangs
about this here L wharf a lot.  Did yer see any piratical humans
monkeyin' around my boat last night?"

"Why, what d'yer mean, cap'n," sniffled Hi Higgins.  "I seen yer tie up
here, and there yer boat is now.  What d'yer mean by pira-pirawell,
them parties yer mentioned?  Yer mean some one took it?"

"Took it--yes, yer hornswoggled longshore lubber!" bellowed the
captain.  "I thought yer was hired as a sort uv watchman on this wharf.
A find watchman yer are!"

"Well, yer see, cap'n," returned Hi Higgins, really alarmed at the
captain's truculent tone, "I ain't here much after nine at night or
before five in the morning."

"Well, was my boat here at five this mornin'?" demanded the captain.

"Sure it was," rejoined Hi Higgins, with a sniffle; "the fust boat I
seen."

"Rob, my boy, I'm goin' crazy in my old age!" gasped the captain. "I'm
as certain as I can be that the boat wasn't here when I came down to
the wharf last midnight, but the pre-pon-der-ance of evidence is
against me."

The captain shook his head gravely as he spoke.  It was evident that he
was sorely puzzled and half inclined to doubt the evidence of his own
senses.

"Douse my toplights," he kept muttering, "if this don't beat a flying
Dutchman on wheels and with whiskers!"

"I certainly don't believe that your eyes deceived you, captain," put
in Rob, in the midst of the captain's rumbling outbursts. "It looks to
me as if somebody really did borrow your boat last night, and that the
decoy note supposed to be from me had something to do with it."

"By the great horn spoon, yer've got it, my boy!" roared the captain.
"And now yer come ter speak uv it, my mind misgives me that all ain 't
right at the island.  I didn't tell yer, but I left a tidy sum uv money
in that old iron safe off the Sarah Jane, the last ship I commanded,
and all this what's puzzled us so may be part uv some thievish scheme.

"I'm going ter hurry over ter the island and make certain sure," he
went on the next minute.  "The more I think uv it, the more signs uv
foul weather I see.  Good-by, my lad, and good luck. Will yer be out
ter see me soon?  The bluefish are running fine."

"We may be out this afternoon, captain," responded Rob.  "I am curious
myself to see if any mischief has been done on your island.  If there
has been," he added earnestly, "you can count on the Eagle Patrol to
help you out."

"Thanks, my boy!" exclaimed the old man, who was bending over his
gasoline tank.  "Hullo!" he shouted suddenly.  "I wasn't crazy! This
boat was took out last night.  See here!"

He held up the gasoline measuring stick which he had grabbed up and
plunged into the tank.  The instrument was almost dry.  The receptacle
for fuel was nearly empty.

"And I filled her before I started out!" thundered the captain.
"Whoever took my boat must have run her a long ways."

Fresh fuel was soon obtained, and the captain, after more shouted
farewells, started for the island to try to obtain some clue to the
mysterious happenings of the night.

Rob, after watching him for a few moments, as he sped down the blue
waters of the sunlit inlet, turned away to return to his home, just
recollecting that, in their eagerness to search for the boat, both he
and the captain had entirely forgotten about breakfast.  He was in the
middle of the meal, and eagerly explaining to his interested parents
the strange incidents of the missing boat and the decoy note, when
Merritt Crawford burst into the room unannounced.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" he apologized, abashed.  "I didn't know you
were at breakfast.  But, Mr. Blake--Rob--something has happened that I
just had to come and tell you about at once."

"Good gracious!  More mysteries," Mr. Blake was beginning in a jocular
way, when the serious look on the boy's face checked him. "What is it?
What has happened, Merritt?" he asked soberly, while Rob regarded the
spectacle of his usually placid corporal's excitement with round eyes.

"The uniforms are all gone!" burst out Merritt.

"What uniforms?"

"Ours--the Eagle Patrols'."

"What!  Stolen?"

"That's right," hurried on Merritt.  "I met old Mrs. Jones in a
terrible state of mind.  You know, Mr. Blake, she's the old woman who
scrubs out the place in the morning.  I asked what was the matter, and
she told me that when she went to the armory early to-day, she found
the lock forced and all the lockers broken open and the uniforms gone!"

"Have you seen the place?" asked Mr. Blake.

"Yes, I followed her up.  The room was turned upside down.  The locks
had been ripped right off and the lockers rifled of everything.  Who
can have done it?"

"I'll bet anything Jack Curtiss and his gang had something to do with
it, just as I believe they put up some crooked job on the captain!"
burst out Rob, greatly excited and his breakfast entirely forgotten.

"Be careful how you make such a grave accusation," warned his father.

"I know it's a tough thing to say," admitted Rob; "but you don't know
that bunch like we do.  They'd--"

He was about to explain more of the characteristics of the bully and
his cronies when a fresh interruption occurred.  This time it was Hiram
Nelson.  He was almost as abashed as Merritt had been when he found
that his excitement had carried him into what seemed a family
conference.

"It's all right, Hiram.  Come right in," said Mr. Blake cheerfully.
"Come on out with your news, for I can see you can hardly keep it to
yourself."

"It's going round the town like wildfire!" responded the panting boy.
The others nodded.  "I see you know it already," he went on.  "Well, I
think I've got a clue."

"You have!  Come on, let's hear it quick," cried Rob.

"Well, I was up late with Paul Perkins last night, talking over the
aeroplane model competition, and didn't start home till about midnight.
As I was approaching the armory I thought I saw a light in one of the
windows.  I couldn't be certain, however, and I put it down to a trick
that my eyes had played me."

"Well, that's all right as far as it goes," burst out Rob.  "It
probably was a light.  I wish you'd investigated."

"Wait a minute, Rob," said his father, noting Hiram's anxious face.
"There's more to come, isn't there, Hiram?"

"You bet!  The most exciting part of it--the most important, I mean,"
went on young Hiram, with an important air.

"Oh, well, get down to it," urged the impatient Rob.  "What was it?"

"Why, right after I'd seen the light," went on Hiram, "I thought I saw
a dark figure slip around the corner into that dark street."

"A dark figure!  Hum!  Sounds like one of those old yellow--back
novels," remarked Mr. Blake, with a smile.

"But this was a figure I recognized, sir," exclaimed Hiram.  "It was
Bill Bender!"

"Jack Curtiss' chum!  They're as thick as two thieves," burst out
Merritt.

"And I believe they are two thieves," solemnly put in Rob.

"Well," went on Hiram, "the next minute Bill Bender came walking round
the corner as fast as if he were coming from somewhere in a great
hurry, and was hastening home.  He told me he had been to a birthday
party at his aunt's."

"At his aunt's," echoed Mr. Blake.  "Well, that's an important point,
for I happen to know that his aunt, Mrs. Graves, is out of town.  She
visited the bank yesterday morning and drew some money for her
traveling expenses.  She informed me that she expected to be gone a
week or more."

"I knew it, I knew it!" shouted Rob.  "That fellow ought to be in jail.
He'll land there yet."

"Softly, softly, my boy," said Mr. Blake.  "This is a grave affair, and
we cannot jump at conclusions."

"I'd jump him," declared Rob, "if I only knew for certain that he was
the thief!"

"I will inform the police myself and have an investigation made," Mr.
Blake promised.  "We will leave no stone unturned to find out who has
been guilty of such an outrage."

"And in the meantime the Eagle Patrol will carry on an investigation of
its own," declared Rob sturdily.  "What do you say, boys?"

"I'll bet every boy in the corps is with you on that," rejoined Merritt
heartily.

"Same here," chimed in Hiram.

"The first step is to take a run to Topsail Island and see if all the
queer things that happened last night have not some connecting link
between them," suggested Mr. Blake.  "I am inclined, after what you
boys have told me, to think that they have."

"I am sure of it," echoed Rob.




CHAPTER IX

THE HYDROPLANE QUEERLY RECOVERED


Seldom had the Flying Fish been urged to greater speed than she was a
short time after the discovery of the looting of the scouts' armory.
She fairly flew across the smooth waters of the inlet and out on to the
Atlantic swells, leaving a clean, sweeping bow-wave as she cut her way
along.  Her four young occupants, for Tubby had been called on and
notified of the occurrences of the night, were, however, wrapped in
slickers borrowed from the yacht club, so that the showers of spray
which fell about them had little effect on them.

The run to Topsail Island was made in record time, and as they drew
near the little hummock of tree and shrub-covered land the boys could
perceive that something unusual had happened.  A figure which even at a
distance they recognized as that of Captain job Hudgins was down on the
little wharf, and had apparently been on the lookout there for some
time.  A closer view revealed the captain waving frantically.

"Something's up, all right," remarked Tubby, above the roar of the
motor-boat's engine.

The others said nothing, but kept their gaze riveted on the captain's
figure.  With the skill of a veteran boatman, Rob brought the Flying
Fish round in a graceful curve and ran her cleanly up to the wharf
without the slightest jolt or jar.

"Ahoy, lads, I'm glad yer've come!" exclaimed the captain, as he caught
the painter line thrown out to him by Merritt, and skillfully made the
boat fast.

"Why, what has happened?" demanded Rob, as he sprang on to the wharf,
followed by the others.

"Happened?" repeated the captain.  "Well, in a manner of speakin',
about twenty things has happened at once.  Lads, my spirits and
emotions are in a fair Chinese tornado--every which way at once.  In
the first place, I'm seventy-five dollars poorer than I was last night;
in the second, poor old Skipper's been given some kind av poison that's
made him so sick I doubt he'll get over it."

"You've been robbed?" gasped Merritt.

"That's it, my lad.  That's the word.  My poor old safe's been scuttled
and her hold overhauled.  But I don't mind that so much--it's poor old
Skipper I'm worried about.  But come on up ter the house, lads, and see
fer yerselves."

Followed by the sympathetic four, the old man hobbled up from his
little wharf to a small eminence on which stood his neatly whitewashed
hut.  He opened the door and invited them in.  A first glance
discovered nothing much the matter, but a second look showed the boys
poor old Skipper lying on the floor in front of the open fireplace
which was filled with fresh green boughs--and evidently a very sick dog
indeed.  He gave the boys a pathetic glance of recognition as they came
in, and with a feeble wag or two of his tail tried to show them he was
glad to see them; but this done, he seemed to be completely exhausted,
and once more laid his head between his forepaws and seemed to doze.

"Poor old dog," said the captain, shaking his head.  "I doubt if he'll
ever get about again."

The safe now engaged the boys' attention.  It is true that it was a
rickety old contrivance which might well have been forced open with an
ordinary poker, but to the captain, up to this day, it had been a
repository as safe and secure as a big Wall Street trust company's
vaults.

"Look at that, boys!" cried the captain, with tragic emphasis, pointing
to the door, which had been forced clear off its rusty hinges.  "Just
busted open like yer'd taken the crust off'n a pie!  Ah, if I could lay
my hands on the fellers that done this, I'd run 'em tip ter the yardarm
afore a foc'sle hand could say 'Hard tack'!"

"Why, we think that--" began Tubby, when Rob checked him.  The captain,
who had been bending over his dog, didn't hear the remark, and Rob
hastily whispered to Tubby:

"Don't breathe a word to anyone of our suspicions.  Our only chance to
get hold of the real culprits is to not give them any idea that we
suspect them."

After a little more time spent on the island, the boys took their
leave, promising to come back soon again.  First, however, Rob and his
corporal made a brief expedition to see if they could make out the
tracks of the marauders of the previous evening. Whoever they had been,
however--and the boys, as we know, had a shrewd guess at their
identity--they had been too cunning to take the path, but had
apparently, judging from the absence of all footmarks, made their way
to the house through the coarse grass that grew on each side of the way.

"Well, what are we going to do about it?" Tubby inquired, as they
speeded back toward home.

"Just what I said," rejoined Rob.  "Keep quiet and not let Jack or his
chums know that we suspect a thing.  Give them enough rope, and we'll
get them in time.  I'm certain of it."

How true his words were to prove, Rob at that time little imagined,
although he felt the wisdom of the course he had advised.

As they neared the inlet, Rob, who was at the wheel and scanning the
channel pretty closely, for the tide was now running out, gave a sudden
shout and pointed ahead.  As the others raised their eyes and gazed in
the direction their leader indicated they, too, uttered a cry of
astonishment.  From the mouth of the inlet there had stolen a long,
low, black craft, gliding through the water at tremendous speed.

In the strange craft the boy scouts had little difficulty in
recognizing Sam Redding's hydroplane.

"So he's got her back," exclaimed Merritt, recovering from his first
astonishment.

"Yes, and she seems little the worse for her experience," remarked
Tubby.  "It doesn't appear, though, that they are going to profit by
their lesson of the other day, for there they go out to sea again."

"Probably consulted the glass this time," remarked Rob.  "It read 'set
fair' when we started out."

"Well, that's the only kind of weather for them," commented Merritt;
"though as both Jack and Bill can swim, I wouldn't mind seeing them get
a good ducking."

"I suppose the coincidence has struck you fellows, too?" remarked Rob
suddenly, as he skillfully twisted and turned the dancing Flying Fish
through the devious ways of the channel at low water.

"What on earth are you talking about?" demanded Merritt.

"Why, that it seems rather queer that Sam, who was round town
desperately trying to raise money with which to get his boat out of
pawn suddenly manages to redeem her, and that on the very day after the
robbery of Captain Hudgins hut."

"By hookey, that's right!" shouted Tubby.  "I'll bet your guess was
correct, Rob--that gang of Jack's robbed the old captain."

"And stole our uniforms," put in Merritt.

"Yes; but how are we going to prove it?" was Rob's "cold water" comment
which silenced further speculation for the time being. Each boy,
however, determined then and there to do his share in running down the
persons responsible for the vandalism.

By the time they got back to Hampton the news had spread among the
entire Eagle Patrol, and an indignation meeting was called in the
devastated armory.  Mr. Blake entered in the midst of it, and offered,
in conjunction with the rest of the local council, to furnish new
uniforms.  On the matter being put to a vote, however, the lads all
agreed that it would be better not to accept such an offer till they
had made a determined effort to run down the plunderers.

"Very well," said Mr. Blake; "your spirit does you great credit, and if
you need any help, don't fail to call upon me at any time."

"Three cheers for Mr. Blake and the members of the council!" shouted
Merritt, jumping on a chair.

They were given with such roof-raising effect, that people outside in
the street, many of whom knew of the robbery, began to think that the
uniforms must have been recovered.

As the lads surged out of the armory, all talking at once about the
robbery and its likely results, whom should they encounter on the
street but Jack Curtiss and his two chums, evidently, from the fact
that they carried waterproof garments over their arms, just back from
their trip in Sam's newly-recovered hydroplane.

It might have been fancy, but as the eyes of the Boy Scouts met those
of the three lads who would have so much liked to belong to the
organization, Rob thought that a look of embarrassment spread over Jack
Curtiss' heavy features, and that even Bill Bender's brazen face took
on a shade of pallor.  If this were so, however, it could have been
only momentary, for the next minute Jack, with what seemed very much
overdone cordiality, came forward with:

"Why, hullo, boys.  I just heard about your loss.  Any news?"

"No, not a word," chirped little Joe Digby, one of the few lads in the
Eagle Patrol who had never run afoul of the bully.

"Well," went on Jack, affecting not to notice the silence with which
his advances had been greeted, "I hope you find the fellows who did it,
whoever they were."

"Same here," chimed in Bill Bender, now quite at his ease, "although,
at that, I guess it was only a joke, and you'll get 'em back again
before long."

"Do you think so, Bill?" asked Merritt, looking the bully's crony
steadily in the eye. "I hope so, I'm sure.  By the way, Hiram Nelson
here says that he saw you hurrying up Main Street at just about the
time the robbery must have taken place.  You didn't hear any unusual
sounds or see anything out of the way, did you?"

"I--why, no--I--you see, I was on my way home from my aunt's home,"
stuttered Bill, seemingly taken off his guard.

"Yes; your aunt, who left home yesterday afternoon to be gone a week,"
shot out Merritt.

"Queer that she should have changed her mind and come home in such a
hurry."

"Oh, come on, Bill," stuck in Sam, seeing that things were getting very
unpleasant.  "We've got to hurry up if we're to get out to Jack's in
time."

Without another word, the three hurried off, seemingly not at all
unrelieved to escape from what Merritt was pretty sure were
embarrassing questions.




CHAPTER X

WINNING THE CONTEST


The day which was to witness the tests of the aeroplane models for the
prizes offered by the professor of aeronautics dawned still and fair.
It followed several days of storm, in which the boys had been unable to
make any excursions in their motor boat, or into the country, or,
indeed, even to devote any time to the engrossing subject of tracing
the theft of the uniforms to its source.

Early in the morning a small field in the rear of Mr. Blake's house was
well filled with boys of all ages and sizes, watching the contestants
in the model contest trying out their craft.  The models were of all
sorts and sizes.  Some were freak craft that had been constructed in a
hurry from pictures, without any attention being paid to scale or
proportions, while others were carefully made bits of mechanism.

Among the latter class were Paul Perkins' monoplane--Silver Arrow, he
called it,--Hiram Nelson's two models, the monoplane of Tom Maloney, a
lad of about sixteen, and Ed River's little duplicate of a Curtiss
biplane.  The contest was to take place on the Main Street of the town,
in front of the bank, and in the middle of the course two poles had
been erected, one on each side of the street, between which a brightly
colored tape had then been strung, forming a sort of aerial hurdle.
The tape was fifty feet above the ground, and to qualify at all it
would be necessary for the contesting models to clear it.

The lecture which took place in the village hall came first and was
well attended, most of the young folks of Hampton being there.  If the
truth must be told, however, while the lecturer was expounding his
subject, illustrating it on the blackboard with chalk drawings, the
majority of his young hearers were wishing that it was over and the
contest really begun.

Especially was this true of the boys of the Eagle Patrol, who were
every one of them anxious to see what kind of aeroplanes Jack Curtiss
and Bill Bender would have produced.  The lecture, however, at last
came to an end, and the gentlemen on the platform shook hands with the
professor and the professor shook hands with them, and somebody called
for three cheers for "Hampton's distinguished son."

Everybody then lost no time in filing out into the afternoon sunlight,
where they found quite a crowd already on the streets, and a small
wooden grand stand, which had been erected near what was expected to be
the finishing line, seating several guests. The committee and the
professor, led by the Hampton brass band, blaring away at patriotic
airs, made their way to the front seats in the structure, and everybody
was requested to line up on each side of the street, so as to make a
clear lane for the models to fly in.

The starting line was about a hundred yards from the red tape, and the
contestants were compelled to stand back of this.  Mr. Wingate, the
president of the yacht club and member of the Boy Scout Council, had
already shuffled the numbers of the contestants in a hat, and they were
to fly their models in the order in which they drew their figures.

Up to this time there had been no sign of Jack Curtiss or Bill Bender,
but the boys now saw them hastening up to a member of the committee and
whispering to him.  A moment later a man, with a megaphone boomed out
from the grand stand:

"William Bender announces that he has withdrawn from the contest."

"Aha!  I'll bet Jack's got cold feet, too," whispered Hiram, nudging
Paul, who was kneeling down and winding up the long rubber bands which
drove the propellers of the Silver Arrow, an Antoinette model.

But a short interval showed him to be mistaken, for Jack, with his
usual confident air, repaired to the buggy in which he had driven into
town from his father's farm, and speedily produced a model that caused
loud sighs of "Ohs!" and "Ahs!" to circulate through the juvenile
portion of the crowd.

However he had managed to accomplish it, the bully had certainly
produced a beautiful model.  It was of the Bleriot type, and finished
perfectly down to the minutest detail.  Every wire and brace on it was
silvered with aluminum paint, and it even bore a small figure at its
steering wheel.  Beside it the other models looked almost clumsy.

The faces of the Boy Scouts fell.

"If that machine can fly as well as she looks," said Rob to Merritt,
"she wins the first prize."

"Not a doubt of it," was Merritt's reply.

"Oh, well," put in Tubby, for the three inseparables were standing
together, "if he can win the prize fairly, don't knock him.  He
certainly has built a beautiful machine.  You've got to give him credit
for that."

And now, as Jack, with a triumphant smile at the glances of admiration
his model excited, strode to the starting point, elbowing small boys
aside, and drew from the hat, the man with the megaphone once more
arose.  He held in his hand the result of the drawing and the order in
which the models would fly.

"The f-i-r-s-t model to com-pete for the big p-r-ize," he bellowed,
"will be that of Thomas Maloney--a Bler-i-ot!"

Poor Tom might have called his machine a Bleriot, but it is doubtful if
the designer of the original machine of that name would have recognized
the model as having any more than a distant relationship to the famous
type of monoplane.  It was provided with a large tin propeller,
however, and seemed capable of at least accomplishing a flight.  In
fact, at the trials in the morning it had flown well, and by some of
the lads was regarded as a sort of "dark horse."  As Tom was on the
village team, as opposed to the Boy Scout contingent, he was greeted
with loud cheers and whistles by his friends as he stepped to the
starting line, and, holding his already wound up machine in his hand,
made ready to launch it.

"Crack!" went the pistol.

At the same instant Tom, with a thrusting motion, released his model;
but, alas! instead of darting forward like the Sparrow Hawk it was
named after, the craft ingloriously wobbled about eccentrically, and
finally alighted on an old lady's bonnet, causing her to exclaim as the
propeller whizzed round and entangled itself in her hair:

"No good'll ever come of teaching lads to meddle with these here
contraptions."

The model having finally been extricated, amid much laughter, and poor
Tom having offered mortified apologies, the announcer made known that
Hiram Nelson's Doodlebug monoplane would essay a flight.

As the pistol sounded, Hiram launched his craft, and amid cheers from
the crowd it soared up, and, just clearing the red tape, settled
gracefully down a few feet the other side of the two hundred foot line.

"Good for you, Hiram!" exclaimed Ernest Thompson, the bike scout, who
was acting as a patrol on the course.  "Whose turn next?"

"You kids wait till I get my Bleriot started," sneered Jack. Several
small boys near him, who were mortally afraid of the big fellow and
rather admired him as being "manly," set up a cheer at this.

"Wait for Jack's dandy model to fly!" they cried.

"Edward Rivers--model of a Curtiss biplane!" came the next announcement
through, the megaphone.

Another cheer greeted this, as young Rivers was also on the "town team."

The little Curtiss darted into the air at the pistol crack and flew
straight as an arrow for the red tape.  It cleared it easily and
skimmed on down past the grand stand, and alighted, fluttering like a
tired butterfly, beyond Hiram's model.

"Three hundred feet!" cried the announcer, amid a buzz of approval,
after the measurers of the course had done their work.

"Paul Perkins--Bleriot!" was the next announcement.

A hum of excitement went through the crowds that lined the track. It
began to look as if the record of Ed Rivers' machine would be hard to
beat, but from the determined look on his face and his gritted teeth it
was evident that Paul meant to try hard.

Before the report of the pistol had died out, the yellow-winged
Dragonfly soared upward from Paul's hand and darted like a streak
across the red tape, clearing it at the highest altitude yet achieved
by any of the models.

"Hurrah!" yelled the crowd.

On and on sped the little Bleriot, while Paul watched it with
pride-flushed cheeks.  It was evident that it was going to out-distance
the record made by Ed Rivers' machine.  The Boy Scouts set up their
Patrol cry:

"Kr-ee-ee-ee-ee!"

As the little machine settled to the ground, far beyond the grand
stand, the officials ran out with their tapes, and presently the
announcement came blaring down the packed ranks of the onlookers:

"Three hundred and fifty feet!"

What a cheer went up then.

"I guess you've got it won.  Congratulations!" said Ed Rivers, pressing
forward to Paul's side.

"Thanks, Ed," returned the other; "but 'there's many a slip,' you know,
and there are several others to be flown yet."

Now came in rapid succession several of the smaller models and freak
designs.   Some of these wobbled through the air and landed in the
crowd.  Others sailed blithely up toward the red tape and just fell
short of clearing it.  Another landed right on the tape and hung there,
the target of irreverent remarks from the crowd.

While this was going on, Bill Bender, Jack Curtiss and Sam were in
close consultation.

"Remember, you promised that if you won the prize you'd give that money
back," Sam whispered to Jack, "and for goodness' sake, don't forget it.
I half believe that those boys suspect us already."

"Nonsense," returned the bully.  "And what if they do?  We covered up
our tracks too well for them to have anything on us. They can't prove
anything, can they?"

"I--I--I don't know," stammered Sam, and was about to say more, but the
clarion voice of the announcer was heard informing the crowd that:

"John Curtiss' Bleriot model will now make a flight for the great
prize."

With a confident smile on his face, Jack stepped forward and held his
model ready.  The murmur of admiration that had greeted its first
appearance was repeated as he held it high in the sunlight and the
afternoon rays glinted and shimmered on its fittings and wings.

"That's the model for my money," remarked a man in the crowd.

"It's going to win, too," said Jack confidently.

Just at that moment the pistol cracked, and Jack released his
much-admired air craft.

Its flight showed that it was as capable of making as beautiful a
soaring excursion as its graceful outlines and careful finish seemed to
indicate.  In a long, sweeping glide, it arose and cleared the red tape
by a greater margin than had Paul Perkins' model.

"Jack Curtiss wins!" yelled the crowd, as the machine soared right on
and did not begin its downward swoop for some distance. After it had
alighted and the measurers had laid their tapes on the course, the
announcer megaphoned, amid a perfect tornado of roars and cheers:

"The last flight, ladies and gentlemen--and apparently the winning
one--accomplished the remarkable distance of four hundred and fifty
feet--four hundred and fifty feet."

"Three cheers for Jack Curtiss!" shouted Bill Bender, slapping Jack
heartily on the back and giving most of the cheers himself.

"I guess those cubs won't be quite so stuck up now," commented Sam,
shaking Jack's hand warmly.

"I was pretty sure I'd win," modestly remarked the bully, as he began
shouldering his way through the press toward the judges' stand.  He was
closely followed by the boys, as it looked as if Paul Perkins might
have won the second prize and Ed Rivers the third.

Urged by Bill Bender, the band began puffing away at "See, the
Conquering Hero Comes," and Jack, nothing averse to appearing in such a
role, bowed gracefully right and left to the admiring throngs.

The professor shook hands warmly with the victorious Jack, and remarked:

"You are to be congratulated, young man.  I have rarely seen a better
model, and your skill does you great credit.  Are you thinking of
taking up aeronautics seriously?"

The bully, his face very red, stammered that he had entertained some
such thoughts.

The professor was about to reply, when there came a sudden sound of
confusion among that portion of the crowd which had surrounded the
delegates deputed to pick up the aeroplanes and bring them to the
stand.  This was in order that they might be exhibited as each prize
was awarded.  A small boy with a very excited face was seen struggling
to get through the mass, and he finally gained the judges' stand.  As
he faced the congratulatory professor he stuttered out:

"Please, sir, there's something wrong about Jack Curtiss' machine."

"What do you mean, you impudent young shaver!" shouted the bully,
turning white, nevertheless.

"Let the lad speak," said Mr. Blake, who as one of the committee was
standing beside the professor.  "What is it, my boy?  Let me see.
You're Joe Digby, of the Eagle Patrol, aren't you."

"Yes, sir; and I live out on a farm near Jack Curtiss.  I was watching
him fly his machine this morning, from behind a hedge, and I heard them
saying something about 'their store-made machine beating any country
boy's model.'"

"He's a young liar!  Pay no attention to him," stammered Jack, licking
his dry lips.

"Silence, sir!" said Mr. Blake gravely.  "Let us listen to what this
boy has to say.  If he is not speaking the truth, you can easily
disprove it.  Go on, my boy."

"Well, I guess that's about all I know about it: but I thought I ought
to tell you, sir," confusedly concluded the small lad.

"You young runt, I'll half kill you if I catch you alone!" breathed
Jack, under his breath, as the lad sped off to join his companions.

"Of course, you are not going to pay any attention to that kid's--I
mean boy's--story," demanded Jack, addressing the professor.  "It's
made out of whole cloth, I assure you."

In the meantime the machines had been brought to the grand stand and
were being examined.  Naturally, after young Digby's statement, Jack's
was one of the first to be scrutinized.  The committee turned it over
and over, and were about to pass on it, when Mr. Wingate, who had been
bending attentively over the bully's model, gave a sudden exclamation.

"Look here, gentlemen," he cried, pointing to a small tag which Jack
had evidently forgotten to remove, "I think this is conclusive
evidence.  Here is the label of the 'Manhattan Model Works' pasted
right under this wing."

"Somebody must have put it there.  It's a job those Boy Scouts put up
on me," protested Tack.  "I made that model every bit myself."

"I regret to say that we must regard the price tag as conclusive
evidence that this machine comes from a store," said the professor
sternly, handing Jack his unlucky model.  "You are disqualified for
entering a machine not of your own workmanship.

"Stand back, please," he went on, as Jack tried to protest.  "I want to
say," he went on in a loud tone, holding up his hand to command
attention, "that there has been a grave mistake made. The machine which
actually flew the longest distance is disqualified, as it was made at a
New York model factory.  The first prize of fifty dollars, therefore,
goes to Paul Perkins, of the Boy Scouts, the second to Edward Rivers,
of Hampton, and the third to Hiram Green, also of the Boy Scouts.

"Hold on one minute," he shouted, as the crowd began to cheer and hoot.
"There is an additional announcement to be made.  The committee has
decided to offer a further reward of five dollars to Thomas Maloney,
whose model shows evidence of praiseworthy and painstaking work."

As the cheers broke loose once more, Jack Curtiss and his cronies slunk
off through the crowd, and having placed the rejected model in the
buggy, drove off into the country in no very amiable or enviable frame
of mind.

"Well, you made a fine mess of it," grumbled Bill Bender savagely.  "I
told you to look carefully and see that all the tags were off it."

"It's no more my fault than yours," grated out Jack, lashing the horse
savagely, to work off some of his rage.  "It's all the fault of those
young cubs of Rob Blake's.  Let them look out, though, for I'll get
even with them before long, and in a way that will make them sit up and
take notice."

"Don't forget that young mischief maker, Joe Digby," suggested Bill
Bender.  "It was all his fault--the young spy!"

"Oh, I'll attend to him," Jack assured his chum, with a grating laugh
that boded no good for the youngest member of the Eagle Patrol.




CHAPTER XI

A FORTUNATE DISCOVERY


"Want to go fishing?" Rob inquired over the telephone of Merritt
Crawford a few days later.

"Sure," was the response.

"We can run into Topsail Island and get a site for the camp picked at
the same time," suggested Rob.

"Bully!  I'll meet you at the wharf.  Going to bring Tubby?"

"You bet! We'll be there in ten minutes."

"All right. Good-by."

At the time set the three boys met on the wharf of the yacht club, and
were speedily ready to start on their trip.  Rob brought along bluefish
squids and lines, and Tubby--never at a loss to scare up a hurried
lunch--had a basket full of good things to eat.

The run to the island was made without incident, and the boys were glad
to see that, contrary to the captain's fears, his dog Skipper was all
right again, for the animal came bounding and barking down the wharf as
they drew near, in token of his gladness to see them.

Attracted by his dog's barking, the old captain, who was at work in a
small potato patch he cultivated, came hobbling to meet the boys as
they tied up and disembarked.

"Well, well, boys; come ter stay?" he cheerily remarked, as the three
lads shook hands.

"No, we're off after 'blues,"' said Rob; "but we thought we'd drop in
and see how things are coming along with you, and if you have heard any
news yet concerning the robbery."

"Not a thing, boys, not a thing," said the old man.  "In fact, I
haven't left the island since my old safe was busted open. Skipper, as
yer see, got over his sickness.  It's my belief that them fellers fed
him poisoned meat or something."

"I shouldn't wonder," remarked Rob dryly.  "It would be quite in their
line."

"By the way," exclaimed the old man suddenly, "a queer thing happened
the other day.  Skipper had been a-skirmishin' round the other side uv
the island after rabbits and critters, and he brought home this--  Wait
a minute and I'll show it to yer."

After some fumbling in his pocket, the old man produced a torn strip of
yellow material with a brass button attached to it.

"I wonder where that come from," he remarked, as he handed the fragment
to Rob for his inspection.

"Why, it's khaki," exclaimed Rob, as he felt it.  "And, by hokey!" he
ejaculated the next instant, "it's a piece of a Boy Scout uniform!"

Old Skipper was jumping about in great excitement, and endeavoring to
sniff the bit of torn material as Rob examined it, and a sudden idea
struck the boy.

"I wonder if Skipper could pilot us to where he found this bit of
material."

"Are you sure it's a bit of uniform?" asked Tubby doubtfully.

"Certain of it.  No one else wears khaki in these parts.  Hey, Skipper,
hey, good dog!  Sic 'em, sic 'em!" cried Rob, holding up the khaki for
the intelligent creature to see.

The animal seemed to be greatly excited and gave short, quick barks as
he danced about the boys.

"Well, we might try and see if he will lead us anywhere." remarked
Merritt somewhat dubiously.  "At any rate, there's no harm done, except
wasting a little time; and if we can get on the track of our uniforms,
it's not such a much of a waste, after all."

"He sure wants ter be off somewhere," observed the old captain,
watching the antics of his dog, whom he regarded in the light of a
human being.  "He never acts nor talks that way unless he's got suthin'
on his mind.  Yer boys follow him, and I'll bet he'll lead yer ter
suthin'.  It may be nothin' more than a dead rabbit, and it may be what
ye think.  I'll stay here an' dig my pertaters, fer my rheumatiz is
powerful bad today."

"Very well, captain.  We shan't be long," rejoined Rob, calling to the
dog.  "Hey, Skipper, hey, old boy!  After 'em, Skipper--after 'em!"

The dog bounded on ahead of the three boys, occasionally looking back
to see if they were following and then plunging on again.

"As the Captain said, he 'sure has got suthin' on his mind'!" laughed
Merritt.

After traversing about a mile of beach, the dog suddenly bounded into a
thicket overhanging the shore and began barking furiously.

"He's treed something, all right," remarked Rob, pushing the branches
aside.

The next minute he gave a loud shout of triumph.

"Look there, boys!  Old Skipper sure did 'have suthin' on his mind'!"

Peering over Rob's shoulder, the other two were able to make out two
hidden sacks, the mouth of one of which had been torn open, evidently
by the investigating Skipper.

From the aperture appeared the torn sleeve of a Boy Scout's uniform,
and a brief searching of the sacks after they had been lugged out on
the beach revealed the entire stolen equipment.

"Bones for you, Skipper, for the rest of your life!" promised Tubby, as
the dog, evidently well pleased with the petting he received and the
admiration showered upon him, pranced about on the beach and indulged
in a hundred antics.

The only one of the uniforms damaged was the one that Skipper had torn.
The others were all intact, but badly crumpled, having been hastily
thrust into the sacks, and, as it appeared, tamped down to make them
fit more compactly.

"Well, what do you know about that?" was Merritt's astonished
exclamation, as one by one Rob drew forth the regimentals and laid them
on the beach.

"You mean what does Jack Curtiss and Company know about that,"
seriously returned Rob.

"However, we found them--that's one thing to be enthusiastic over,"
observed Tubby sagely.

"I'd like just as well almost to find out exactly who hid them there,"
was Merritt's reply.

"The same folks that stole the old captain's seventy-five dollars, I
guess," returned Rob, thrusting the garments back into the sacks
preparatory to carrying them to the boat.  "Here, Tubby, you carry this
one--it'll take some of that fat off you to do a hike along the beach
with it.  I'll shoulder this one."

"Well, boys, yer certainly made a haul, thanks ter old Skipper here,"
declared Captain Job, after the delighted boys had made known their
discovery.  "He's a smart one, I tell yer.  No better dog ever lived."

"That's what we think," agreed Merritt warmly, patting old Skipper's
black and white head.

The recovery of the uniforms had quite put all thoughts of blue or any
other fishing out of the boys' heads, and after bidding farewell to the
captain, who promised to point out to them a good site for a camp on
their next visit, they made their best speed back to Hampton.  On their
way to the armory they spread the news of their discovery broadcast, so
that in a short time the town was buzzing with the information that the
Boy Scouts' lost uniforms had been found under most surprising
circumstances; and the editor of the Hampton News, who was just going
to press, held his paper up till he could get in an item about it.

It was this item that caught Jack Curtiss' eye, the next morning as he
and Bill Bender and Sam were seated in Bill's "club room."

"Confound those brats, they seem always to be putting a spike in our
schemes!" muttered Jack, as he handed the paper to Bill for that
worthy's perusal.  "Which reminds me," he went on, "that we haven't
attended to the case of that young Digby yet."

"I wish you'd leave those kids alone for a while, Jack," objected Sam,
in his usual whining tones.  "You've had your fun with them. They've
had to do without their uniforms for a long time.  Now let up on them,
won't you?"

"Oh, you're feeling friendly toward 'em, now, are you?" sneered Jack.

"Oh, no, it isn't that," Sam hastened to assure him; "nothing of the
kind.  What I mean is that we are liable to get into serious trouble if
we keep on this way.  I saw Hank Handcraft the other day, and I can
tell you he's in no very amiable mood.  He wants his money for the
other night, he says, and he intimated that if he didn't get it he'd
make things hot for us."

"He'd better not," glowered Bill Bender, looking up from his paper.
"We know a few things about friend Hank."

"Yes, and he knows a good deal about us that wouldn't look well in
print," retorted Sam gloomily.  "I wish I'd never gone into that thing
the other night."

"Pshaw, it was just borrowing a little money from the old man, wasn't
it?" snorted Jack.  "We'll pay it back some time."

"When we get it," rejoined Sam more gloomily than ever; "and I don't
see much immediate chance of that."

"Oh, well, cheer up; we'll get it all right somehow," Jack assured him.
"And in connection with that I've got a scheme. Why shouldn't we three
fellows go camping after the motor-boat races?"

"Go camping--where?" asked Bill, looking up surprised.

"Well, I would have suggested Topsail Island, but those pestiferous
kids are going there, I hear.  However, there are plenty of other
islands right inside the Upper Inlet.  What's the matter with our
taking possession of one of those?"

The Upper Inlet was a sort of narrow and shallow bay a short distance
above Topsail Island, and was well known to both Bill and Jack, who had
been there in the winter on frequent ducking expeditions.

"We might as well do something like that before school opens," said
Sam.  "I think that Jack's suggestion is a pretty good one."

"I don't know that it's so bad myself," patronizingly admitted Bill;
"but what connection has that with your scheme for getting money, Jack?"

"A whole lot," replied the bully.  "I'm going to get even with that
young Digby if it takes me a year.  He cost me the fifty-dollar prize,
and, beside that, all the kids in the village now call me 'cheater,'
and hardly anybody will have anything to do with me."

"Well, how do you propose to get even by going camping?" inquired Bill.

"I plan to take that Digby kid with me," rejoined Jack calmly.

"You're crazy!" exclaimed Bill.  "Why, we'd have the whole country
after us for kidnapping."

"Oh, I've got a better plan than that," laughed Jack coolly, "and we
won't need to be mixed up in it at all.  It'll all come back on Hank
Handcraft, I owe him a grudge for bothering me about money, anyhow, the
old beach-combing nuisance!"

"But where do we come in to get any benefit out of it?" demanded Sam.

"I'll explain that to you later," said Jack grandiloquently.  "I
haven't quite worked out all the details yet; but if you'll meet me
here this evening I'll have them all hot and smoking for you."




CHAPTER XII

JACK FORMS A PLOT


The next morning Jack lost no time in making his way toward Hank
Handcraft's tumble-down abode.  He found its owner in, and likewise
disposed to be quarrelsome.

"'Oh, here you are at last!" exclaimed the hairy and unkempt outcast,
as the bully approached heavily through the yielding sand.  "I'd about
given you up, and was seriously contemplating making a visit to your
home--"

"If you ever did," breathed Jack threateningly.

"Well," grinned Hank impudently, with his most malicious chuckle, "if I
did, what then?"

"I'd have you thrown out of the house," calmly replied Jack, seating
himself on a big log of driftwood, once the rib of a schooner that went
ashore on the dangerous shoals off Hampton and pounded herself to
pieces.

"Oh, no; you wouldn't have me thrown out!" chuckled Hank, resuming his
task of scaling a mackerel.  "Cause if you did, I'd go to the chief of
police and tell him something about the robbery of the armory and the
cracking of old man Hudgins' safe."

"You wouldn't dare to do that!" sneered Jack.  "You are implicated in
that as badly as we are."

"That's a matter of opinion," rejoined Hank, industriously scraping
away at his fish, and showing no trace of any emotion in his pale eyes.
"Anyhow, what I want right now is some cash.  You agreed to pay me well
for what I did the other night, and I haven't seen the money yet."

"Be a little patient, can't you?" irritably retorted the other. "Money
doesn't grow on trees.  Now listen, Hank.  How would you like to get a
nice little sum of money--more than I could give you--for camping out
on Kidd's Island, in the Upper Inlet, for a few days?"

Hank's fishy eyes showed some trace of feeling at this.

"What do you mean?" he asked.  "Is this a new joke you're putting up on
me?"

"No, I am perfectly serious.  You can make a good sum by following our
directions, and I'll see that you get into no trouble over it."

"Well, if you can do that, I'll keep my mouth shut," chuckled Hank in
his mirthless way; "but if I don't get some money pretty quick, I'm
going to make trouble fer somebody, I tell you!"

"Haven't you got some place where we can talk that is less exposed than
this?" said Jack, looking about him apprehensively.

"Sure, there's my mansion," grinned Hank, pointing over his shoulder
with a fishy thumb.

"That's the place," said Jack, "although I wish you'd clean it out
occasionally.  Now listen, Hank, here's the plan--"

Still talking, the ill-assorted pair entered the ruinous shack.

 * * * * * *

Motor-boat engines were popping everywhere.  The club house was dressed
in bright-colored bunting from veranda rail to ridge pole.  Ladies
strolled about beneath their parasols with correctly dressed yachtsmen,
asking all sorts of absurd questions about the various boats that lay
ready to take part in the various events.  It was the day of the
Hampton Yacht Club's regatta.

Among the throng the Boy Scouts threaded their way, watching with
interest the events as they were run off, one after the other. But
their minds were centered on the race for the trophy which, although
there were several other entries, had been practically conceded to Sam
Redding's hydroplane.

"She's a wonder," said one of the onlookers, pointing from the porch to
the float, where Jack Curtiss, Bill Bender and Sam were leaning over
their speedy craft, stripping her of every bit of weight not absolutely
necessary.  On the opposite side of the float the crew of the Flying
Fish, the Snark, the Bonita and the Albacore were equally busy over
their craft.

"Douse the engine with oil," directed Rob,  as Merritt gave the piece
of machinery a final inspection; "and how about that extra set of
batteries?"

"They're aboard," rejoined Tubby, who was perspiringly removing
cushions and other surplus gear from the fleet boat.

"That's right; if it comes to an emergency, we may need them," said
Rob.  "Nothing like being prepared."

"Do you think we have any show?" asked Tubby, who was to be a sort of
general utility man in the crew.  Rob was to steer.

"I don't see why not," rejoined the other, wiping his oily hands on a
bit of waste.  "The race is a handicap one, and we get an allowance on
account of our engine not being as powerful as the hydroplane's."

The course to be run was a sort of elongated, or isosceles triangle.
The turning point was at the head of the inlet, a buoy with a big red
ball on it being placed just inside the rough waters of the bar.  It
made a course of about five miles.  The race for the Hampton Motor Boat
Club's cup, for which the boys and the others were entered, was twice
round.

The waters about the club house were so dotted with motor craft which
darted about in every direction that Commodore Wingate of the club and
the other regatta officials had a hard time keeping the course clear
for the contestants.  On the threat, however, that the races would be
called off if a clear course was not kept, order was finally obtained.

The boys were too busy to pay much attention to the results of the
other races, but a member of the club who had won the Blake trophy for
the cabin cruiser boats, warned the boys to beware of the turn above
the far buoy.

"It's choppy as the dickens there," he said, as he made his way to the
club house, "and you want to take the turn easily.  Don't 'bank' it, or
you'll lose more than you gain."

The boys thanked him for his advice, and laid it to heart to be used
when the race was on.

Sam's boat having been tuned up to the last notch of readiness, Jack
Curtiss strolled consequentially about on the float, making bets freely
on the hydroplane's chance of winning.

"I'll bet you twenty-five to any odds you like that the hydroplane wins
the race," he said, addressing Colin Maxwell, the son of a well-to-do
merchant from a neighboring town.  Young Maxwell had heard nothing of
Jack's mean trick in the aeroplane contest, and therefore didn't mind
talking to him.

"I like the look of the Flying Fish pretty well," was the response,
"and I'll take you up.  You'll have to give me odds, though."

"Oh, certainly," responded the bully, with a confident grin;
"twenty-five to thirty, say."

"Make it thirty-five."

"All right; done," said Jack.  "You know me, of course; no necessity of
putting up the money."

"Oh, not the least," rejoined the other politely, though had he known
the state of Jack's finances he might have thought differently.

The bully went about making several bets at similar odds, until finally
Bill Bender came up behind him and in a low voice warned him to be
careful.

"What are you going to do if we lose?" he breathed.  "You haven't got a
cent to pay with."

"Oh, it's like taking gum from a busted slot machine," rejoined the
bully, with a laugh.  "They can't win.  We know what their boat can do,
and the race is practically conceded to us. Besides--" he placed his
hand close to Bill's ear and whispered a few minutes.  "I guess that's
a bad scheme, eh?" he resumed in a louder tone, though his voice was
still pitched too low for those about to hear him.  "If it's done
right, we'll ram them and it'll never be noticed."

"Hum, I'm not so sure," grunted Bill.  "However, if we really perceive
we are losing, I don't see what else we are to do.  Are you going to
steer?"

"Sure.  Sam lost his nerve at the last moment--like him, eh? It's a
good thing, though, I'm to be at the wheel, because I don't think Sam
would have had the courage to carry out my plan."

"Not he," said Bill, with a shrug.  "He's got the backbone of a snail."

More of this interesting conversation was cut short by the "bang" of
the pistol which warned the contestants of the racing boats to get
ready.

"The race for the Hampton Yacht Club's trophy will take place in five
minutes!" cried the announcer.

The five contestants cast off from the float and slowly chugged out to
a position in the rear of the starting line and behind the committee
boat.  Then came the nervous work of awaiting the starting gun.  The
boys had all donned slickers, and the crew of the hydroplane wore
rubber coats which covered them completely. A sort of spray hood had
been erected over the hydroplane's engines.

"That means she's going to do her best," remarked Rob, pointing to this
indication that great speed was expected.  "That's what we want to do,
too, isn't it?"

At last came the gun that started off the Snark, the Bonita and the
Albacore, which were all of about the same speed.

"Our turn next," said Rob, who had previously received his instructions
from the committee.

"Well, I'm all ready," said Merritt, nervously twisting a grease cup.




CHAPTER XIII

THE  "FLYING FISH" ON HER METTLE


"Bang!"

With a nervous twitch, Rob threw in the first speed clutch, for the
engine had been kept running on her neutral speed, and was able to take
up way as soon as the propeller began to "bite."

Rapidly the boy increased the speed up to the third "forward," and the
Flying Fish darted through the water like a pickerel after a fat frog.

"Bang!" came behind them once more, as the sound of the cheers which
greeted them as they shot across the line grew faint.

"Crouch low!" shouted Rob back to his crew.  "We'll need every inch of
advantage we can get."

The white spray shot in a perfect fountain from the sharp bow of the
Flying Fish, and her every frame and plank quivered under the vibration
of her powerful engine.

"She's doing better than she ever did!" shouted Merritt to Tubby, who
crouched in the center of the boat, ready to take any part in an
emergency.

The other nodded and kept his eyes ahead on the white wake of the other
three craft.

Suddenly the Albacore began to fall back.  As the Flying Fish roared by
her, Rob heard a shout of something about "missing fire."

A steady downpour of spray was drenching the occupants of the racer,
but they paid scant heed to it.  Rob dived in his pockets and put on a
pair of goggles.  The spray was blinding him.  He waved to Tubby to go
further astern and keep the rear part of the boat well down when they
made the sharp turn at the red buoy.

In an incredibly short time, it seemed, the turning buoy faced them.
Rob set his wheel over and spun the Flying Fish through the rougher
water at the mouth of the inlet at as sharp an angle as he dared.  In a
few seconds more they had passed the Snark and the Bonita, which were
racing bow and bow.  The crew of the Flying Fish, though, knew that
both boats had a time allowance over them, so that the mere passing
didn't mean much, unless they could increase the lead.

Faster and faster the boy's craft forged ahead.  A thrill shot through
Rob's frame.  The Flying Fish was showing what she was made of.

But as he turned his head swiftly he saw that the hydroplane had
rounded the stake and was coming down the straight stretch of water
like an express train.  A great wave of water shot out on either side
of her bow.  So low in the water had her powerful engines dragged her
that she seemed to be barely on the surface, and yet, as the boys knew,
she was actually "coasting" over the surface.

Try as he would, Rob could not get an ounce more speed out of the
Flying Fish, and as the speedy hydroplane roared by them they heard a
mocking shout from her crew.

Rob, more determined than ever to stick it out, sent the Flying Fish
plunging at top speed through the wash of the speedy craft, hoping to
keep up the distance between them at least equal.  But as he saw the
hydroplane gradually drawing away and heard the great roar that went up
from the thrilled spectators as she shot by the club house, his heart
sank.

It looked as if the Plying Fish was beaten.  And now the club house
loomed near once more.

"Go on, Plying Fish, go on!"

"You've got a time allowance on her!"

"Push along, Rob!"

"Kr-ee-ee-ee-ee!"

A tumult of other shouts roared in Rob's ears as they tore past the
crowded porch.

"Kr-ee-ee-ee-ee!" screamed back Merritt and Tubby, with waves of the
hand to the brown uniformed figures they could see perched on every
point of vantage.

Suddenly the Flying Fish began to creep up on the hydroplane, which had
slowed down for some reason.

"Hurrah!  We've got'em now!" shouted Merritt, as he saw, far ahead,
Jack and the other two occupants of the seeming winner leaning over the
craft's engine, the hood having been raised.

Rob said nothing, but with burning eyes clung to the wheel and shot the
Flying Fish straight ahead on her course.

As they thundered past the hydroplane, the slender craft lay almost
motionless on the water, with a great cloud of blue smoke tumbling out
of her exhausts.

"Looks like they've flooded her cylinder," said Merritt, observing
these signs.

"Kr-ee-ee-ee-ee!"

It was Tubby giving utterance triumphantly to the Eagle scream.

Jack Curtiss straightened up angrily as he heard, his face black and
greasy from his researches into the engine.  He shook a menacing fist
at the others as they tore by.  The next minute, however, a quick look
back by Rob showed that the hydroplane was coming ahead again, and that
the engine trouble, whatever it was, had been adjusted.

As they neared the turning point, Rob saw, to his dismay, that the
hydroplane was creeping up faster and faster.  It was the last lap, and
if Sam Redding's boat passed them at the stake the race was as good as
over.

"Come on, Flying Fish! Come on!" shouted Rob, as the hydroplane crept
ever nearer and nearer to his boat's stern.

Rob noticed, as he swung a trifle wide of the stake raft, that it
seemed to be the intention of Jack Curtiss, who was at the wheel, to
swing the hydroplane round the sharp angle of the course inside of the
Flying Fish. Guessing that this would mean disaster to her ill-advised
occupants, he waved his hand at them to keep out.

"When we need your advice we'll send for it.  This is the time we've
got you!" yelled Jack Curtiss, bending low over his wheel, as he grazed
by the Flying Fish's stern to take the inside course.

At the same instant, so quickly that the boys did not even get a mental
picture of it, the hydroplane overturned.

Taking the curve at such a speed and at such a sharp angle had, as Jack
had surmised, proved too much for her stability.   Her occupants were
pitched struggling into the water.

"Shall we pick them up?" yelled Merritt.

"No," shouted Rob; "they've all got life belts on.  A launch from the
club will get them."

Indeed, as he spoke a launch was seen putting off to the rescue. The
accident had been witnessed from the club, and as the water was warm,
the boys were satisfied that no harm would come to the three from their
immersion.

But the delay almost proved fatal to the Flying Fish's chance of
winning.  Close behind her now came creeping up the speedy Albacore.

But a few hundred feet before the finish the Flying Fish darted ahead
once more, and shook off her opponent amid a great roar of yells and
whoops and cheers.  An instant later she shot across the line--a winner.

"Bang!" went the gun, in token that the race was finished.

"I congratulate you," said Commodore Wingate, as the boys brought their
craft up to the float.  "It was a well-fought race."

And now came the captains of the Albacore, Snark and Bonita.

"You won the race fairly and squarely," said the former, shaking Rob's
hand.  "I presume, commodore, the time was taken?"

"It has been," replied that official.  "The Flying Fish wins by one
minute and four and seven hundredths seconds."

More cheers greeted this announcement, mingled with laughter and some
sympathy, as the club launch, towing the capsized hydroplane, puffed up
to the float.  From the launch emerged three crestfallen figures with
dripping garments.  But wet as he was, Jack Curtiss was not going to
surrender the race without a protest.

"A foul!  We claim a foul!  The Flying Fish fouled us!" he shouted.

"My dear young man," calmly replied the commodore, "I was watching you
every foot of the way through binoculars, and I should rather say that
you fouled the Flying Fish.  Anyhow, you should have better sense than
to try to shave round that turn so closely."

More mortified, and angrier than ever, Jack strode off to put on dry
clothes, followed by his equally chagrined companions, who, however,
had sense enough now not to make any protests.  They knew well enough
that Jack, in his hurry to grab the prize, had attempted a foolish and
dangerous thing which had cost them the race.

"A great race, a great race," said Mr. Blake, as the boys, followed by
the crowd, entered the club house, where the awards were to be
distributed.  "You boys certainly covered yourselves with glory," he
went on.

"Yes, and here is your reward.  I hope it will stimulate you to put up
a fine defense for it next year," said Commodore Wingate, handing to
the elated boys a fine engraved silver cup, the trophy of the Hampton
Yacht Club.

"Get up and make a speech!" shouted some one.

The boys felt inclined to run for it.

"Go ahead!  Make some sort of a talk," urged Rob, helping Tubby on to
the platform from which the prizes had been handed out.

"Ladies and gentlemen," puffed the stout youth, "we want to thank you
for your congratulations and thank the club for the fine cup.
Er--er--er--we thank you."

And having made what was perhaps quite as good a speech as some of his
elders', Tubby stepped down amid loud and prolonged cheering.

Up in the dressing room Jack and his cronies, changing into other,
garments, heard the sounds of applause.

"It's high time something was done," said Bill, as he gazed from a
window at several of the yacht club attendants bailing out the unlucky
hydroplane.  "Those young beggars will be owning the town next."




CHAPTER XIV

THE EAGLES IN CAMP


The next few days were full of excitement and preparation for the Boy
Scouts.  Their headquarters resounded all day to the tramp of feet, and
the Manual of Instructions was consulted day and night. The official
tents had arrived, and every boy in the Patrol was eager for the time
to arrive to put them up.  So much so that two or three confessed that
they could hardly sleep at night in their impatience for the hour when
the embarkation for Topsail Island was to take place.

Besides the tents, there was much other equipment to be overhauled and
set in order, for, before their departure, the boys were to be reviewed
by their scout master and a field secretary from New York.  There were
haversack straps to be replaced, laces mended, axes sharpened, "Billys"
polished and made to shine like new tin, and a hundred and one things
to be done.  At last, however--although it seemed that it would never
come--the eventful Monday arrived, as eventful days of all kinds have a
habit of doing; and the Eagle Patrol, spick and span and shining from
tan boots to campaign hats, fell in line behind the band.  Proudly they
paraded up the street, with their green and black Eagle Patrol sign
fluttering gallantly in the van.

The "reviewing stand" was the post-office steps, around which most of
the citizens of Hampton and the proud parents and relatives of the
young scouts were assembled.

Plenty of applause greeted them, as, in response to Rob's orders, given
in the sharp, military manner, they drew up in line and gave the Boy
Scout's salute.  This done, the young scouts went through a smart drill
with the staffs they carried.  Then, after saluting once more, and
being warmly complimented on their appearance by the field secretary,
they marched off to the wharf where they were to embark for their camp.

The day before Merritt, Hiram Nelson, Paul Perkins and the three
"tender feet"--Martin Green, Walter Lonsdale and Joe Digby--had been
told off by Rob as on "pioneer service"; that is to say, that they had
gone down to the island in the Flying Fish. Arrived there, they
selected a good spot for the camp, aided by Commodore Wingate's and
Captain Hudgins' suggestions, and set up the tents and made the other
necessary preparations.  The camp was therefore practically ready, for
the "army" to move into.

At Tubby's special request, a list of the rations for the week's camp
had been made out by Rob and affixed to the bulletin board in the
headquarters of the Eagles.  As perhaps some of my young readers may
care to know what to take on a similar expedition, is the list,
exclusive of meat, which was to be brought from the mainland, and fish,
which they expected to catch themselves:

  Oatmeal, 8 lbs.;
  rice, 4 lbs.;
  crackers, 35 lbs.;
  chocolate, 1 1-2 lbs.;
  tea, 3 lbs;
  coffee, 1 lb.;
  lard, 6 lbs.;
  sugar, 8 lbs.;
  condensed milk, 10 cans;
  butter, 4 lbs.;
  eggs, 12 dozen;
  bacon, 20 lbs.;
  preserves, 14 jars;
  prunes, 8 lbs.;
  maple syrup and molasses, 4 quarts;
  potatoes, 1 bushel;
  white beans, 6 quarts;
  canned corn, 6 tins;
  canned tomatoes, 6 tins;
  flour, 35 lbs.;
  baking powder, 2 lbs.;
  salt, 4 lbs.;
  pepper, 2 ounces.

"Well," Tubby had remarked, as he gazed attentively at the list, "we
won't starve, anyhow."

"I should say not," laughed Rob; "and besides all that, I've got lots
of lines and squids, and the blues and mackerel are running good."

"Can't I take along my twenty-two rifle--that island's just swarming
with rabbits, and I think I heard some quail when we were there the
other day," pleaded Merritt.

"Not in season," answered Rob laconically.  "Laws not up on them till
November."

"Oh, bother the law!" blurted out Merritt.  "However, I suppose if
there wasn't one there wouldn't be any rabbits left."

"I guess you're right," agreed Tubby.  "Still, it does seem hard to
have to look at them skip about and not be able to take a shot at them."

"Maybe we can set a springle and snare some," hopefully suggested
Tubby, as a way out of the difficulty; "that wouldn't be as bad as
shooting them, you know, and I can build a springle that will strangle
them instantaneously."

"No fair, Tubby," laughed Rob.  "You know, a boy scout promises to obey
the law, and the game law is as much a law as any other."

Arrived at the L wharf, the boys found the Flying Fish and Captain
Hudgins' Barracuda waiting for them.  With much laughter they piled
in--their light-heartedness and constant joking reminding such
onlookers, as had ever seen the spectacle, of a band of real soldiers
going to the front or embarking for foreign stations.

With three ear-splitting cheers and a final yell of, "Kr-ee-ee-ee-ee!"
the little flotilla got under way.

They arrived at the camping ground at the northeast end of the island
before noon, and found that the "pioneers" appointed by Rob had done
their work well.  Each tent was placed securely on a level patch of
sandy ground, cleared from brush and stamped flat. The pegs were driven
extra deep in anticipation of a gale, and an open cook tent, with flaps
that could be fastened down in bad weather, stood to one side.

A small spring had been excavated by the pioneers, and an old barrel
sunk in place, which had filled in the night and now presented
sparkling depths of cool, clear water.

"I suppose that water is all right, captain?" inquired Leader Rob, with
a true officer's regard for his troops.

"Sweet as a butternut, son," rejoined the old man.  "Makes the sick
strong and the strong stronger, as the medicine advertisements say."

For the present, the cooking was to be done on a regular camp fire
which was built between two green logs laid lengthwise and converging
toward the end.  The tops of these had, under Commodore Wingate's
directions, been slightly flattened with an axe.  At each end a forked
branch had been set upright in the ground, with a green limb laid
between them.  From this limb hung "cooking hooks," consisting of green
branches with hooked ends at one extremity to hang over the long
timber, and a nail driven in the other from which to hang the pots.

"That's the best form of camp fire, boys," said Commodore--or perhaps
we would better call him scout master now--Wingate, who had accompanied
the boys to see them settled.  "Now, then, the next thing to do is to
run up the Stars and Stripes and plant the Eagle flag.  Then you'll be
all O.K."

Little Andy Bowles made the woods behind them echo with the stirring
call of "assembly," and halliards were reeved on a previously cut pole,
about fifteen feet in height.  The Stars and Stripes were attached, and
while the whole company stood at attention and gave the scout salute,
Scout Master Wingate raised the colors.  Three loud, shrill cheers
greeted Old Glory as it blew bravely out against the cloudless blue.

"That's a pretty sight now, shiver my timbers if it ain't," observed
old Captain Hudgins, who had stood, hat in hand, during the ceremony.
"I've seen Old Glory in many a foreign port, and felt like takin' off
my hat and givin' three cheers fer the old flag; but I never seen her
look better or finer than she does a-streakin' out from that there bit
of timber."

"Now, Patrol cooks," was Scout Master Wingate's next command, "it's
only an hour to dinner time, and we want the first mess to be right.
Come on, and we'll get the pot boiling."

Cook duty fell that day to Hiram Nelson and Walter Lonsdale, and under
the scout master's directions they soon had potatoes peeled, beans in
water, and a big piece of stew meat chopped up with vegetables in a
capacious pot.

After every errand to the store tent, Walter was anxious to know if it
was not yet time to light the fire.

"Never be in a hurry to light your fire when you are in the woods,"
rejoined the scout master; "otherwise you will be so busy tending the
fire you won't be able to prepare your food for cooking.  Now we're all
ready for the fire, though, and you can bring me some dry bark and
small sticks from that pile of wood the pioneers laid in yesterday."

This was promptly done, and the lads watched the next step with
interest.  They saw the scout master take a tiny pile of the sticks and
then light a roll of bark and thrust it into them.

"I thought you piled them up all criss-cross," remarked Hiram.

"No woodsman does that, my boy," was the rejoinder.  "Now get me some
larger timber from that pile, and I'll show you how to go about it like
regular trappers."

The fire builder shoved the ends of the sticks into the blaze and then
the bean pot was hung in place.

"We won't put the potatoes on now, as they take less time," he
remarked; "those beans will take the longest."

Soon the heat was leaping up about the pots, and the cheerful crackle
and incense of the camp fire filled the air.  As the sticks burned down
the scout master shoved the ends farther into the blaze, instead of
throwing them on top of it.

"Now, then, boys, you've had your first lesson in camp fire making and
cooking," he announced.  "Now go ahead, and let's see what kind of a
dinner you can produce.  I'm going for a tour of exploration of the
island."

Among the other things the pioneers had accomplished was the building
of a table large enough to seat the entire Patrol, with planks set on
logs as seats.  Hiram put Walter to setting this, while he burned his
fingers and smudged his face over his cookery.  Long before the beans
seemed any nearer to what experience taught the young cook they ought
to be, Walter announced that the table was all set, with its tin cups
and dishes and steel knives and forks.

Suddenly, while Hiram was considering putting the potatoes on their
hook, there came from the rear of the store tent the most appalling
succession of squeals and screams the boy had ever heard.  Springing to
his feet, he dashed to the scene of the conflict--for such it seemed to
be though not without a heart that beat rather faster than usual.  He
bad no idea what the creatures could be that were producing all the
uproar, and for all he knew they might have been bears.

Behind him came Walter, rather pale, but determined to do his best as a
Boy Scout to fight off any wild beasts that might be attacking the
camp.  As he dashed behind the tent, however, Hiram was impelled to
give a loud laugh.  The contestants--for he had rightly judged they
were in high dispute--were two small black pigs which had looted a bag
of oatmeal from under the flap of the store tent and were busily
engaged in fighting over their spoils.

"Get out, you brutes!  Scat!" shouted the boy, bringing down a
long-handled spoon he carried over the backs of the disputants.

The spoon, being almost red-hot, the clamor of the porkers redoubled,
and with indignant squeals and grumblings they dashed off into the
dense growth of scrub oak and pine that covered the island in its
interior.  At the same moment the captain, who had been taking a snooze
under some small bushes, awoke with a start.

"Eh--eh--eh!  What's all that?" he exclaimed, hearing the yells. "Why,
it's that plagued Betsy and Jane, my two young sows," he cried the next
moment.  "Consarn and keelhaul the critters, they're breakin' out all
the time.  I reckon they're headed fer home now," he added, when Hiram
related how he had scared them.

"I'm glad that they were nothing but pigs, captain," said Hiram, going
back with flushed cheeks to his cookery.  "I was afraid for a minute
they were I hardly know what.  We'll have to fix that store tent more
snugly in future."

"And I'll have ter take a double reef in my pig Pen," chuckled the
captain.




CHAPTER XV

THE CHUMS IN PERIL


Even the epicurean Tubby Hopkins voted dinner that day a great success,
and Hiram, with becoming modesty, took his congratulations blushingly.
In mid-afternoon, after seeing that the camp was in good working order,
the scout masters started for the home shore in Captain Hudgins's boat,
which was also to bring back some additional supplies for the next day.

After dinner Rob had assigned Merritt and Tubby to form a "fishing
squad," to range seaward in the Flying Fish and "halt and detain" all
the bluefish they could apprehend.  The others were given the afternoon
to range the island and practice up their woodcraft and landmark work,
while Rob busied himself in his tent, which was equipped with a small
folding camp table, in filling out his pink blank reports which were to
be forwarded to Commodore Wingate and dispatched by him to the
headquarters of the Boy Scouts in New York.

Merritt and Tubby were both ardent fishermen, and in response to
Hiram's pleadings, they allowed him to accompany them on their
expedition.  The fish were running well, and the boys cast and pulled
in some time without particularly noticing how far out to sea they had
gone.

Suddenly the stout youth, who was fishing with an unusually heavy line
and hook, felt a hard tug on his apparatus, so powerful a tweak, in
fact, that it almost pulled him overboard.  He tried to haul in, but
the resistance on the other end of his line was so great that he was
compelled to twist it about a cleat in order to avoid either letting go
or being dragged into the sea.

"What in the name of Sam Hill have you hooked?" gasped Merritt, as the
Flying Fish began to move through the water faster than even her engine
could propel her.

"I've not the least idea," remarked Tubby placidly, "but I rather think
it must be a whale."

"Whale nothing!" exclaimed Merritt scornfully and with superior wisdom.
"Whales sound, don't they?"

"Well, there's not been a sound out of this one so far," truthfully
observed Hiram.

"What kind of a sound do they make, corporal?"

"Oh, you chump," responded Merritt good-naturedly, "you've lived by the
sea all your life, and you don't know how a whale sounds. Sound means
when a whale blows, spouts, sends up a big fountain of water."

"Oh, I see," responded Hiram, much enlightened.  "But see here,
Merritt, whatever we are fast to is beginning to pick up speed pretty
rapidly.  Don't you think we'd better cut the line or try to haul in?"

"Haul in!  Not much!" exclaimed Tubby indignantly.  "We'll just hang on
till we tire him out, that's what we'll do, and then haul in."

"But we're getting a good way out from shore," objected Hiram, who,
however much at home he was at the key of a wireless apparatus, had no
great relish for blue water in a small motor boat.

"Don't you worry, sonny," put in Merritt patronizingly.  "We'll be all
right.  My, that was a plunge!"

As he spoke the bow of the Flying Fish dipped till she shipped a few
gallons of green water.

"I'll pay out some more line," said the unperturbed Tubby.  "I guess
whatever we're onto begins to believe that he has swallowed something
pretty indigestible."

Faster and faster the Flying Fish began to cut through the sea. The
water sprayed out from both sides of her cutwater in a steady stream.

"She's doing as well as she did the day of the race," said Merritt,
with a laugh, gazing at Hiram's rather pale face.  The wireless youth
was casting longing glances at the shore.

"Well, I wish Mr. Whale, or whatever he is, would come up and let us
have a look at him!" exclaimed Tubby suddenly.  "This is getting pretty
monotonous."

As he spoke the boy paid nut a little more line.  He had only just time
to belay it round the cleat to avoid its being jerked out of his hand,
so fast was the creature they had hooked now traveling.

"Say, Tubby," spoke Merritt at length, "I'm beginning to think myself
that it might not be a bad idea to put back.  Those clouds over there
on the horizon look as if they meant trouble."

"Oh, let's keep it on a little while longer pleaded Tubby; cutting
through the water like this, without any expenditure of gasoline or
power, is the real luxurious way of ocean traveling. It beats the
Mauretania. Just think if liners could hitch a whole team of things
like whatever has got hold of us to their bows! Why, the Atlantic would
be crossed in four days."

For some time longer the boat shot along over the waves, towed by its
invisible force.  The boys, with the exception of Tubby, began to get
anxious.  The shores of the mainland were dim in the distance behind
them, and Topsail Island itself only showed as a dark blue dot.

Suddenly the motion ceased.

"He's free of the line!" shouted Hiram, inwardly much relieved to think
they had got rid of what to him was an alarming situation.

"No, he's not," replied Tubby, bending over the line.  "He's still fast
to us.  The line's as tight as a fiddle string."

He was standing up as he spoke, and as the Flying Fish gave a sudden,
crazy jerk forward, he was almost thrown overboard.  In fact, he would
have toppled into the sea if Merritt had not bounded forward and
grabbed the fleshy lad just as he was losing his balance.

"We're off again!" exclaimed Hiram, as the Flying Fish once more began
to move through the water.

But now the creature that had seized Tubby's big hook started to move
in circles.  Round and round the Flying Fish was towed in dizzy swings
that made the heads of her young occupants swim.

"Start the engine on the reverse, and see if that will do any good,"
said Tubby, bending anxiously over his line.

Merritt brought the reverse gear to "neutral," and then started it up,
gradually bringing back the lever governing the reversing wheel till
the Flying Fish was going second speed astern, and finally at her full
gait backward.

The tug thus exercised seemed to have no effect on the monster that had
caught Tubby's bait, however.  With the exception that the speed was
diminished a trifle, the Flying Fish was still powerless to shake off
her opponent.

Suddenly, and without the slightest warning, a huge, shiny, wet body
shot out of the water almost directly in front of the amazed and
startled boys, and settled back with a mighty splash that sent the
spray flying in a salt-water shower bath over their heads.

"Whatever was it?" gasped Hiram in awed tones.

"A shark," replied Merritt, "and a whopper, too.  What are we going to
do, Tubby--keep on or cut loose?"

"Just a little longer," pleaded the other.  "He must be tiring by this
time.  If we can only wear him out, we can tow him ashore and make a
little money out of him.  You know shark skin is valuable."

"I'd rather have a whole skin of my own," quavered Hiram, who had been
considerably alarmed by the momentary glimpse he had had of Tubby's
quarry.

"He's off again!" shouted Merritt, as the sea tiger started straight
ahead once more.

Suddenly the line slackened again.

"Look out!" Tubby had just time to shriek the warning before a mighty
shock threw them all off their feet in a heap on the bottom of the boat.

"Zan-g-g-g!"

The line twanged and snapped under the sudden strain, and a great rush
seaward showed the boys, as soon as they recovered their senses, that
they had lost their shark.

"And a good line," moaned Tubby.

"What are you kicking about?" demanded Merritt.  "It's a lucky thing
the beast didn't start some plank of the boat when it charged; but as
far as I can see, the Flying Fish stood the shock all right."

"It felt like an earthquake," murmured Hiram, whose face was white and
eyes frightened.

"Well, I suppose we'd better head for home," said Tubby at length.
"Those bluefish will go fine for supper."

"Spoken like a Tubby," laughed Merritt.  "All right, I'll start up.
Hullo--" he looked up with a puzzled face from the reverse lever.  "I
can't get her on the forward speed."

"What's the matter?" gasped Hiram.

"I don't know.  Something's stuck.  Shut off that engine, will you,
Tubby, while I see?"

Tubby promptly shut down the motor, and Merritt struggled with the
refractory lever.  It was all in vain, however; he could not get it on
the forward speed.

"I've got to investigate," puffed the perspiring corporal; "something
must be wrong with the reversible propeller."

"Well, whatever you are going to do, hurry up about it," spoke Tubby,
with unwonted sharpness in his tones.

"Why, what's the--" began Merritt.

Tubby checked him with a finger on his lips.

"Don't scare the kid," he whispered, leaning forward, "but we're in for
a storm."

He pointed seaward.

Rolling toward them was a spreading wall of heavy clouds traveling at
seemingly great speed, while below the wrack the water darkened
ominously and became flecked with "white horses."




CHAPTER XVI

LOST IN THE STORM


"The trouble's in the reversible propeller.  I always told Rob he was
foolish not to have a regular reverse gear on the shaft itself and a
solid wheel," said Merritt.

"Well, never mind that now," urged Tubby anxiously.  "I'll shift all
the cushions and stuff up in the bow, and Hiram and I will get as far
forward as we can.  That will raise the stern and you can hang over and
reach the wheel."

When the stout lad had done as he suggested there was quite a
perceptible tilt forward to the Flying Fish, and Merritt, hanging over
the stern, could feel about the propeller better.

"Just as I thought," he shouted presently.  "That shark when he came
astern fouled that heavy line on the propeller."

He got out his knife, and in a few minutes succeeded in cutting the
entangling line free.

It was not any too soon.  From far off there came a low sound,
something like the moaning of a large animal in pain.  It grew louder
and closer, and with it came an advancing wall of water crested with
white foam.  The sky, too, grew black, and air filled with a sort of
sulphurous smell.

"It's a thunder squall," shouted Tubby, as Merritt shoved over the
lever and started the engine.

As he spoke there came a low growl of thunder and the sky was illumined
with a livid glare.

"Here she comes!" yelled Merritt; "better get out those slickers or
we'll be soaked."

Tubby opened a locker and produced the yellow waterproof coats. The
boys had hardly thrust their arms into them before the big sea struck
them.  Thanks to Tubby's steering, however, the Flying Fish met it
without shipping more than a few cupfuls of water.

The next minute the full fury of the storm enveloped the Boy Scouts and
the Flying Fish was laboring in a heaving wilderness of lashed and
tumbling water.

"Keep her head up!" roared Merritt, above the screaming of the wind and
the now almost continuous roar and rattle of the thunder.  It grew
almost dark, so overcast was the sky, and under the somber, driving
cloud wrack the white wave crests gleamed like savage teeth.

Hiram crouched on the bottom of the boat, too terrified to speak, while
Tubby and Merritt strove desperately to keep the little craft from
"broaching to," in which case she would have shipped more water than
would have been at all convenient, not to say safe.

As if it were some vindictive live thing, seized with a sudden spite
against the boat and its occupants, the storm roared about the dazed
boys.

The Flying Fish, however, rode the sweeping seas gallantly, breasting
even the biggest combers bravely and buoyantly.

"It's getting worse," shouted Tubby, gazing back at Merritt, who was
bending over the laboring motor.

"Yes, you bet it is!" roared back the engineer; "and I'm afraid of a
short circuit if this rain keeps up."

"Cover up the engine with that spare slicker," suggested Tubby.

"That's a good idea," responded the other, rummaging in a stern locker
and producing the garment in question. In another moment he had it over
the engine, protecting the spark plugs and the high-tension wires from
the rain and spray.  But the wind was too high to permit of the
covering remaining unfastened, and with a ball of marlin the young
engineer lashed the improvised motor cover firmly in place.

Hiram, with a white face, now crawled up from the bottom of the boat.
In addition to being scared, he was seasick from the eccentric motions
of the storm-tossed craft.

"Do you think we'll ever get ashore again?" he asked, crawling to
Merritt's side.

"Sure," responded the corporal confidently. "'Come on, buck up, Hiram!
You know, a Boy Scout never says die. We'll be back in camp in three
hours' time, when this squall blows itself out."

"I--I don't want you to think me a coward, Merritt," quavered Hiram,
"but--but you know this is enough to scare any fellow."

Indeed, he seemed right.  The Flying Fish appeared no more than a tiny
chip on the immense rollers the storm had blown up.  Time and again it
looked as if she would never be able to climb the huge walls of green
water that towered above her; but every time she did, and, as the storm
raged on, the confidence of the boys began to grow.

"She'll ride it out, Tubby!" yelled Merritt, dousing the engine with
more oil.

"Sure she will!" yelled back Tubby, with a confidence that was,
however, largely assumed.  The stout youth had just been assailed by an
alarming thought that flashed across his mind.

"Would the gasoline hold out?"

There was no opportunity on the plunging, bucking craft to examine the
tank, and all the boy could do was to make a rapid mental calculation,
based on what he knew of the consumption of the engine.  The tank, he
knew, had been half full when they came out, and that, under ordinary
conditions, would have sufficed to drive the Flying Fish for five or
six hours.

But they were not ordinary conditions under which she was now laboring.
Tubby knew that Merritt was piling in every ounce of gasoline the
carburetor could take care of.

Suddenly, while the stout youth's mind was busied with these thoughts,
and without the slightest warning, there came a sort of wheezing gasp
from the motor.

Merritt leaned over it in alarm.  He seized the timing lever and shoved
it over and opened the gasoline cock full tilt.

But there was no response from the motor.

It gasped out a cough a couple of times and turned over in a dying
fashion for a few revolutions and then stopped dead.

The boys were adrift in the teeth of the storm in a crippled boat.

"What's the matter?" roared back Tubby from the wheel. "She's lost
steerage way!"

"Motor's gone dead," howled back Merritt laconically.

"Great Scott, we are in for it now! What's the matter?"

"No gasolene," yelled Merritt.

"Sosh-osh-soh!"

A huge green wave climbed on to the Flying Fish's bow, shaking her from
stem to stern like a terrier shakes a rat.

"We've got to do something quick, or we'll be swamped!" roared Merritt.

"The cockpit cover, quick!" shouted Tubby, steadying himself in the
bucking craft by a tight grasp on the bulwarks.

"That's it. Now the oars. Hurry up. Here, you Hiram, grab that can and
bail for all you're worth!"

The fat youth seemed transformed by the sudden emergency into the most
active of beings.

"What are you going to do?" yelled Merritt, framing his mouth with his
hands.

"Make a spray hood. Come forward here and give me a hand."

With the oars the two boys made a sort of arched framework, secured
with ropes, and over it spread the canvas cockpit cover, lashing it
down to the forward and side cleats. This work was not unattended with
danger and difficulty. Time and again as they worked the boys had to
lie flat on their stomachs and hang on while the Flying Fish leaped a
wave like a horse taking a barrier. At last, however, their task was
completed, and the improvised spray hood served to some extent to break
the waves that now threatened momentarily to engulf the laboring craft.

"Now to get out a sea anchor!" shouted the indefatigable Tubby.

He seized up an old bait tub, a boat hook and a "swabbing-out" broom,
and lashed them all together in a sort of bridle. Then he attached the
Flying Fish's mooring cable to the contrivance and paid it out for a
hundred feet or more, while the storm-battered craft drifted steadily
backward.  Instead, however, of lying beam on to the big sea, she now
headed up into them, the "drag," as it is sometimes called, serving to
keep her bow swung up to the threatening combers.

"There, she'll ride for a while, anyhow," breathed Tubby, when this was
done.

"What's to be done now?" shouted Merritt in his car.

"Nothing," was the response; "we've got to lie here till this thing
blows over."

"It's breaking a little to the south now," exclaimed Merritt, pointing
to where a rift began to appear in the solid cloud curtain.

This was cheering news, and even the seasick but plucky Hiram, who had
been bailing for all he was worth, despite his misery, began to cheer
up.

"Hurrah!  I guess the worst of our troubles are over," cried Tubby.
"It certainly looks as if the sea was beginning to go down, and the
wind has dropped, I'm sure."

That this was the case became apparent shortly.  There was a noticeable
decrease in the size and height of the waves and the wind abated in
proportion.  In half an hour after the rift had been first noticed by
Merritt, the black squall had passed, and the late afternoon sun began
to shine in a pallid way through the driving cloud masses.

The lads, however, were still in a serious fix.  They had been driven
so far out to sea that the land was blotted out altogether.  All about
them was only the still heaving Atlantic. The sun, too, was westering
fast, and it would not be long before darkness fell.

Without gasoline and with no sail, they had no means of making land.
Worse still, they were in the track of the in and out-bound steamers to
and from New York--according to Tubby's reckoning--and they had no
lights.

"Well, we seem to have got out of the frying pan into the fire," said
Merritt in a troubled voice.  "It's the last time I'll ever come out
without lights and a mast and sail."

"That's what they all say," observed Tubby grimly.  "The thing to do
now is to get back to shore somehow.  Maybe we can rig up a sail with
the cockpit cover and the oars.  We've got to try it, anyhow."

After hauling in the sea anchor, the lads set to work to rig up and
lash the oars into an A shape.  The canvas was lashed to each of the
arms of the A, and the contrivance then set up and secured to the fore
and aft cleats by the mooring line they had utilized for the sea anchor.

"Well," remarked Tubby, as he surveyed his handiwork with some
satisfaction and pride, "we can go before the wind now, anyhow--even if
we do look like a lost, strayed or stolen Chinese junk."

"Say, I'm so hungry I could eat one of those fish raw!" exclaimed
Hiram, now quite recovered, as the Flying Fish, under her clumsy sail,
began to stagger along in the direction in which Tubby believed the
land lay, the wind fortunately being dead aft.

"Great Scott, the kid's right!" exclaimed Merritt.  "We forgot all
about eating in the gloom but now I believe I could almost follow
Hiram's lead and eat some of those fellows as they are."

"Well, that's about all you'll get to eat for a long time," remarked
Tubby, grimly casting an anxious eye aloft at the filling "sail."




CHAPTER XVII

ALMOST RUN DOWN


It grew dark rapidly and the night fell on three lonely, wet, hungry
boys, rolling along in a disabled boat under what was surely one of the
queerest rigs ever devised.  It answered its purpose, though, and under
her "jury mast" the Flying Fish actually made some headway through the
water.

None of the boys said much, and Tubby, under the cover of the darkness,
tightened his capacious belt.  It spoke volumes for his Boy Scout
training that, though he probably felt the pangs of hunger as much or
even more keenly than the others, he made no complaint.  Hiram, the
second-class scout, complained a bit at first, but soon quieted down
under Merritt's stern looks; as for the latter, as corporal of the
Eagle Patrol, it was his duty to try to keep as cheerful as possible;
which, under the circumstances, was about as hard a task as could well
be imagined.

The eyes of all three were kept strained ahead for some sign of a
light, for they had been so tossed about in the squall that all sense
of direction had been lost, and they had no compass aboard, which in
itself was a piece of carelessness.

Suddenly, after about an hour of "going it blind" in this fashion,
young Hiram gave a shout.

"A light, a light!"

"Where?" demanded Tubby and Merritt sharply.

"Off there," cried the lad, pointing to the left, over the port side of
the boat.

Both the elder lads gazed sharply.

"That's not the direction in which land would lie," mused Tubby.

"The light's pretty high up, too, isn't it?" suggested Merritt. "It
might be a lighthouse.  We may have been blown farther than we thought."

Tubby offered no opinion for a few seconds, but his ordinarily round
and smiling face grew grave.  A sudden apprehension had flashed into
his mind.

"Tell me, Merritt," he said, "can you see any other lights?"

"No," replied Merritt, after peering with half closed eyes at the white
light.

"I can," suddenly shouted young Hiram.

"You can?"

"Yes; some distance below the white light I can see a green one to the
right and a red one on the left."

"Shades of Father Neptune!" groaned Tubby.  "It's just as I thought,
Merritt--that light yonder is a steamer's mast lantern, and the fact
that Hiram can see both her port and starboard lamps beneath shows that
she's coming right for us."

This was alarming enough.  Without lanterns, without the means of
making any noise sufficiently loud to attract the attention of those on
the approaching vessel, the occupants of the Plying Fish were in about
as serious a predicament as one could imagine.  To make matters worse,
the wind began to drop and come in puffs which only urged the Flying
Fish ahead slowly.  Tubby made a rapid mental calculation, and decided
that hardly anything short of a miracle could save them from being run
down, unless the steamer saw them and changed her course.

"Can't we shout and make them hear us?" asked Hiram in an alarmed
voice.  He saw from the troubled faces of both the elder lads that
something serious indeed was the matter.

"We might try it," responded Tubby, with a bitter shrug.  "But it's
about as much use as a mouth organ in a symphony orchestra would be.
Better get on the life belts."

With hands that trembled with the sense of impending disaster, the
three boys strapped on the cork jackets.

"Now all shout together," said Merritt, when this was done.

Standing erect, the three young castaways placed their hands
funnel-wise to their mouths and roared out together:

"Ship ahoy!  St-eam-er a-hoy!"

They were alarmed and not ashamed to admit it.

"No good," said Tubby, after they had roared themselves hoarse. "When
she strikes us, jump over the starboard bow and dive as deep as you
can.  If you don't, the propellers are liable to catch us."

It was a grim prospect, and no wonder the boys grew white and their
faces strained as the impending peril bore down on them.

They could now see that she was a large vessel--a liner, to judge from
the rows of lighted portholes on her steep black sides.  Her bow lights
gleamed like the eye of some monster intent on devouring the Flying
Fish and her occupants.  On and on she came. The air trembled with the
vibration of her mighty engines, and a great white "'bone" foamed up at
her sharp prow.

Not one of the boys spoke as the vessel came nearer and nearer,
although it speedily grew evident that unless a wind sprang up or the
lookout saw them, it was inevitable that they would be cut in two
amidships.

"Remember what I said," warned Tubby, in a strange, strained voice.
"Dive deep and stay tinder as long as you can."

And now the great vessel seemed scarcely more than two or three boat
lengths from the tiny cockleshell on which she was bearing down.  As a
matter of fact, though, her towering bulk made her appear much nearer
than she actually was.

"Can't we do anything, Merritt?" gasped Hiram, with chattering teeth.
"We might try shouting once more," suggested Tubby in a voice that
quivered in spite of his efforts to keep it steady.

"All together now--come on!"

"Ship ahoy!  You'll run us down!  St-eam-er a-hoy!"

Suddenly there were signs of confusion on the bow of the big vessel.
Men could be seen running about and waving their arms.

"By hookey, they've seen us!" breathed Merritt, hardly daring to
believe it, however.

The others were speechless with suspense.

Suddenly from the bow of the oncoming steamer a great fan-shaped ray of
dazzling light shot out and enveloped the boys and their boat in its
bewildering radiance.

"Hard over, hard over!" the boys could hear the lookout roaring, and
the command rang hoarsely back along the decks to the wheelhouse.

Slowly, very slowly, as if reluctant to give up her prey, the bow of
the mighty liner swung off, and the boys were safe.

"Look out for the wash," warned Merritt, as the great black bulk,
pierced with hundreds of glowing portholes, ploughed regally by them,
her deck crowded with curious passengers.  A voice shouted down from
the bridge:

"What in blazing sea serpents are you doing out here in that marine oil
stove?"

The boys made no attempt to reply.  They had all they could do to hang
on, as the Flying Fish danced about like a drifting cork in the wash of
the great vessel.  They could see, however, that several of her
passengers were clustered at her stern rail, gazing wonderingly down at
them in great perplexity, no doubt, as to what manner of craft it was
that they had so narrowly escaped sending to the bottom.  For had the
vessel even grazed the Flying Fish, the small boat would have been
annihilated without those on board the liner even feeling a tremor.  It
would have been just such a tragedy as happens frequently to the
fishing dories on the foggy Newfoundland banks.

"Wh-ew!" gasped Merritt, sinking down on a locker.  "That was a narrow
escape if you like it!"

"I don't like it," remarked Tubby sententiously, mopping his forehead,
on which beads of cold perspiration had stood out while their
destruction had seemed inevitable.  So thoroughly unnerved were the
lads, in fact, by their experience that it was some time before they
could do anything more than sit limply on the lockers while the Flying
Fish rolled aimlessly with an uncontrolled helm.

"Come on," said Tubby at length; "we've got to rouse ourselves. In the
first place, I've got an idea," he went on briskly.  "I've been
thinking over that gasoline stoppage, and the more I think of it the
more I am inclined to believe that there's something queer about it.
It's worth looking into, anyhow."

"You mean you think there may be some fuel in the tank, after all?"
asked Merritt, looking up.

"It's possible.  Have you tried the little valve forward of the
carburetor?"

"Why, no," rejoined Merritt; "but I hardly think--"

"It wouldn't be the first time a carburetor had fouled, particularly
after what we went through in that squall," remarked Tubby.  "It's
worth trying, anyhow."

He bent over the valve he had referred to, which was in the gasoline
feed pipe, just forward of the carburetor, and placed there primarily
for draining the tank when it was necessary.

"Look here!" he yelled, with a sudden shout of excitement.  "No," he
cried the next moment, "I don't want to waste it--but when I opened the
valve a stream of gasoline came out.  There's plenty of it.  That
stoppage is in the carburetor.  Oh, what a bunch of idiots we've been!"

"Better sound the tank," suggested Merritt; "what came out of the valve
might just be an accumulation in the pipe."

"Not much," rejoined the other, "it came out with too much force for
that, I tell you.  It was flowing from the tank, all right."

"We'll soon find out," proclaimed Merritt.  "Give me the sounding stick
out of that locker, Hiram."

Armed with the stick, Merritt rapidly unscrewed the cap of the fuel
tank and plunged the sounder into it.

"There's quite a lot of gasoline in there yet," he exclaimed, with
sparkling eyes, as he withdrew and felt the wet end of the instrument.

The carburetor was rapidly adjusted.  The rough tossing about the
Flying Fish had received had jammed the needle valve, but that was all.
Presently all was in readiness to get under way once more with the
little boat's proper motive power. The "jury rig" was speedily
dismantled Merritt swung the flywheel over two or three times, and a
welcome "chug, chug!" responded.

"Hurray! she's working," cried Hiram.

"As well as ever," responded Merritt.  "Now for the shore.  By the
way," he broke off in a dismayed tone, "where is the shore?"

"I know now," rejoined Tubby in a confident tone.  "Off there to the
right.  You see, that steamer was hugging the coast preparatory to
heading seaward--at least, I'm pretty sure she was, and that would put
the shore on her port side, or on our starboard."

They chugged off in the direction Tubby indicated, and before long a
joyful cry from Hiram announced the sudden appearance of lights.

"What are they?" asked Merritt.

"Don't know--they look like bonfires," rejoined the other lad. "I
wonder if we have been lucky enough to pick up Topsail Island?"

As they drew nearer the lads soon saw that it was the island that they
were approaching, and that the lights they had seen were campfires
ignited by order of the anxious young Patrol leader to guide them back.

In a short time they had anchored the Flying Fish opposite the camp,
and jumped into the dinghy left at her moorings when they embarked.

"A fine scare you've given us," cried Rob, as they landed and flung
down their afternoon's catch.  "We were afraid for a time that you were
lost in that black squall--it blew two of our tents down, and we were
mighty anxious about you, I can tell you."

"You did not alarm our folks?" asked Hiram anxiously.

"No, I thought that it would be best to wait.  Somehow, I thought you'd
turn up safe.  Where on earth have you been and what has happened?  You
look as pale as three ghosts."

"Towed to sea by a shark--caught in a squall--almost run down by a
liner--and so hungry we can't talk now," sputtered out Tubby
comprehensively.

"All right; come on up to the fire and get dried out and pitch into the
grub."

After such a meal as it may be imagined the young scouts indulged in,
they told their whole yarn of their adventures to the listening Patrol.
A short time after they concluded--so long had it taken to relate
everything and answer all questions--the mournful call of "Taps"
sounded and it was time to turn in. Little Digby alone, who was to do
sentry service, remained on duty.

Merritt's dreams were a strange jumble.  It seemed to him that he was
being towed to sea on the back of a huge shark, by a big liner with a
row of blazing portholes that winked at him like facetious eyes.
Suddenly, just as it seem he was about to slip off the marine monster's
slippery back, he thought he heard a loud cry of  "Help, scouts!"

So vivid was the dream and so real the cry that he awoke trembling, and
listened intently while peering out through the tent flap.

There was no sound, however, but the ripple of the waves on the beach
and the "hoot hoot" of an owl somewhere back in the woods on the island.

"Funny," mused the boy, as he turned over and dozed off again, "that
certainly sounded loud enough to have been a real, sure enough call for
help."




CHAPTER XVIII

JOE DIGBY MISSING


"Merritt! Merritt, wake up!"

The boy sleepily opened his eyes and saw bending over him the pale
features of Rob, whose voice quivered with suppressed excitement as he
shook the other's shoulder.

"I didn't hear reveille blow yet.  What's up?  Have I overslept?"
murmured the young corporal.

"No, it's not six-thirty yet--barely after half past four, in fact.
But young Digby--he had the night watch, you know--and was to have been
relieved at three o'clock.  Well, Ernest Thompson, his relief, roused
out at that hour, but not a trace of Digby was to be found!"

"What!" The sleepy boy was drowsy no longer.  "Digby gone?"

"Hush!  We don't know yet.  Don't wake any of the others. Thompson and
I have skirmished around ever since it began to get light, and we have
not been able to find a trace of him."

Merritt was out of his cot while his leader was still speaking, and ten
minutes later, during which time the boys exchanged excited questions
and answers, he was in his uniform and outside the tent.

The sun was just poking his rim above the western horizon and the
chilly damp of early dawn lay over the island.  The sea, as calm almost
as a lake, lay sullen and gray, scarcely heaving.  Behind the sleeping
camp a few shreds of mist--the ghosts of the vapors of the night were
arising like smoke among the dim trees.  At the further end of the
assemblage of tents, and beyond the smoldering fire, stood a silent
figure, that of Ernest Thompson.

"Have you explored the island thoroughly?" asked Merritt under his
breath.  Somehow the dim hour and the situation seemed to preclude the
idea of loud talking.

"Of course not.  Not yet," breathed the other in the same tones. "We
will break the news to the rest of the Patrol after breakfast.  It's no
use alarming them yet."

"It isn't possible that he went off on an early fishing expedition?"

For answer, Rob waved his hand toward the water, where the Flying Fish
lay rocking gently at her anchor.  Ashore the dingy lay as Merritt and
his companions had left it the night before.

"But what can have happened to him?" burst out Merritt, as they made
their way over to Ernest Thompson's side.

"I cannot think.  It is absolutely mystifying.  I am going to start for
the captain's place now.  He may be able to throw some light on the
affair."

Merritt shook his head.

"Hardly likely.  If there is no trace of Joe Digby on this side of the
island, it is improbable that Captain Hudgins knows anything about him."

"Well," rejoined Rob in a troubled voice, "we've got to try everything.
I am responsible for his safe keeping while he is in camp.  I blame
myself for allowing the kid to go on sentry duty at all."

"No use doing that," comforted Merritt; "there's one thing sure, he
can't have melted away.  He must be somewhere on the island. There are
no wild beasts or anything like that here to carry him off, so if we
keep up the search we must come upon him sooner or later."

"That's what makes the whole affair the more mystifying," rejoined Rob.
"What can have become of him?"

"Well, if he's on the island, we'll find him," he continued; "and if he
isn't--"

"We'll find him anyway," declared Merritt in a determined voice.

"That's the stuff!" warmly exclaimed the other.  "And now I'm going to
take a cruise round to the other side of the island, and see if I can
find out anything there."

A few seconds later he was in the dinghy and sculling out over the
water to the speedy Flying Fish.  In a short time he was off.

As the "chug chug" of the motor grew fainter, Merritt turned to young
Thompson.

"Don't breathe a word of this to the others till we know for certain
that Digby has vanished," he said.

The other boy nodded.

"I understand," he said, and the look with which he accompanied the
words rendered Merritt perfectly confident that he would be obeyed.

"And now let's rouse out Andy Bowles and get him busy with that tin
horn of his," cheerfully went on Merritt, walking toward Andy's tent.

That youth was much surprised to find that it was morning, but tumbled
out of his cot in double-quick time, and soon the cheerful notes of
reveille were ringing out over the camp, on which the sun's rays were
now streaming down in that luminary's cheerful morning way.

The soldier who immortalized himself by sing the words: "We can't get
'em up, We can't get 'em up, We can't get 'em up in the morning--, We
can't get 'em up, We can't get 'em up, We can't get'em up at
a-a-l-l-l!" to the stirring notes of the army's morning call had never
been in a camp of Boy Scouts.  If he had he wouldn't have written them,
for before the last notes had died away the camp was alive and astir,
with hurrying lads filling tin washbasins and cleaning up.

The cook and "cookee" for the day--Jim Jeffords and Martin Green--soon
had their cooking fire going, and presently the appetizing aroma of
coffee and fried ham and eggs filled the camp.

"Give the breakfast call, Andy," ordered Merritt, as the proud if
flush-faced cooks announced their labors complete, and with a clatter
and bang of tin dishes and cups the Boy Scouts sat down to breakfast.

"Where's Rob and Digby?" demanded Andy Bowles, as he dug his spoon into
an island of oatmeal completely surrounded by an ocean of condensed
milk thinned down with warm water.

The moment that Merritt had dreaded had arrived.

"Why, he and Rob went off early to see the captain," he said.  "I guess
they'll be back soon."

"Pretty early for paying social calls," commented Andy, too busy with
his breakfast, however, to give the matter more attention, for which
Merritt was duly thankful.

After breakfast Merritt ordered a general airing of bedding, and the
side walls of the tents were raised to let the fresh air blow through
them.  Still there was no sign of Rob.  Merritt grew so anxious that he
could hardly keep from pacing up and down to conceal his nervous state
of mind.  However, he stuck to his duties and oversaw the first routine
of the morning without betraying his anxiety to any of the lads under
his charge.  At last there came the awaited chug chug of the returning
boat, for which he had been so eagerly listening, and Rob appeared
rounding the little point below the camp.  In the craft was another
figure, that of the captain himself.

Merritt's first hope when he saw the two persons in the boat--namely,
that one of them might be the missing boy--was promptly dashed, and he
instinctively guessed by Rob's silence as he dropped the anchor and he
and the captain tumbled into the dinghy that there had been no news.

"No," said Rob, shaking his head dejectedly as they reached the shore,
"there isn't anything to tell.  The captain is as much in the dark as
we."

"Well, you'd better have some breakfast," said Merritt, after he and
the captain had exchanged greetings, "then we can go ahead and notify
the others and institute a thorough search."

"That's the stuff, my boy," agreed the veteran.  "Overhaul ship from
bilge ter royals, and if not found, then take a cruise in search uv."

Rob ate his meal with small appetite, but the captain, urging on his
young companion the necessity of "filling his hold," devoured
prodigious quantities of food, and then, arising, suggested that the
time had come to "pipe all hands aft and read orders."

The boys had been so busy about their morning tasks that fortunately
none of them, except Tubby, whom Merritt had told of the disappearance,
had found time to notice Rob's return or ask questions; so that when he
announced to them that Joe Digby was missing it came as a stunning
shock.

"Now, boys," said Rob, after he had communicated the full details, so
far as he knew them, of the circumstances of the disappearance, "there
is only one thing to do, and that is turn this island inside out.  It
won't take long, but I want it done thoroughly.  Don't leave a stone
unturned.  If after a painstaking search we find nothing on the island,
we'll know we have to look elsewhere.  You are all fairly good woodsmen
by this time, and can trail by signs as effectively as first-class
scouts.  Use your eyes, and good luck."

Merritt at once assigned searching parties, he and Rob and Tubby taking
the center of the island and the others being detailed to search along
the shores in two separate squads for any trace of their missing
comrade.

"Call me a lubber if this ain't the most mystifyin' thing I've run my
bow into since the Two Janes, uv Boston, brig, lost her bearings in a
fog and fetched up off Iceland," declared the captain, who had elected
to accompany the three leaders of the Patrol.  "But drown or swim, sail
or sink, we'll find that kid if he's on deck."

The searching parties construed this speech as a sort of valedictory to
them as, indeed, the captain intended it--and greeted it with a cheer.

"The first scout that finds a trace of Joe is to light the four
'smokes', meaning come to council," was Rob's last order.  "Light them
on as prominent a place as you can find and we will all meet in camp to
hear the news."

The searching parties at once separated, one striking off to the right,
the other to the left and the three young leaders and their grizzled
friend making a dead set for the center of the island.

If Joe Digby was to be found, the look of determination on the face of
each scout showed that it would not be the fault of his young comrades
if he were not.




CHAPTER XIX

SAM REBELS


In the meantime on a small island in the Upper Inlet a strange
conference was taking place.  Three youths whom our readers will
recognize as Jack Curtiss, Bill Bender and Sam Redding; were in earnest
consultation with the unkempt and unsavory individual whom we know as
Hank Handcraft, the beach-comber.

"Well, the job's put through, all right," Hank was saying, as the three
sat outside a small tent in front of which was a smoldering fire, about
which the remnants of a meal were scattered.

"Yes, but now we've got to tackle the hardest part of it," said Jack,
knitting his brows.  "I've got the letter written and here it is."  As
he spoke he drew from his pocket a sheet of paper. "The question is who
to send for the money when the time comes."

"Oh, Hank is the man," said Ben, without an instant's hesitation. "We
must not appear in this at all."

"Oh, I am the man, am?" put in Hank, with no very gratified inflexion
in his voice; "and what if I am caught?  I'm to go to prison, I
suppose, while you fellows get off scot-free."

"As for me," said Sam Redding, who was pale and looked scared, and
whose eyes, too, were red-rimmed and heavy as if from lack of sleep,
"you can count me out.  I want nothing to do with it. You've gone too
far, Jack, in your schemes against the boys.  I'm through with the
whole thing."

"Well, if you're that chicken-hearted, we don't want you in it at all,"
sneered Jack, although he looked somewhat troubled at his follower's
defection.  "All we want you to promise is not to split on us."

"Oh, I won't peach," promised Sam readily.

"It will be better for you not to," warned Bill Bender; "and now let's
figure this thing out, and quickly, too.  We haven't got any too much
time.   They'll have discovered the kid has gone by this time and the
alarm will be spread broadcast."

"I thought, when he yelled like that last night, we were goners sure,"
remarked Jack, scowling at the recollection.  "It's a good thing those
kids sleep as hard as they do, or we'd have been in a tight fix."

"Oh, well, no good going back to that now," dissented Bill.  "How was
the young cub when you left him, Hank?" he asked abruptly.

"Oh, he'd got through crying, and was lying nice and quiet on his
bunk," remarked Hank, with an amiable chuckle, as though he had just
performed some praiseworthy act, instead of having left little Joe
Digby locked in a deserted bungalow on an island some little distance
from the one on which the conversation related above was taking place.

"Well, that's good," said Bill; "although crying, or yelling, either,
won't do him much good on that island.  He could yell for a week and no
one would hear him."

"No; the water's too shallow for any motor boats to get up there,"
agreed Hank.  "I had a hard job getting through the channel in the
rowboat, even at high water."

"Is the house good and tight?" was Jack's next question.

"Tight--tight as the Tombs," was Hank's answer, the simile being an apt
one for him to use.  "The door has that big bolt on the outside that I
put on, besides the lock, of which I carried away the key, and the
shutters are all nailed up.  No danger of his getting away till we want
him to!"

"Couldn't be better," grinned Jack approvingly.  "Now, here's the
letter.  Tell me what you think of it?"

Opening the sheet of paper, the bully read aloud as follows:

"MR. AND MRS. DIGBY:

"Your son is safe and in good hands.  I alone know where the men who
stole him have taken him.  But I am a poor man, and think that the
information should be worth something to you.  Suppose you place two
hundred dollars under the signpost at the Montauk crossroads to-night.
I will call and get it if you will mark the spot at which you place it
with a rock.  Look under the same rock in the morning and you will find
directions how to get your boy back.

CAPTAIN NEMO."

"What do you think of that?" inquired Jack complacently, as he
concluded the reading of his epistle.

"A bee-yoo-tiful piece of composition," said Hank approvingly, with one
of his throaty chuckles; "the only thing is--who is Captain Nemo?"

"Why, so far as delivering the letter and getting the money is
concerned, you are," said Jack decisively.  "Eh, Bill?"

"Oh, by all means," assented Bill.

Sam was not included in the conversation, and gazed sullenly straight
in front of him as he lay where he had thrown himself on the fine white
sand.

"Oh, by no means," echoed Hank derisively.  "Say, what do you fellows
take me for, the late lamented Mr. Easy Mark?  If you do you have
another think coming."

"Now look here, Hank," argued Jack, "what's the objection?  All you've
got to do is to take this note ashore, give it to some boy to deliver,
and then go to the crossroads at whatever time to-night you see fit and
get the money."

"Of course," Bill hastened to put in, "you've got to bring it to us for
proper division."

"Oh, I have, have I?" chuckled Hank.  "Well, what do you think of that?
I'm to do all the work and you fellows are to get the bacon!   That's a
fine idea--not!  Four into two hundred doesn't go very many times, you
know."

"Not four," corrected Jack, "three.  Sam is out of this.  He's too much
of a coward to have anything to do with it," he added, mimicking Sam's
tone.

The boat-builder's son reddened, but said nothing in reply to the
bully's taunt.

"Well, three, then," went on Hank; "that's not percentage enough for
me.  If I'm to have anything to do with this here job, I want half the
money.  You fellows can split the rest between you!"

Jack and Bill exchanged blank looks.

"Now, look here, Hank, be reasonable," began Jack in a tone meant to be
conciliatory.

"Now, look here, Jack, be sensible," echoed Hank mockingly.  "You seem
to forget that you owe me something for the job we did on those
uniforms the other night, and that other little errand you performed on
the island.  You've got a very convenient memory, you have.  Why, I
daresay those kids would have given me a nice little wad of tobacco
money to have told just who took their Sunday-go-to-meetin' suits, but
did I peach?  No, you know I didn't; but," he added, with rising
emphasis, "if I don't get what's coming to me pretty soon, I will."

"Well, you idiot," began Jack truculently; "haven't you got your chance
now?"

"If I choose to take it--yes," was the rejoinder; "but I don't know as
I will.  It seems to me I hold all the trumps and you are at my mercy."

"Why, you insolent dog!" bellowed Jack, rising to his feet from the
position in which he had been squatting.  "For two cents I'd knock your
bewhiskered head off!"

He advanced threateningly, but Bill, seeing the turn matters were
taking, and realizing that more was to be gained by peaceful methods,
intervened.

"Now, Jack, shut up.  Stow that nonsense," he ordered sharply. "Look
here, Hank, we'll accept your terms.  Half to you if you carry it out
successfully."

"And if I don't?"

"Then we'll all have to shift for ourselves.  This part of the country
will be too hot to hold us.  I mean to go out West.  I've got a cousin
who has a ranch, and I think I could get along all right there if the
worst comes to the worst."

"See here, I don't agree with your way of dividing the money," began
Jack, an angry light in his eyes. "Look--"

"Look here, Jack," cut in Bill sharply, "if you don't like it, it
doesn't do you any good.  If you object to it, keep out.  Hank and I
form a majority.  You chump" he added, quickly, under his breath, as
Hank turned away and began to "skip" flat stones over the water, "don't
you see he takes all the responsibility?  It's a cinch for us to get
away if anything goes wrong."

"Yes, it's a cinch we get cheated out of our share of the money,"
argued Jack, with an angry glare in the direction of the unconscious
Hank.

"Beggars can't be choosers," argued Bill.  "You know, as well as I do,
that if we are implicated in this affair it means serious trouble.  Our
parents wouldn't stand for it, and we should be disgraced.  By doing it
this way we get some of the proceeds--I admit not our fair share but
what's to be done?"

"Well, I guess you are right, Bill," assented Jack, with a shrug. "It's
go ahead now; we've gone too far to draw back."

"That's the line of talk," grinned Bill, "and when we've each got fifty
dollars in our pockets, silenced Hank with a golden gag and had our
revenge on those kids, we'll be able to talk over future plans.  I'm
sick of school.  I hate the idea of going back there. I've half a mind
to strike out for the West anyway."

"Do you think I could get a job on your cousin's ranch?" asked Jack.

"I don't doubt it a bit," rejoined Bill.  "You're a good, husky chap,
and brawn and muscle is what they need in the West."

"Yes, I'm husky, all right," conceded Jack modestly.  "Sometimes I
think that I don't get full opportunities to expand here in this
wretched country hole."

"No, the West is the place," agreed Bill, with an inward smile, "as the
newspapers say--one can expand with the country out there."

Their conversation was broken in upon by Sam, who demanded in no very
gentle tones:

"Well, who's going ashore?  I'm off."

"No hurry, Sam," said Jack in a more amiable tone than he had yet used
that morning.  "Let's sit around here a while and enjoy the sun--we
might take a swim after a while."

"If you don't come now you'll have to swim ashore," grunted Sam,
arising and brushing the sand from himself.  "I'm going back to
Hampton.  I'm tired of camping out here."

He walked toward the beach and prepared to shove off the dinghy,
preparatory to sculling out to the hydroplane, which lay a few rods off
shore in the channel.

"Hold on, Sam," cried Bill; "we're coming.  Don't go away sore."

"I'm not sore," rejoined Sam, in a tone which belied his words, "but I
don't think you fellows are doing the right thing when you maroon a kid
like Joe Digby on a lone island, in a deserted bungalow in which you'd
be scared to stop yourselves."

"Why, what's got into you, Sam?" protested Jack.  "It's more a lark
than anything else."

"Fine lark," grunted Sam, "scaring a kid half to death and then writing
notes for money.  It's dangerously near to kidnapping--that's what I
call it, and I'm glad I'm not in it."

Both the others looked rather uncomfortable at this presentation of the
matter, but Jack affected to laugh it off.

"Pshaw!" he exclaimed, "it's a little bit rough, I know, but such
things do a kid good.  Teach him to be self-reliant and--and all that."

"Sure," agreed Bill, "you don't look at these things in the right
light, Sam--does he, Hank?"

Hank, who had shuffled toward the dinghy at the conclusion of these
edifying remarks, agreed with a chuckle that Sam had no sense of humor,
after which they all got into the dinghy and we sculled off to the
unlucky hydroplane.

It didn't take long to get under way, and the little craft was soon
scudding through the water at a good pace, towing the dinghy behind her.

"Better put us ashore before we get into Hampton," suggested Bill.  "We
don't want to be seen about there more than can be helped."

"That's where you are wrong," objected Jack.  "We'll put Hank ashore up
the coast, but the more we are seen about the place the better.  It
won't look as if we had anything to do with the Digby kid--in case
things do go wrong."

So it was agreed that Hank was to be landed in a small cove a few miles
farther down the coast, from which it was a short cut across country to
the neighborhood of the Digby farm.

Then he was to waylay the first likely-looking messenger and entrust
the note which Jack had read to him for delivery.  After that he was to
spend the time as best he could in suitable seclusion, and after dark
conceal himself near the sign-post.  He was not to make any attempt to
secure the money if any one hovered about the place, but if the coast
was clear he was to go boldly in and take it.

Hank was landed at the spot agreed upon, a short time later, and the
other three then resumed their journey for the hydroplane's home port.
As they turned seaward Jack pointed mockingly to Topsail Island, which
lay a short distance on their port bow.

"I'll bet there's plenty going on there right now," he grinned.

"Right you are," assented Bill.

"Hullo," he added hastily the next moment; "what's that?"

He pointed toward the island, and the occupants of the homing
hydroplane saw, slowly rising from it in the still air, four straight
columns of blue smoke.

"Looks like a signal of some kind," suggested Jack after a scrutiny.

"It's coming from about the place where we grabbed the kid," added
Bill, a note of apprehension in his voice.

"I wonder what it signifies?" demanded Jack, whose face began to bear a
somewhat troubled look.

"I can tell you," said Sam shortly, turning round from the wheel.

"You can?"

"Yes."

"Well, hurry up, then--what does it mean?" Jack spoke sharply at Sam's
deliberation.

"It means," said Sam slowly, as if he wanted every word to sink in,
"that the Boy Scouts have picked up your trail."




CHAPTER XX

THE HUNT FOR TENDERFOOT JOE


Rob, Merritt, Tubby Hopkins and Captain Hudgins rested, perspiring
under the noon-day heat, on a group of flat rocks at the highest point
of the island.  Their search had been fruitless, and their downcast
faces showed it.

"How ever are we going to break the news to his parents?"

Merritt it was who voiced the question that had been troubling all of
them.

Before any one had time to frame a reply the captain, whose keen eyes
had been gazing about him, gave a sudden shout:

"There's that smoke yonder yer boys were lookin' fer," he exclaimed,
pointing.

"Four columns of it," shouted Rob, "hurray, boys, that means news!
It's 'Come to counsel.'  Come on, don't let's lose any time in getting
back."

Rapidly the boys stumbled and ran forward over the rocks and pushed on
among the dense growth that covered the hillside they had climbed.
They hardly noticed the obstacles, however, so keenly were they bent on
getting back to camp and learning the news which they knew must be
awaiting them.  They covered the distance in half the time it had taken
them to ascend the hillside and were met in the camp by the body of
searchers--Andy Bowles, Sim Jeffords and Ernest Thompson--who had swung
off to the left or mainland side of the island.

"Well, boys, what news?" breathlessly exclaimed Rob, "we saw the
counsel smoke and hurried down at top speed."

"Well, there's not very much, I'm afraid, Rob," began Andy, "but we
found something that may give us a clue.  About half a mile down the
beach there's the distinct mark of a boat keel where it was drawn up on
the hard sand and the marks of three separate pairs of feet."

"Good," exclaimed Rob, "that's something and half confirms my
suspicion.  Go on, Andy, what else?"

"Well, we examined the marks carefully and found that two pairs of feet
wore good shoes and the third a very broken, disreputable pair."

"Yes," exclaimed Rob, while the others listened breathlessly.

"Of course that indicated to us that three persons must have carried
Joe off--for I don't think there's much doubt now that he was carried
off, do you?"

"I don't," said Rob sadly, "but for what possible motive?"

"I have it," suddenly exclaimed Tubby Hopkins, snapping his fingers,
"you remember the day of the aeroplane model contest?"

"Yes, but what--" began Rob.

"Has that to do with it," finished Tubby for him.  "Everything. It was
Joe who first told the committee that Jack's model was a bought one and
so lost him the fifty-dollar prize."

"By cracky, that's right!" assented Rob, "and you think that Jack and
his gang have carried him off in revenge for it?"

"Looks that way to me," nodded the stout youth.

"Why, they wouldn't dare," began Andy Bowles.

"Oh, yes, they would," amended Rob bitterly, "they'd dare anything to
get even on us for their fancied wrongs.  But whose could have been the
broken ragged shoes?" he asked, suddenly taking up another train of
thought.

"Hank Handcrafts, the beach-comber's," suggested Tubby.

"Gee Whillikens!  I'll bet a cracker that's the solution," cried Andy,
"and now I come to think of it I heard, before we left, that Jack and
his gang had gone camping."

"Where?"

"Up around the Upper Inlet somewhere.  You know that's full of islands
and as there's no drinking water there few people ever think of
frequenting the place.  If they wanted to do anything like carrying off
Joe that is where they would have been likely to go."

"You may be right, Andy.  It's worth looking into, anyway," declared
Rob.  "I'll leave a note here for the others and we'll take a run over
there in the Flying Fish.  If Joe is there we'll get him out."

"And in jig time, too," chimed in Ernest Thompson.

"Come on, boys, get some gasoline, hop in the dinghy and let's get
aboard.  We've got to move fast if we're to accomplish anything.  You
get the boat, Andy, while I write a line to tell the others what we've
gone after."

The young leader hastily ran into his tent and sitting down at the
table dashed off these lines:

"Boys, we think we have a clue to Joe's whereabouts.  Have gone after
him.  Keep camp in regular way while we are gone.  Hiram Nelson is
leader, and Paul Perkins corporal, in our absence.

"ROB BLAKE, Leader,

"Eagle Patrol, B. S. of A."

With a piece of chalk the boy marked a rough square and an arrow on a
tree--the arrow pointing to a spot in the sand in which he buried the
letter.

"Now, then, come on," he shouted, dashing toward the boat, "shove off,
boys, and if Joe's in the Upper Inlet we'll find him."

"Hurray," cheered the others, much heartened by the prospect of any
trace of the missing boy, however slight.

"Give way, boys," bellowed the captain, who had insisted on coming
along armed with a huge horse pistol of ancient pattern which he had
strapped on himself in the morning when the news of Joe Digby's
disappearance reached him.  "This reminds me uv the time when I was A.
B. on the Bonnie Bess and we smoked out a fine mess of pirates in the
Caribees."

"Regular pirates?" inquired Andy as Rob and Merritt bent to the oars.

"Reg'lar piratical pirates, my boy," responded the old salt, "we
decorated the trees with 'em and they looked a lot handsomer there than
they did a-sailin' the blue main."

Further reminiscences of the captain's were cut short by their arrival
at the Flying Fish's side.  They had hastily thrown two cases of
gasoline into the dinghy before they shoved off so that all that
remained to be done was to fill the fast craft's tank and she was ready
to be off.

"Hold on," warned Rob, as Tubby Hopkins was about to secure the dinghy
to the mooring buoy, "we'll tow her along.  We may need her.  There's
lots of shoal water in that Upper Inlet."

"Right yer are, my boy; there's nothin' like bein' forehanded,"
remarked the captain as Merritt bent over the flywheel and Rob threw in
the spark and turned on the gasoline.  After a few revolutions an
explosion resulted and the Flying Fish was off on the mission which
might mean so much or so little to the anxious hearts on board her.

"Do you know the channel," asked Merritt as Rob with his eyes glued on
the coast sent the Flying Fish through the waves, or rather wavelets,
for the sea was almost like a sheet of glass.

"I've been up here once or twice after duck," rejoined Rob, "but it's a
tricky sort of a place to get through.  However, I guess we'll make it."

As they drew nearer the shores the boys made out an opening which Rob
said was the Upper Inlet channel.

"Say, Tubby, get out the lead line and let's see how much water we
have," directed Rob as the color of the ocean began to change from dark
blue to a sort of greenish tinge, lightening in spots, where the shoals
were near to the surface, to a sandy yellow.

The stout lad took a position in the bow and swinging the lead about
his head cast it suddenly ahead of the Flying Fish's bow.

"Slow down," ordered Rob, and Merritt cut down the motor to not more
than two hundred revolutions a minute.

The lead line, tagged with different colored bits of flannel at each
fathom length, sang through the stout lad's fingers.

"By-a-quarter-three," he called out the next instant.

This meant that three fathoms and a quarter or eighteen feet three
inches of water was under the keel of the little craft.

"Nough fer a man-uv-war," grinned old Captain Hodgins.

Slowly the Flying Fish forged ahead till right under her bow lay a
patch of the yellow water.

"By-a-half-two," came a sharp hail from the fat youth, who had once
more heaved the lead.

"Cut her down some more," sharply ordered Rob, without turning his
head, "we draw only three feet so I guess we'll do nicely for a while."

"Great hop-toads, there's regular shark's teeth ahead," commented
Captain Hudgins, pointing to the still shallower water indicated by the
lightening tint of the channel.

"By-one-by-a-quarter-one!" came sharply from Tubby, as the Flying Fish
seemed hardly to crawl along the water.

"By-a-half!" came an instant later, meaning that only three feet of
water lay right ahead.

"Stop her," roared out Rob.

But he was too late.  Instantly, almost as Merritt's hand had flown to
the lever, the nose of the Flying Fish poked into the sandbank and her
motor with a gentle sigh came to a stop.

"Hard a-ground!" roared the captain, "too bad and with a fallin' tide,
too."

"Full speed astern," came the next order.

The propeller churned up the water aft into a white turmoil. The Flying
Fish trembled in her every timber, and began to slide slowly backward
from the treacherous shoal.

"Safe, by the great horn spoon!" roared the captain, fetching Andy
Bowles a slap on the back that almost toppled the small bugler into the
water.

"For a time," said Rob quietly, "come ahead a bit, Merritt."

Slowly the little vessel slid ahead once more.  Rob seemed fairly to
feel his way through the narrow channel he had picked out and finally
the Flying Fish, after as much coaxing as is usually bestowed on a
balky horse, floated in the deep water beyond the sandy bar.

Eagerly the boys looked about them as they "opened up," as sailors call
it, the narrow stretch of water known as the Upper Inlet.  It did not
take them long to spy the island with the tent on it in which the
conversation between Jack and his cronies, and the mutineer to his
plans, had taken place.

"There's their camp!" shouted Rob, eagerly sending the Flying Fish
ahead at full speed, "now we'll find out something."

"And, maybe, use this." The captain, as he spoke, grimly produced his
formidable weapon and flourished it about.

"No, none of that," sternly rejoined Rob, "the Boy Scouts can take care
of those fellows--without using firearms."

"You bet," rejoined Merritt, grimly "muscling up," "we'll show 'em if
it comes to a fight."

But bitter disappointment awaited the boys. As we know, the camp was
deserted and no trace or clue of the whereabouts of its occupants was
to be found. In the tent, however, lay a piece of blotting paper with
ink-marks on it. It was the material with which Jack had dried his
letter.

"Anybody got a mirror?" asked Rob.  "This blotter may help some if we
can read what's on it."

"I've got a pocket one," said Andy Bowles, who was somewhat particular
about his person and always carried a small toilet case.

"That will do; let's have it."

Rob seized the bit of looking glass and held the blotter to it.

"Just as I thought," he exclaimed a minute later, with a cry of
triumph.  "It's Jack Curtiss' writing, though he has tried to disguise
it, and they've got Joe hidden somewhere.  Look here, they want $200
for his return."

"Yes, but what good does it do us to know that," objected Merritt, when
the sensation this announcement caused had subsided.  "They evidently
had him here overnight and then deserted the camp for fear we'd pick up
their trail.  They've taken Joe with them."

"By the great sea-serpent, that's right," grunted the captain, "it's a
blind trail, boys!"




CHAPTER XXI

SAVED BY "SMOKE MORSE"


Each member of the party regarded the other blankly.

The captain was right.  The deserted camp was only a blind trail and
they had all their work to do over again.

"The first people to communicate with are Joe's parents," mused Rob.
"That note will be delivered very shortly, as the longer they delay the
more dangerous it will be for them."

"That's right," agreed Merritt, "Jack and his gang will not let the
grass grow under their feet now that they know the chase must be on.
What can they have done with Joe?"

Rob had been looking about him with the instinct of the Boy Scout.  He
was anxious to ascertain if there were not something tangible, some
clue on which they could base a search for the missing member of the
Patrol.  Suddenly something remarkable struck him about the tracks that
lay about the tent.

They were all four those, of persons of larger growth than Joe Digby
and mingling with them unmistakably was the broken-shoed track of Hank,
the beach-comber.

"Boys," announced Rob suddenly, "Joe has not been here at all."

"Not been here at all," echoed Merritt, amazedly.

"I mean what I say.  Look at these tracks.   There is not a footmark
here that could by any chance be his."

The others scrutinized the maze of foot-prints with the same care as
had Rob and were forced to come to the same conclusion.  There was no
question about it--they would have to seek elsewhere for a trace of the
lad.

But where?

They gazed about them at the stretch of lone bay or inlet, the sparse
scrub grass and vegetation fringing it on the shore side and wheeling
sea-gulls swooping and soaring above the shoal waters.

Then Rob's gaze rested carelessly on a closed and seemingly deserted
bungalow, occupying the island above them.  As his eyes fell on it they
suddenly became riveted and then grew wide with surprise.

A stream of smoke was issuing from the fieldstone chimney roughly
constructed at one end of the apparently deserted dwelling.

"There's some one living in that bungalow," he exclaimed, as he made
the discovery, "maybe whoever it is can give us some clue to where Joe
Digby is."

They all gazed intently at the weather-beaten old house from which the
paint was scaling, adding to the note of desertion sounded by its
closed shutters and forlorn-looking yard.

As they looked, astonished at the idea that the barren structure should
actually house a human being, a sudden thought struck Merritt.

"Suppose Jack Curtiss and his gang are there?" he said.

"Hardly likely," rejoined Rob, "however, we'll get over there and find
out just who is making that smoke."

Suddenly the old captain, who had been watching the smoke closely, gave
an astonished snort.

"What's the matter, captain?" asked Rob, who was about to walk to the
water's edge and get ready to shove off the dinghy.

"Why, there's somethin' queer about that thar smoke," responded the old
salt.

"Queer--how do you mean?"

"Well, watch it a minute--there--see! now stops--now it starts
ag'in--then it stops--wha, do yer suppose is happenin' to it?"

Rob knitted his brows and watched the phenomenon to which the captain
had called attention with narrowed eyes.

There was no question about it the smoke was certainly behaving
"queerly" as the captain put it.

The blue vapor emerged from the chimney now in a copious puff and then,
for a space, would cease, only to roll forth once more in larger
volume.  The boys watched it in some astonishment.

"What can they be doing, do you suppose?" Merritt asked.

"I have no idea.  It's past me to say," responded Rob, "it comes out in
puffs like--like--by hookey!  I've got it!" he broke off with a shout,
"like the Morse code!"

"Somebody signaling?" stammered Merritt.

"That's it--watch!"

The smoke, which had not been visible for some seconds, now emerged
from the stone chimney once more and the boys, fascinated, watched it
closely with burning eyes.  There was no doubt whatever about it now.
It was signaling.

Four short puffs.

"Four dots--that's H," exclaimed Rob, trembling with excitement.

The smoke ceased.

"Here comes some more," shouted Merritt.

One short puff from the chimney.

"E, one dot, that's E sure enough," translated Rob.

The others stood like figures carved in stone as their leader read off
the strange signals.

Puff!  A longer period of smoking by the chimney--then two sharp puffs.

"That's L," interpreted the leader of the Eagles.  Before they could
say a word the chimney took up its message once more.

Puff--a long puff--another long one, and then a short one.

"Dot--dash--dash--dot," exclaimed Rob.

"That's the letter P," put in Merritt.

"That's right, old man," shouted Rob, slapping him on the back, "and
we've found Joe Digby.  That smoke signal spelled Help in the Morse
code."

"You're right," shouted Merritt, "come on, Cap, come on, boys, we've
got to get a move on and get it on quick!"

They dashed toward the dinghy and a few seconds later had once more
embarked and were speeding toward the desolate and forsaken bungalow.
Somehow they managed to get ashore in the dinghy without anyone being
spilled over the side in their desperate hurry and a minute later were
pounding at the door.

"Joe--Joe Digby," shouted Rob in a strange, strained voice.

"Here," came back the answer in a feeble tone, "oh, boys, I'm glad
you've come."

Furiously Rob shook the door.

"It's locked," came the voice from inside, "I tried to break it down.
Too weak, I guess.  Try the shutters."

At each window in turn the Boy Scouts sought to effect an entrance, but
in vain.  The owner of the place had screwed up the window coverings
too tightly for them to be opened without tools.

The rescue party came to a momentary halt.

"I've got it," shouted the captain suddenly, "we'll have him out uv
there in two shakes uv a drake's tail."

He produced his formidable old pistol and waved it grimly.

"Come on, boys," he yelled, darting round to the front of the
house--the side on which the door was.

"What are you going to do?" demanded Rob, as much mystified as the rest
at the old eccentric actions.

"Watch me," grinned the captain as he gained the door.

"Stand clear!" he bawled at the top of his lungs, "stand clear uv the
door inside there, Joe!"

"All right," came back the reply, "I'm in a corner."

"Now, stand by ter receive boarders!" roared the veteran as he placed
the muzzle weapon at the lock and pulled the trigger.

"Bang!"

There was a roaring explosion from the wide mouthed weapon and a cloud
of smoke filled the air.  But simultaneously there came a sound of
ripping, tearing and splintering and the lock of the door, shot clean
out by the heavy charge, clattered down to the floor on the inside of
the room.

An instant later Joe Digby, pale and trembling from privation, surprise
and happiness all mingled in one, was in the midst of his friends and
fellow scouts.

"I don't know what made me think of it," he explained in answer to
eager questions about the smoke telegraph message.  "It was what the
books call an inspiration, I guess.  There were plenty of loose
boards--fragments of old packing cases lying about, and luckily they
had not taken my matches.  I built a blaze and then, while it was still
smoldering, I covered it with an old strip of sacking that I wetted
with some water out of the bottle they left me."

"It made about as good a signal, as one could want," responded Rob
warmly, "but now tell us about your capture, Joe, how did it happen?"

"Why, you see," exclaimed the lad, his voice growing stronger as he
proceeded, "I was just thinking it was about time to wake my relief
when I heard a rustling noise in the bushes back of the camp.  I walked
up there to investigate, for I thought it might be some animals--maybe
the captain's pigs."

"Keel haul them lubberly swine," from the captain.

"But, as you shall hear, I was mistaken.  Hardly had I reached the edge
of the dark shadows than I was seized and a hand put over my mouth.  I
had only time to let out one yell for help."

"The one that woke me," put in Merritt, in parenthesis.

"That was it; I guess," went on the small lad, "well, I was picked up
and carried some little distance to where they had a boat, and thrown
into it.  Then the three men who were in the boat rowed to an island
with a tent on it and there two of them got out.  The other, a fellow
with a big beard and very dirty, then rowed over to this place with me
and, after putting some bread and a bottle of water inside the door,
closed and locked it.

"I carried on like a baby, I guess.  I cried for a long time and
shouted, but no one came.  Then I grew quieter and tried to find some
way of escape but the shutters were all fastened and the door was too
strong for me.  I tried to clamber up the chimney once but I had to
give it up.  Then suddenly the thought of making a smoke came to me and
then I improved on that idea and used the Morse code that Rob has been
drumming into me.  I never thought that I might be able to use it to
save my life maybe--or at least a lot of hunger and misery."

"Could you recognize the men who took you if you saw them again?" asked
Rob earnestly.

"I'm not sure," responded the small lad, "one of them I would know--the
one with the beard.  The other two wore masks.  But I think their
voices sounded like Bill's and Jack's.  I'm sure of the man with the
beard though."

"Hank Handcraft," exclaimed Merritt.

"Oh, that's who it was," cried the small lad, "I thought somehow the
voice and something about the man seemed familiar.  He's that old beach
comber who lives outside Hampton."

"That's the son uv a sea-swab," roared the captain, "oh, if I could
only get my hands on him, I'd--"

The fate the captain had reserved for Hank was doomed not to be known,
for as he was speaking Paul Perkins gave a sudden shout:

"Look--look there!" he cried, pointing.

Sneaking up to the tented island was the familiar outline of Sam
Redding's hydroplane.




CHAPTER XXII

THE ESCAPE OF THE BULLY


The group standing about the newly rescued lad on the veranda of the
deserted bungalow galvanized into instant action.

"Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender are in her!" shouted Rob, "come on,
scouts, we'll get after them while we can."

With a shout the Boy Scouts ran for the boat and speedily pulled out to
the Flying Fish.  Hastily as they executed this move, however, the two
in the other boat had had time to head her about and start at top speed
for the mouth of the inlet.

"Clap on more sail, my hearties," roared the captain, almost beside
himself with excitement, "I want ter get my hands on them two piratical
craft."

Rob, with a look of grim determination on his usually pleasant face,
held the Flying Fish true on her course, but, heavily laden as she was,
she could not make her usual speed and the hydroplane soon distanced
her.  Jack Curtiss stood in her stern and waved a mocking hand at the
Boy Scouts as the light-draft craft shot over the shoals and shallows
with case while the Flying Fish had to lose much time and way by
threading in and out seeking the deeper water.

"Douse my toplights, I can't stand that," bellowed the irate Captain
Hudgins.  "I'll put a shot in that jackanapes' locker."

With these words, and before any of the boys could stop him, he rose to
his feet and sent a bullet from his ponderous revolver flying in the
direction of the fleeing motor boat.  It missed and hit the water near
by, sending up a little fountain of spray.

Even at the distance they were the occupants of the Flying Fish could
see the fear which this warlike move inspired in the bully and his
companion.  They threw themselves flat in their boat till only the
hands of Bill, who was steering, were visible.

They need not have feared, however.  The captain's hasty move brought
down on his head Rob's wrath, though the young leader could not find it
in his heart to be really angry with the old man who had been irritated
past endurance by the bully's mocking defiance.

"Shiver my garboard strake," he exclaimed contritely, when Rob pointed
out to him that he might have killed one of the occupants of the
hydroplane, "shiver my garboard strake, lad, I saw red fer a minute
just like I did that time the Chinese pirates boarded the Sarah Jane
Butts in the Yellow River."

Although there was not much hope of catching the two, Rob stuck to the
chase even when he realized the scouts were outdistanced, and in fact
kept his attention so closely riveted on the other craft that when
there came a sudden jar and jolt and the Flying Fish stopped with a
grunt and a wheeze, he realized with a start that he had not been
watching the treacherous channel and was once more fast on a sand bar.

With a last shout and a yell of defiance the bully and his companion,
who had by now got over their fright, shot out on to the ocean and
rapidly vanished.

"There goes our hope of catching those two crooks," cried Tubby
angrily, while the engine of the Flying Fish was set at reverse. "It's
all off now.  They know that we have rescued Joe and they'll fly the
coop for some other part of the country."

"I suppose they came down here to get their tent, not realizing we'd be
here so soon," observed Andy, which indeed was the fact.

Fortunately the Flying Fish was not very hard aground and a little
manipulation got her off into deep water once more.

"I guess those two chaps are almost in Hampton by this time and getting
ready to leave town," observed Rob as the motor boat forged ahead, once
more.

"This will be the safest thing for them to do," exclaimed Merritt,
"they are in a serious position this time.  Kidnapping is a dire
offense."

"I wonder what they came back for?" said Tubby suddenly.

"No doubt to get their tent and the few things they had left on the
island," vouchsafed Rob, skillfully dodging a shoal as he spoke,
"maybe, too, they intended to see how Joe was making out."

"I wasn't making out at all," said the small lad, with a shudder at the
recollection of his imprisonment.

"Never mind, Joe, that's all over now," put in Merritt.

"I'm glad it is," answered the small lad, "and just think, if I hadn't
been a Boy Scout and understood that code I might have been there yet."

"That's true enough," said Rob, "for we had about made up our minds
that the bungalow was deserted, and were not going to bother
investigating it, till we saw the smoke."

About an hour later the boys landed once more in camp, where their
reception by the others may be well imagined by my young readers.

"And now comes the final chapter in the career of Messrs. Jack Curtiss
and Bill Bender," said Rob decisively, "I'm going to take a run up to
Hampton. Joe, you'll come along, and you, Merritt, and Tubby.  If that
letter was delivered, as I imagine it was, Joe's parents must be in a
terrible state of anxiety by now and we must hurry up and see them at
once."

"Right," agreed Merritt, and a few moments later, having left the
captain and the others ashore, the Boy Scouts and their young leader
were speeding toward Hampton.  With the craft lightened as she was,
they made good time and arrived at the yacht club pier speedily.

News of the events which had transpired at the island had evidently
reached the town, for Mr. Wingate himself, with Mr. Blake and Merritt's
father were at the landing as the Flying Fish glided up to it.

The three elders were almost as enthusiastic as the boys had been over
the safe recovery of Joe, the details attendant on which Rob rapidly
sketched to them.  He had hardly concluded and had not had time to ask
how they knew of the kidnapping when a wild-eyed man in faded old farm
clothes, accompanied by an equally distracted woman, came rushing down
to the wharf.

"Where's them Boy Scouts?  I allers knew no good would come of my son
joining 'em," the man shouted.  "I'll give a hundred dollars fer a boat
that'll take me ter Topsail Island in ten minutes."

"'No need of that, Mr. Digby," said Rob quietly stepping forward with
his hand on Joe's shoulder, "here is Joe safe and sound."

"Great hopping watermelons!" yelled the farmer, rushing at his son
followed by his wife.  Together the worthy souls almost squashed the
small lad like a butterfly under a harrow.  But at last the first
greetings were over and the farmer turned to the somewhat amused group
of boys and men who were looking on.

"My, what a fright we had," exclaimed Mrs. Digby, a motherly-looking
woman, dabbing at her eyes with capacious pocket handkerchief, "we gets
a letter tellin' us that our boy be kidnapped."

"Yes we know all about that, Mrs. Digby," put in Mr. Blake, "you
recollect your husband telephoned to the chief of police here about it,
and expecting news from the island, we came down here."

"So he did, so he did," cried Mrs. Digby, "oh, dear me, Mr. Blake, I'm
in such a takin!  I hardly know what I'm sayin'."

"Consarn them Boy Scouts," sputtered the farmer, returning to his
original grievance, "if Joe hadn't a joined them none of this would
have happened."

"Oh, yes it would and worse in fact," said Mr. Blake quietly, "from
what I have learned of the affair it was your lad's knowledge of the
Morse code, which every Boy Scout must know, that saved him when he was
confined on the island."

"That's right, pop," piped up the lad himself.

"Wall, I don't know nothin' about Horses, codes," grunted Mr. Digby,
somewhat mollified, "but if it saved Joe here it must be all right."

"Then your animosity toward the Boy Scouts is somewhat modified,"
smiled Mr. Blake, "let me tell you just what happened.  As a matter of
fact the whole trouble dates back to the day your son exposed the
contemptible trick by which Jack Curtiss hoped to win the aeroplane
model prize contest."

The banker drew the farmer aside and related to him the story that had
been previously narrated by Rob.

"I want ter shake yer hand, boy," exclaimed the fanner, darting at Rob
at the conclusion, "I want ter shake all yer hands," he yelled in his
enthusiasm.

"Bless my soul," exclaimed Commodore Wingate suddenly, "we are clean
forgetting about those two young rascals who tried to extort the money
from Mr. Digby.  We must get after them at once and their accomplice
who, I suppose, is, the man delegated to take the money from under the
rock."

"What do you suggest?" asked Mr. Blake.

"That we hasten to the office of the chief of police and then get into
my car and ferret them out if possible," said the commodore briskly,
"they must be made to suffer for this."

"I don't believe that Sam Redding had any hand in it," put in Rob as
Merritt mentioned the name of the boat-builder's son.  "You know that
all our investigation only pointed to two persons, Jack and Bill, and
their assistant, Hank Handcraft."

A short time later Merritt, Tubby and the Digbys being left behind on
the landing, a high powered car, containing Rob, his father, Commodore
Wingate and the chief of police of Hampton shot out on to the road
leading to the farm owned by Jack Curtiss' father.  Inquiry at the
Bender home had already developed the fact that Jack and Bill had left
there hurriedly a short time before, saying they were going out to the
Curtiss place.  The party was doomed to disappointment, however, so far
as the hope of catching Jack or his accomplices at the farm was
concerned. Old Mr. Curtiss informed them that his son had taken the
family buggy and driven furiously off down the road with Bill Bender a
short time before.

"He got a hundred dollars from me," explained the old man simply, "he
told me he was goin' ter invest it in some rich mining stock his friend
Bender had promoted but--what's the matter, gentlemen," he broke off,
noticing the half-pitying look on the faces of the men in the
automobile.  Mr. Blake hurriedly explained the attempted extortion of
which Jack had been guilty.

"What, Jack--my son!" exclaimed the old man in half daze at the
stunning intelligence, "my boy Jack do a thing like that?  Why, it
can't be true.  I don't believe it."

"I'm afraid, nevertheless, it is," rejoined Mr. Blake, but the old man
only shook his head.

"I'll not believe it," he kept repeating.

"I wish that so good a father had a worthy son," remarked Mr. Blake as
the car shot out of the farm and out upon the highroad in the hope of
overtaking the buggy.

At the Digby farm the machine was turned off to take the cross roads
and at this spot they encountered a buggy coming toward them driven by
a farmer friend of Mr. Blake's.

"Seen a rig with Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender in it?" shouted the
banker as the car was slowed up by Commodore Wingate.

"Down the road a piece driving like the Mischief," responded the rustic
pointing back with his whip, "but you're wrong 'bout ther' bein' only
two of them; that no-good beach-comber, Hank Handcraft, was in there
with them."

With a shouted word of thanks the car dashed forward once more. It was
evident that, realizing that their game was up, Jack and Bill had
picked up Hank, and, with a sense of loyalty for which Rob certainly
would not have given them credit, were trying to save him too.

"Where can they be headed for?" wondered Mr. Blake as the car dashed
forward.

"I can hazard a guess," exclaimed Commodore Wingate, "for the Sunnyside
railroad station.  If they make a train they may escape us yet."

"Je-rus-a-lem," exclaimed the chief of police, a man named Applegate,
pulling out a huge old-fashioned silver watch, "there's a train due in
a few minutes now; if we don't make it, they'll slip through our
fingers!"

Faster and faster the car roared forward and suddenly as it shot round
a curve the little station of Sunnyside came in sight. Tied outside it
was the buggy and horse of farmer Curtiss and on the platform stood
three figures that the party in the auto made out at once as Jack
Curtiss, Bill Bender and their unsavory ally.

The road took a long curve at this point and while they could see the
station the pursuers had the mortification of knowing that it would be
some minutes before they could reach it.  As the car bounded forward,
swaying like a rocking ship over the rough roads, there came a sudden
sound that made Rob's heart bound.

The long whistle of an approaching train.

Faster the machine shot onward roaring like a battery of machine guns
going into action.  Its occupants leaned forward with eyes glued on the
group on the platform.

The trio of whom the autoists were in pursuit had by this time realized
that they were the objects of the chase and were nervously staring up
the track down which was fast approaching the train by which they hoped
to escape.

The auto was still a good two hundred yards from the station when the
train rolled in and, hardly stopping, started to move out again.

"Stop! stop!" yelled Chief Applegate, at the top of his lungs, and the
others waved their hands frantically.  The engineer looked back at them
with a grin.

"Some more idiots missed their train, Jim," he remarked to the fireman,
"I might have waited for them but we're five minutes behind schedule
time now."

The fireman nodded understandingly and as the auto, in a cloud of dust,
dashed up to the little depot the train, with a screech that sounded
like the last defiance of the bully, shot round a curve and vanished
with a cloud of black smoke.

"Beaten!" gasped the chief.

"We can telegraph ahead and have them arrested in New York," suggested
Rob.

"No, perhaps it is all for the best," counseled Mr. Blake, "the parents
of both those boys are respected citizens, and it would be a cruel
grievance to them were their boys to be publicly disgraced.  Let them
work out their own salvation."

And so Jack Curtiss, Bill Bender and Hank Handcraft vanish for a time
from the ken of the Boy Scouts, leaving behind them no regrets, except
it be those of their parents who were for many months bowed down with
the grief and humiliation of their boys' misdoings.




CHAPTER XXIII

SCOUTS IN NEED ARE FRIENDS INDEED


"Ta-ra-ta-ra-ta!  Ta-ra-ta-ra-ta!  Ta-ra-ta-rata!  Ta-ra-ta-a-a!"

Andy's bugle briskly announced the last morning of the Boy Scouts' camp
on Topsail Island.  Already the first breath of autumn had begun to
tint the leaves of the earlier fading trees, and the chill of the early
dawn was noticeable.

During their stay in camp the lads had profited in every way. The scout
program as sent out for camps by headquarters had been gone, through
with some modifications, and Sim Jeffords had qualified as a
first-class scout while Martin Green, Walter Lonsdale and Joe Digby,
once more as merry as ever, were all fitted for their second-class
scout diplomas.  The prospect of another patrol in Hampton had been
discussed and the outlook for one seemed favorable.

As the last notes of Andy's call--to turn to the subject of the opening
of this chapter--rang out the tousle-headed, sleepy-eyed scouts
appeared from their tents and found themselves enveloped in a fleecy
mist--such a light fog as is common on that part of the Atlantic coast
at this season of the year.

"Pretty thick!" was Rob's comment as he doused his face in his tin
basin.

"Hull-o-o-o!" suddenly hailed a voice from the water, "got any
breakfast fer an old shipmate?"

Through the fog the boys could make out the dim outline of the
captain's motor boat even if it's apoplectic cough had not already told
them it was there.

"Sure, come ashore," hailed Merritt.

A few moments later the hearty old seaman was sitting down with the
lads and performing miracles of eating.

"It's a good thing we haven't all got your capacity," remarked Rob,
laughing, "or that provision tent wouldn't have held out very long."

"Wall, boys," observed the captain, drawing out a black pipe and
ramming some equally black tobacco into it with a horny thumb, "a full
hold makes fair sailin', that's my motto and 'Be Prepared' is yers.  A
man can be no better prepared than with a good meal under his belt.
Give me a well-fed crew and I'll navigate a raft to Hindustan, but a
pack uv slab-sided lime juicers couldn't work a full-rigged ship uv the
finest from here to Ban-gor."

Having delivered himself of this bit of philosophy, the captain passed
on to another subject.

"Hear'n anything uv them varmints what slipped their moorings on the
train?" he asked.

"We heard that they had gone West," rejoined Merritt, "but to just what
part I don't know."

"That thar Sam Reddin' boy clar'd himself uv all suspicion, did he?"
went on the old man.

"Yes, after he had admitted that Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender and
himself stole our uniforms and robbed you--"

"Consarn him," interrupted the captain.

"You needn't grumble, his father paid you back all that was taken,"
observed Merritt.

"That don't lessen the crime," grunted the captain, "heave ahead with
yer yarn, my boy; yer was sayin' that that Reddin' boy admitted
everythin'."

"Well," continued Rob, "in consideration of his confession, it was
agreed not to prosecute him and he seems to be a reformed character.
He absolutely denied, though, having had anything to do with the
kidnapping of Joe Digby here, and I believe he is telling the truth."

"The truth ain't in any uv them fellers, that's my belief," snorted the
captain, "and if ever I get my hands on that thar Jack Curtiss or Bill
Bender I'll lay onto 'em with a rope's end."

"Oh, we'll never see them again," laughed Rob.

It may be said here, however, that in this he was very much mistaken.
Rob and his friends did meet the bully again and under strange
circumstances, in scenes far removed from the peaceful surroundings of
Hampton.

"Fog's thickenin'," observed the captain squinting seaward.

As he remarked, the mist was indeed increasing in density, shrouding
the surroundings of the camp completely and covering the trees and
bushes with condensed moisture, which dripped in a slow, melancholy
sort of way from their limbs.

"Bad weather for ships," observed Merritt.

"Yer may well say that, my lad, and this is a powerful bad part uv the
coast ter be navigatin' on in a fog.  I've heard it said that there's a
lot uv iron in the Long Island shoals and that this deflects the
compasses uv ships that stay too near in shore in a fog.  I don't know
how that maybe, I don't place a lot uv stock in it myself, but I do
know that steamers and vessels uv al kinds go ashore here more than
seems ter be natural."

As he finished speaking there came, the fog a sound that fitted in so
well with subject of his conversation that it almost an accompaniment
to it.

"Who-oo-oo-oo!"

"A steamer's siren," exclaimed Rob.

"That's what it is, lad," assented the old sailor, as the sound came
again, booming through the fog with a melancholy cadence.

"Who-o-o-o-o-o!" roared the siren once more.

"I'll bet the feller who's on the bridge uv that ship is havin' his own
troubles just about now," remarked the captain, "hark at that!"

The whistle was now roaring like a wounded bull, sending distinct
vibrations of sound through the increasing fog billows.

"Thick as pea soup," commented the captain, refilling his pipe, "reckon
I'll have ter stay here till she lifts a bit.  Wind's hauled to the
sou'west too.  Bad quarter means more fog and smother."

"Who-o-o-o-o!" boomed the siren of the hidden vessel once more, and
this time it was answered by another whistle somewhere further off in
the fog.

"Two uv 'em now.  Stand by fer a collision," shouted the captain, while
the scouts, intensely interested in the development of this hidden
drama of the fog, clustered about him.

"Who-o-o-o-o!  Who-o-o-o-o!  Who-o-o-o-o!" came the nearest siren.

"She's standin' in shore," shouted the captain, "boys, she's in grave
danger."

"What's she coming in for?" asked Merritt.

"I suppose her skipper thinks he's got plenty uv water under his keel
and wants ter give a wide berth ter the other vessel," explained the
captain.  "Boys, if only we had a big bell or a steam whistle we could
warn them poor fellows uv their peril."

"It does seem hard to hear them blundering in and not be able to warn
them," agreed Rob, "there should have been a lighthouse put on these
shoals long ago."

"Right yer are, boy, but the government is a slow movin' vessel and
hard ter get under way."

The boys had to laugh at this odd way of expressing the difficulty of
getting new lights erected, but they knew as well almost as their
companion the dangers of the ocean off this part of Long Island.

The whistle boomed out its wailing note again.

"Closer and closer," lamented the captain, "what's the matter with
those lubbers?  Yer'd think they'd have a leadsman out."

All at once the catastrophe for which they had been more or less
prepared happened.  So quickly did it come that they had not time to
speak.

The echoes of the last note of the siren had hardly died out when there
came a loud explosion.

"Bang!"

"A signal gun," roared the captain.

"They are calling for help?" asked Rob.

"That's it, my boy.  They've struck, just as I thought they would."

The distress gun sounded again.

"They're in a bad mess by the sound uv that," said the captain.

"It doesn't sound as if they were more than half a mile or so out,"
remarked Rob.

"I guess they're not.  Hark at that!  They must be scared ter death."

The gun was fired three times in rapid succession.

"They'll never hear that at Lone Hill life savin' station," grimly
commented the captain, "and this fog's too thick fer them ter see her."

"Do you imagine she is badly damaged, captain?" asked Rob anxiously.
The idea of the stranded ship lost in the dense fog affected him
strangely.

"Can't tell," the captain replied to his question, "may have stove a
hole in herself and be sinking now."

"Can't we do something to help them?" asked Merritt eagerly.

"Only one thing we can do, boy, and that's full uv danger."

"What is it?" demanded Rob, ignoring the last part of the captain's
speech.

"Get in ther boat and go out thar to 'em.  If they're sinkin' we can
help 'em a whole lot, and--"

The captain stopped short in amazement.

Rob, Merritt and Tubby had already started for the beach and Hiram,
"the wireless scout", was close on their heels.

"Well, douse my toplights," exclaimed the captain, rising to his feet
and lumbering after them, "Yer can't beat the Boy Scouts."




CHAPTER XXIV

A MEETING IN THE FOG--CONCLUSION


"Can you make her out?"

Five pairs of eyes peered through the mist that hung like a white pall
an every side of the Flying Fish.

"Stop that motor a minute, while I listen!"

In compliance with Rob's order Merritt shut down the panting engine.

"What's that noise off there?" asked Hiram suddenly.

"That sort of throbbing sound?" rejoined Tubby Hopkins.

"That's it, sounds like a big heart beating," put in Rob.

"I guess that's their engine.  They're tryin' ter back her off,"
suggested the captain.

"Give them a blast on that fog-horn and see if they answer," said Rob
suddenly.

Hiram took up the big brass fish-horn, used as a fog signal on the
Flying Fish, and blew a loud, long call.

After an interval of waiting, from out of the mist came the wail of the
stranded ship's siren once more.

"There she is, right in there," declared the captain, pointing seaward
into the mist.  "Steer right on that tack, Rob, and we'll pick her up
pretty soon."

The motor was started up once more and the Flying Fish forged ahead
through the smother.  Suddenly Rob, with a sharp cry of:

"Stop her!" swung his wheel over sharp and the Flying Fish headed about.

The gleaming black rampart of a large vessel's side had suddenly loomed
up dead ahead of him.

"Ahoy! aboard the steamer," roared the captain, framing his mouth with
his hands, "what ship is that?"

"The El Paso from London to New York," came back a hail from somewhere
above them in a somewhat surprised tone, "who are you?"

"The Flying Fish of Hampton, Long Island," responded Rob, with a laugh.

"Never heard of her," responded the voice, "we're hard aground on one
of your Long Island shoals it seems."

"That's what yer are," exclaimed the captain, "how come yer ter be
huggin' the shore so hard?"

"Trying to avoid a collision with another vessel."

"Are yer all right?" bellowed the captain.

"Seem to be.  So far as we can find out there's not a plate started,
but if you're from the land we've got a couple of passengers we'd be
thankful if you'd take ashore.  Will you come on board?"

"Sure, if yer'll drop a Jacob's ladder," bellowed the captain at the
invisible speaker.

"In a minute."

The conversation had been carried on without either of the parties to
it being able to see one another, but the captain of the vessel--for he
had been the boy's interlocutor--now came off the bridge and with some
of the crew watched two sailors lower a Jacob's ladder and make it fast
to the rail.

"Now we go aboard," said Captain Hudgins, clambering up the swaying
contrivance as nimbly as an athlete, "make our painter fast ter the
ladder, Rob."

This being done, the boys followed the veteran on board.  The steamer,
when they gained her deck, puzzled them a good deal and it was not till
her captain, a genial blond-bearded Britisher, explained to them that
she was a cattle ship that they understood the utility of the wooden
structures with which her decks were obstructed.

The captain explained that these were pens for the cattle she expected
to take back to England, from which country she was returning after
having taken over a large consignment of steers.

"Which," went on the captain, "brings us to my passengers.  They are
Mr. Frank Harkness and his son, of Lariat, a small cattle town in the
West, where Mr. Harkness has a large ranch.  They were his cattle that
we took over and as he had difficulty in engaging a berth on a liner at
this time of year, when the passenger ships are crowded, he decided to
return with us.  Here is Mr. Harkness now," he added, as a tall,
bronzed man, with a long coat draped over a pair of broad shoulders,
and a wide-brimmed sombrero above keen eyes, approached.

"Visitors from the shore, captain?" he inquired, a pleasant smile
illuminating his clean-shaven, sun-browned face.

"That's what they are," rejoined the captain, "just dropped in on us,
don't you know."

"You mean we dropped in on them," amended the other with a laugh, "come
here, Harry," he called, raising his voice, "we've got some company out
of the fog."

In response to his call a lad about the age of Rob appeared from the
after-end of the ship, where the cabins were, and greeted the boys with
a smile and a nod.  He, like his father, wore a sombrero and was quite
as sunburned.  For the rest he was well-knit and athletic looking and
had evidently lived an out-door life.

"Well, we are getting plenty of experiences away from the ranch, eh,
Harry?" observed his father, after the boys and the captain had
introduced themselves and there had been a great and ceremonious
hand-shaking all round.

"We just naturally are," responded the rancher's son.  "Say, captain,"
he went on, "when do you expect to get off?"

"If we are not too badly hung up we ought to get off at high-water,"
rejoined the Britisher.

"That won't be till late to-night," observed Rob.

"If I could only get a tug we might do better," observed the captain,
"in fact, since I've had the engines going I don't think we can back
off under our own power."

"Have you got a wireless?" asked Hiram, his pet subject uppermost.

"Yes, but our operator went ashore in London and I guess he had too
good a time; anyhow he never showed up so we had to cross without one."

"Is she working?" asked Hiram interestedly.

"Sure, there's plenty of 'juice' as the operators, call it.  I tried to
work it coming over," laughed Harry, "but outside of getting a proper
shock, I didn't do much."

"I'll send out a signal for a tug," said Hiram quietly, "there's a
station at Island.  They'll pick up the message and transmit it."

"What--you can work a wireless?"

"A little bit," said the lad modestly.

"Come on, I'll show you the way," said the delighted captain, starting
off with Hiram, and followed by the others.

"Say, don't think it personal of me, will you?" remarked Harry Harkness
to Rob as they followed, "but would you mind telling me what you all
are wearing those uniforms for?"

"Why, we're Boy Scouts," rejoined Rob proudly, and went on to explain
just what the organization is.

"Say, that's great," exclaimed Harry enthusiastically, "I'd like to
form a patrol out at Lariat.  Do you reckon I could?"

"I don't doubt it," rejoined Rob, smiling the Western enthusiasm.

"By cracky, I'll do it," went on Harry Harkness, "I'll make it a
mounted patrol and if we don't get old 'Silver Tip' then, besides all
the other sport we'll have, call me a coyote."

"Who or what is old Silver Tip?" asked Rob, somewhat interested in his
breezy new acquaintance.

"Silver Tip is a grizzly," explained Harry, "a grizzly bear you know.
Dad says he's the biggest he's ever seen and he seems to bear--excuse
the pun, please--he seems to bear a charmed life. All the boys on the
ranch are crazy to get a shot at him, but they've never been able to."

"Say, that sounds bully," agreed Rob, "I wish I could get out West for
a while."

"It's a great country," said Harry sagely, as they entered the wireless
room, where Hiram was already bending over the instrument sending out a
message for aid, while the blue spark leaped and crackled across its
gap.  The others gazed on admiringly as Hiram, having completed his
message, adjusted the detector on his head and awaited an answer.

It soon came.  Tugs would be dispatched as soon as the fog lifted, the
operator at Fire Island announced.

"That's a weight off my mind," breathed the captain, while Harry
hastily confided to his father that the lads who had boarded the vessel
out of the mist were Boy Scouts.

"The fog is lifting," announced Rob, as they streamed out of the
wireless room.

"Yes, the wind has shifted," remarked Captain Hudgins.  "I guess it was
that sou'west breeze that brought the mist.  She's hauled ter the
nor'west now, and in an hour's time it will be clear."

"I wonder if you boys can put us ashore," said Mr. Harkness, as the
group walked aft to the captain's cabin; "I would be very grateful if
you could.  It seems that it will be some time before the steamer is
cleared, and I am anxious to make a train for the West."

The boys agreed to land the ranchman and his son as soon as the fog
cleared off, which, as the captain had prophesied, it did in about an
hour's time.  The boys had spent the interim in exploring the ship and
listening to Harry Harkness' tales of the ranch and the marvelous
exploits of Silver Tip, the huge grizzly, who derived his name, it
appeared, from a spot of white fur on his breast.  In fact, so fast did
they get on, that by the time Harry and his father were called by
Captain Hudgins to embark in the Flying Fish, the boys had become fast
friends.

The run to the shore was made quickly and by landing the two travelers
at a point above Hampton they were enabled to make a train that would
land them in the city in time for dinner.  Mr. Harkness whiled away the
trip by plying the boys with all sorts of questions about the Boy
Scouts and seemed greatly interested in their answers.  Altogether the
boys felt quite sorry when it came time to part at the wharf at
Farmingdale, the place where the rancher and his son were put ashore.

"Well, good-bye, boys," said Mr. Harkness, holding out a big hand to
Rob, who took it and was amazed to find a twenty dollar gold piece
slipped into his palm by the ranchman.

"Oh, I couldn't think of taking that," he said, insisting on handing it
back despite the ranchman's protests, "I appreciate your motive, but I
couldn't think of taking any money for an ordinary courtesy."

"By Sam Hooker, you're right, boy," cried the ranchman heartily, "and
it's a privilege to meet such a bunch of fine lads.  I thought all you
Easterners were a bunch of stuck-up tenderfeet, but I find I'm
wrong--anyhow so far as the Boy Scouts are concerned."

A few minutes later the rancher and his son were hastening to the
railroad station, followed by the boys' eyes.  As they entered the
depot, just in time to catch the New York train--they waved a hearty
farewell and the boys waved and shouted in return.

"We've only known them a few hours, but I feel as if I'd just said
good-bye to two friends," said Rob as they turned away and prepared to
go back to the island in their boat and break camp.

"So do I!" said Tubby; "I wonder if we'll ever see them again."

"No, I guess they're kind of ships that pass in the night,"' laughed
Merritt, "however, I'm glad we did them a good turn."

The boys, however, were destined to meet the ranchers again and to have
many strange and exciting adventures, among which the ultimate downfall
of Silver Tip was to be one.  Could they have looked into the future,
too, they would have seen that in the Far West they were to face
dangers and difficulties of which they had as yet never dreamed and
were to be the victims of the malicious contrivings of Bill Bender and
our old, acquaintance, Jack Curtiss.

A few weeks after the events related above there was great excitement
in Hampton over the announcement that Merritt's courageous act of
life-saving and the achievements of the other young scouts of the Eagle
Patrol were to receive official recognition.  A field secretary of the
organization arrived at the village one evening and was met at the
depot by the Patrol in full uniform, and with the village band drawn up
at their head. Proudly, under the Eagle standard, they marched to the
Town Hall, which had been illuminated in a style the villagers would
never have believed possible and were greeted by the local committee
headed by Commodore Wingate and Mr. Blake.

"Three cheers for the Boy Scouts!" came from a voice in the back of the
crowded hall after the honors had been distributed and the advances in
rank announced.

The shout that went up cracked the plaster on the ceiling of the
venerable building.

"Speech, speech," shouted one of those individuals who always do raise
that cry on the slightest excuse.

Rob Blake, very red and protesting, was hustled to the front of the
stage on which the Scouts had been drawn up.

"I can't make a speech," he began.

"Hear!  Hear!" shouted the crowd, most of whom couldn't.

"But on behalf of the Boy Scouts I want to thank you all and--and--"

The rest was drowned by the band which, having been quiescent for ten
whole minutes, could maintain silence no longer and blared out into
that favorite of all village bands, "Hail to the Chief."

"Come on, let's get out of here," whispered Rob to Merritt, whose
breast was decorated with the coveted bronze cross and red ribbon,
which is the highest honor a scout can attain.

As they slipped out upon the darkened street a boy came up to them with
an outstretched hand.

"I want to tell you I'm sorry for the part I played in the mean tricks
Jack Curtiss and Bill Bender put up on you fellows," he said
contritely, "will you shake hands?"

"Sure we will, Sam Redding," responded Merritt, extending his palm,
while Rob did likewise.

"At that," added Merritt, "I guess we win."

And here, with their former enemy become a remorseful friend, we will,
for the present, leave the Boy Scouts to renew our acquaintance with
them in the next volume of this series which will be called: "The Boy
Scouts on the Range."



THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Boy Scouts of the Eagle Patrol, by 
Howard Payson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOY SCOUTS OF THE EAGLE PATROL ***

***** This file should be named 12112.txt or 12112.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/1/1/12112/

Produced by Sean Pobuda.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
