The Project Gutenberg EBook of Jackanapes, by Juliana Horatio Ewing

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Jackanapes

Author: Juliana Horatio Ewing

Illustrator: Amy Sacker

Release Date: January 13, 2007 [EBook #20351]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACKANAPES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland and Sankar Viswanathan








                              JACKANAPES


                                  By

                        JULIANA HORATIO EWING




                            Illustrated by

                              Amy Sacker




                                BOSTON

                        L. C. PAGE and COMPANY

                            (INCORPORATED)




                           COPYRIGHT, 1895

                                  BY

                        JOSEPH KNIGHT COMPANY

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS


CHAPTER  I.
"Last noon beheld them full of life,
Last eve in beauty's circle proudly gay."

CHAPTER  II.
"And he wandered away and away
With Nature, the dear old nurse."

CHAPTER  III.
"If studious, copie fair what time hath blurred,
Redeem truth from his jawes."

CHAPTER IV.
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man
lay down his life for his friends."

CHAPTER  V.
"Then, said he, 'I am going to my Father's.'"

CHAPTER  VI.
"Und so ist der blaue Himmel grösser als jedes
Gewölk darin, und dauerhafter dazu."

       *       *       *       *       *




ILLUSTRATIONS


"BUT SHE REMEMBERED THE LITTLE MISS JESSAMINE"       _Frontispiece_

TITLEPAGE

"NEXT DAY JANE HAD HEARD MORE"

AT THE POND

"JACKANAPES COULD HARDLY SLEEP FOR SPECULATING"

"HE WAS DISPOSED TO TALK CONFIDENTIALLY"

THE GENERAL'S GRANDSON

THE BOY TRUMPETER

TAILPIECE

FINIS

       *       *       *       *       *

     "_If I might buffet for my love, or bound my horse for her
     favors, I could lay on like a butcher, and sit like a
     Jackanapes, never off_!"

KING HENRY V, Act 5, Scene 2.

       *       *       *       *       *




JACKANAPES

CHAPTER I.

    Last noon beheld them full of lusty life,
    Last eve in Beauty's circle proudly gay,
    The midnight brought the signal sound of strife,
    The morn the marshalling in arms--the day
    Battle's magnificently stern array!
    The thunder clouds close o'er it, which when rent
    The earth is covered thick with other clay,
    Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
    Rider and horse:--friend, foe,--in one red burial blent.

    Their praise is hymn'd by loftier harps than mine:
    Yet one would I select from that proud throng.
    ---- to thee, to thousands, of whom each
    And one as all a ghastly gap did make
    In his own kind and kindred, whom to teach
    Forgetfulness were mercy for their sake;
    The Archangel's trump, not glory's, must awake
    Those whom they thirst for.--BYRON.


Two Donkeys and the Geese lived on the Green, and all other residents
of any social standing lived in houses round it. The houses had no
names. Everybody's address was, "The Green," but the Postman and the
people of the place knew where each family lived. As to the rest of
the world, what has one to do with the rest of the world, when he is
safe at home on his own Goose Green? Moreover, if a stranger did come
on any lawful business, he might ask his way at the shop.

Most of the inhabitants were long-lived, early deaths (like that of
the little Miss Jessamine) being exceptional; and most of the old
people were proud of their age, especially the sexton, who would be
ninety-nine come Martinmas, and whose father remembered a man who had
carried arrows, as a boy, for the battle of Flodden Field. The Grey
Goose and the big Miss Jessamine were the only elderly persons who
kept their ages secret. Indeed, Miss Jessamine never mentioned any
one's age, or recalled the exact year in which anything had happened.
She said that she had been taught that it was bad manners to do so "in
a mixed assembly."

The Grey Goose also avoided dates, but this was partly because her
brain, though intelligent, was not mathematical, and computation was
beyond her. She never got farther than "last Michaelmas," "the
Michaelmas before that," and "the Michaelmas before the Michaelmas
before that." After this her head, which was small, became confused,
and she said, "Ga, ga!" and changed the subject.

But she remembered the little Miss Jessamine, the Miss Jessamine with
the "conspicuous" hair. Her aunt, the big Miss Jessamine, said it was
her only fault. The hair was clean, was abundant, was glossy, but do
what you would with it, it never looked like other people's. And at
church, after Saturday night's wash, it shone like the best brass
fender after a Spring cleaning. In short, it was conspicuous, which
does not become a young woman--especially in church.

Those were worrying times altogether, and the Green was used for
strange purposes. A political meeting was held on it with the village
Cobbler in the chair, and a speaker who came by stage coach from the
town, where they had wrecked the bakers' shops, and discussed the
price of bread. He came a second time, by stage, but the people had
heard something about him in the meanwhile, and they did not keep him
on the Green. They took him to the pond and tried to make him swim,
which he could not do, and the whole affair was very disturbing to all
quiet and peaceable fowls. After which another man came, and preached
sermons on the Green, and a great many people went to hear him; for
those were "trying times," and folk ran hither and thither for
comfort. And then what did they do but drill the ploughboys on the
Green, to get them ready to fight the French, and teach them the
goose-step! However, that came to an end at last, for Bony was sent to
St. Helena, and the ploughboys were sent back to the plough.

Everybody lived in fear of Bony in those days, especially the naughty
children, who were kept in order during the day by threats of, "Bony
shall have you," and who had nightmares about him in the dark. They
thought he was an Ogre in a cocked hat. The Grey Goose thought he was
a fox, and that all the men of England were going out in red coats to
hunt him. It was no use to argue the point, for she had a very small
head, and when one idea got into it there was no room for another.

Besides, the Grey Goose never saw Bony, nor did the children, which
rather spoilt the terror of him, so that the Black Captain became more
effective as a Bogy with hardened offenders. The Grey Goose remembered
_his_ coming to the place perfectly. What he came for she did not
pretend to know. It was all part and parcel of the war and bad times.
He was called the Black Captain, partly because of himself, and partly
because of his wonderful black mare. Strange stories were afloat of
how far and how fast that mare could go, when her master's hand was on
her mane and he whispered in her ear. Indeed, some people thought we
might reckon ourselves very lucky if we were not out of the frying-pan
into the fire, and had not got a certain well-known Gentleman of the
Road to protect us against the French. But that, of course, made him
none the less useful to the Johnson's Nurse, when the little Miss
Johnsons were naughty.

"You leave off crying this minnit, Miss Jane, or I'll give you right
away to that horrid wicked officer. Jemima! just look out o' the
windy, if you please, and see if the Black Cap'n's a-com-ing with his
horse to carry away Miss Jane."

And there, sure enough, the Black Captain strode by, with his sword
clattering as if it did not know whose head to cut off first. But he
did not call for Miss Jane that time. He went on to the Green, where
he came so suddenly upon the eldest Master Johnson, sitting in a
puddle on purpose, in his new nankeen skeleton suit, that the young
gentleman thought judgment had overtaken him at last, and abandoned
himself to the howlings of despair. His howls were redoubled when he
was clutched from behind and swung over the Black Captain's shoulder,
but in five minutes his tears were stanched, and he was playing with
the officer's accoutrements. All of which the Grey Goose saw with her
own eyes, and heard afterwards that that bad boy had been whining to
go back to the Black Captain ever since, which showed how hardened he
was, and that nobody but Bonaparte himself could be expected to do him
any good.

But those were "trying times." It was bad enough when the pickle of a
large and respectable family cried for the Black Captain; when it came
to the little Miss Jessamine crying for him, one felt that the sooner
the French landed and had done with it the better.

The big Miss Jessamine's objection to him was that he was a soldier,
and this prejudice was shared by all the Green. "A soldier," as the
speaker from the town had observed, "is a bloodthirsty, unsettled sort
of a rascal; that the peaceable, home-loving, bread-winning citizen
can never conscientiously look on as a brother, till he has beaten his
sword into a ploughshare, and his spear into a pruning-hook."

On the other hand there was some truth in what the Postman (an old
soldier) said in reply; that the sword has to cut a way for us out of
many a scrape into which our bread-winners get us when they drive
their ploughshares into fallows that don't belong to them. Indeed,
whilst our most peaceful citizens were prosperous chiefly by means of
cotton, of sugar, and of the rise and fall of the money-market (not to
speak of such salable matters as opium, firearms, and "black ivory"),
disturbances were apt to arise in India, Africa and other outlandish
parts, where the fathers of our domestic race were making fortunes for
their families. And, for that matter, even on the Green, we did not
wish the military to leave us in the lurch, so long as there was any
fear that the French were coming.[1]

[Footnote 1: "The political men declare war, and generally for
commercial interests; but when the nation is thus embroiled with its
neighbors the soldier ... draws the sword, at the command of his
country.... One word as to thy comparison of military and commercial
persons. What manner of men be they who have supplied the Caffres with
the firearms and ammunition to maintain their savage and deplorable
wars? Assuredly they are not military.... Cease then, if thou would'st
be counted among the just, to vilify soldiers."--W. NAPIER, Lieut.
General, _November_, 1851.]

To let the Black Captain have little Miss Jessamine, however, was
another matter. Her Aunt would not hear of it; and then, to crown all,
it appeared that the Captain's father did not think the young lady
good enough for his son. Never was any affair more clearly brought to
a conclusion.

But those were "trying times;" and one moon-light night, when the Grey
Goose was sound asleep upon one leg, the Green was rudely shaken under
her by the thud of a horse's feet. "Ga, ga!" said she, putting down
the other leg, and running away.

By the time she returned to her place not a thing was to be seen or
heard. The horse had passed like a shot. But next day, there was
hurrying and skurrying and cackling at a very early hour, all about
the white house with the black beams, where Miss Jessamine lived. And
when the sun was so low, and the shadows so long on the grass that the
Grey Goose felt ready to run away at the sight of her own neck, little
Miss Jane Johnson, and her "particular friend" Clarinda, sat under the
big oak-tree on the Green, and Jane pinched Clarinda's little finger
till she found that she could keep a secret, and then she told her in
confidence that she had heard from Nurse and Jemima that Miss
Jessamine's niece had been a very naughty girl, and that that horrid
wicked officer had come for her on his black horse, and carried her
right away.

[Illustration]

"Will she never come back?" asked Clarinda.

"Oh, no!" said Jane decidedly. "Bony never brings people back."

"Not never no more?" sobbed Clarinda, for she was weak-minded, and
could not bear to think that Bony never, never let naughty people go
home again.

Next day Jane had heard more.

"He has taken her to a Green?"

"A Goose Green?" asked Clarinda.

"No. A Gretna Green. Don't ask so many questions, child," said Jane;
who, having no more to tell, gave herself airs.

Jane was wrong on one point. Miss Jessamine's niece did come back, and
she and her husband were forgiven. The Grey Goose remembered it well,
it was Michaelmastide, the Michaelmas before the Michaelmas before the
Michaelmas--but ga, ga! What does the date matter? It was autumn,
harvest-time, and everybody was so busy prophesying and praying about
the crops, that the young couple wandered through the lanes, and got
blackberries for Miss Jessamine's celebrated crab and blackberry jam,
and made guys of themselves with bryony-wreaths, and not a soul
troubled his head about them, except the children, and the Postman.
The children dogged the Black Captain's footsteps (his bubble
reputation as an Ogre having burst), clamoring for a ride on the black
mare. And the Postman would go somewhat out of his postal way to catch
the Captain's dark eye, and show that he had not forgotten how to
salute an officer.

But they were "trying times." One afternoon the black mare was
stepping gently up and down the grass, with her head at her master's
shoulder, and as many children crowded on to her silky back as if she
had been an elephant in a menagerie; and the next afternoon she
carried him away, sword and _sabre-tache_ clattering war-music at her
side, and the old Postman waiting for them, rigid with salutation, at
the four cross roads.

War and bad times! It was a hard winter, and the big Miss Jessamine
and the little Miss Jessamine (but she was Mrs. Black-Captain now),
lived very economically that they might help their poorer neighbors.
They neither entertained nor went into company, but the young lady
always went up the village as far as the _George and Dragon_, for air
and exercise, when the London Mail[2] came in.

[Footnote 2: The Mail Coach it was that distributed over the face of
the land, like the opening of apocalyptic vials, the heart-shaking
news of Trafalgar, of Salamanca, of Vittoria, of Waterloo.... The
grandest chapter of our experience, within the whole Mail Coach
service, was on those occasions when we went down from London with the
news of Victory. Five years of life it was worth paying down for the
privilege of an outside place.

DE QUINCEY.]

One day (it was a day in the following June) it came in earlier than
usual, and the young lady was not there to meet it.

But a crowd soon gathered round the _George and Dragon_, gaping to see
the Mail Coach dressed with flowers and oak-leaves, and the guard
wearing a laurel wreath over and above his royal livery. The ribbons
that decked the horses were stained and flecked with the warmth and
foam of the pace at which they had come, for they had pressed on with
the news of Victory.

Miss Jessamine was sitting with her niece under the oak-tree on the
Green, when the Postman put a newspaper silently into her hand. Her
niece turned quickly--"Is there news?"

"Don't agitate yourself, my dear," said her aunt. "I will read it
aloud, and then we can enjoy it together; a far more comfortable
method, my love, than when you go up the village, and come home out of
breath, having snatched half the news as you run."

"I am all attention, dear aunt," said the little lady, clasping her
hands tightly on her lap.

Then Miss Jessamine read aloud--she was proud of her reading--and the
old soldier stood at attention behind her, with such a blending of
pride and pity on his face as it was strange to see:--

"DOWNING STREET,

"_June_ 22, 1815, 1 A.M."

"That's one in the morning," gasped the Postman; "beg your pardon,
mum."

But though he apologized, he could not refrain from echoing here and
there a weighty word. "Glorious victory,"--"Two hundred pieces of
artillery,"--"Immense quantity of ammunition,"--and so forth.

     "The loss of the British Army upon this occasion has
     unfortunately been most severe. It had not been possible to
     make out a return of the killed and wounded when Major Percy
     left headquarters. The names of the officers killed and
     wounded, as far as they can be collected, are annexed.

"I have the honor ----"

"The list, aunt! Read the list!"

"My love--my darling--let us go in and--"

"No. Now! now!"

To one thing the supremely afflicted are entitled in their sorrow--to
be obeyed--and yet it is the last kindness that people commonly will
do them. But Miss Jessamine did. Steadying her voice, as best she
might, she read on, and the old soldier stood bareheaded to hear that
first Roll of the Dead at Waterloo, which began with the Duke of
Brunswick, and ended with Ensign Brown.[3] Five-and-thirty British
Captains fell asleep that day on the bed of Honor, and the Black
Captain slept among them.

[Footnote 3: "Brunswick's fated chieftain" fell at Quatre Bras, the
day before Waterloo, but this first (very imperfect) list, as it
appeared in the newspapers of the day, did begin with his name, and
end with that of an Ensign Brown.]

       *       *       *       *       *

There are killed and wounded by war, of whom no returns reach Downing
Street.

Three days later, the Captain's wife had joined him, and Miss
Jessamine was kneeling by the cradle of their orphan son, a purple-red
morsel of humanity, with conspicuously golden hair.

"Will he live, Doctor?"

"Live? GOD bless my soul, ma'am! Look at him! The young Jackanapes!"




CHAPTER II.

    And he wandered away and away
    With Nature, the dear old Nurse.

LONGFELLOW.


The Grey Goose remembered quite well the year that Jackanapes began
to walk, for it was the year that the speckled hen for the first time
in all her motherly life got out of patience when she was sitting. She
had been rather proud of the eggs--they are unusually large--but she
never felt quite comfortable on them; and whether it was because she
used to get cramp, and got off the nest, or because the season was
bad, or what, she never could tell, but every egg was addled but one,
and the one that did hatch gave her more trouble than any chick she
had ever reared.

It was a fine, downy, bright yellow little thing, but it had a
monstrous big nose and feet, and such an ungainly walk as she knew no
other instance of in her well-bred and high-stepping family. And as to
behavior, it was not that it was either quarrelsome or moping, but
simply unlike the rest. When the other chicks hopped and cheeped on
the Green all at their mother's feet, this solitary yellow one went
waddling off on its own responsibility, and do or cluck what the
spreckled hen would, it went to play in the pond.

It was off one day as usual, and the hen was fussing and fuming after
it, when the Postman, going to deliver a letter at Miss Jessamine's
door, was nearly knocked over by the good lady herself, who, bursting
out of the house with her cap just off and her bonnet just not on,
fell into his arms, crying--

"Baby! Baby! Jackanapes! Jackanapes!"

If the Postman loved anything on earth, he loved the Captain's
yellow-haired child, so propping Miss Jessamine against her own
door-post, he followed the direction of her trembling fingers and made
for the Green.

Jackanapes had had the start of the Postman by nearly ten minutes. The
world--the round green world with an oak tree on it--was just becoming
very interesting to him. He had tried, vigorously but ineffectually,
to mount a passing pig the last time he was taken out walking; but
then he was encumbered with a nurse. Now he was his own master, and
might, by courage and energy, become the master of that delightful,
downy, dumpy, yellow thing, that was bobbing along over the green
grass in front of him. Forward! Charge! He aimed well, and grabbed it,
but only to feel the delicious downiness and dumpiness slipping
through his fingers as he fell upon his face. "Quawk!" said the yellow
thing, and wobbled off sideways. It was this oblique movement that
enabled Jackanapes to come up with it, for it was bound for the Pond,
and therefore obliged to come back into line. He failed again from
top-heaviness, and his prey escaped sideways as before, and, as
before, lost ground in getting back to the direct road to the Pond.

[Illustration]

And at the Pond the Postman found them both, one yellow thing rocking
safely on the ripples that lie beyond duck-weed, and the other washing
his draggled frock with tears, because he too had tried to sit upon
the Pond, and it wouldn't hold him.




CHAPTER III.

    ... If studious, copie fair what time hath blurred,
    Redeem truth from his jawes; if souldier,
    Chase brave employments with a naked sword
    Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
    If they dare try, a glorious life, or grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

    In brief, acquit thee bravely: play the man. Look not on
    pleasures as they come, but go. Defer not the least vertue:
    life's poore span Make not an ell, by trifling in thy woe. If
    thou do ill, the joy fades, not the pains. If well, the pain
    doth fade, the joy remains.

GEORGE HERBERT.


Young Mrs. Johnson, who was a mother of many, hardly knew which to
pity more; Miss Jessamine for having her little ways and her
antimacassars rumpled by a young Jackanapes; or the boy himself, for
being brought up by an old maid.

Oddly enough, she would probably have pitied neither, had Jackanapes
been a girl. (One is so apt to think that what works smoothest works
to the highest ends, having no patience for the results of friction.)
That Father in GOD, who bade the young men to be pure, and the maidens
brave, greatly disturbed a member of his congregation, who thought
that the great preacher had made a slip of the tongue.

"That the girls should have purity, and the boys courage, is what you
would say, good Father?"

"Nature has done that," was the reply; "I meant what I said."

In good sooth, a young maid is all the better for learning some
robuster virtues than maidenliness and not to move the antimacassars.
And the robuster virtues require some fresh air and freedom. As, on
the other hand, Jackanapes (who had a boy's full share of the little
beast and the young monkey in his natural composition) was none the
worse, at his tender years, for learning some maidenliness--so far as
maidenliness means decency, pity, unselfishness and pretty behavior.

And it is due to him to say that he was an obedient boy, and a boy
whose word could be depended on, long before his grandfather the
General came to live at the Green.

He was obedient; that is he did what his great aunt told him. But--oh
dear! oh dear!--the pranks he played, which it had never entered into
her head to forbid!

It was when he had just been put into skeletons (frocks never suited
him) that he became very friendly with Master Tony Johnson, a younger
brother of the young gentleman who sat in the puddle on purpose. Tony
was not enterprising, and Jackanapes led him by the nose. One summer's
evening they were out late, and Miss Jessamine was becoming anxious,
when Jackanapes presented himself with a ghastly face all besmirched
with tears. He was unusually subdued.

"I'm afraid," he sobbed; "if you please, I'm very much afraid that
Tony Johnson's dying in the churchyard."

Miss Jessamine was just beginning to be distracted, when she smelt
Jackanapes.

"You naughty, naughty boys! Do you mean to tell me that you've been
smoking?"

"Not pipes," urged Jackanapes; "upon my honor, Aunty, not pipes. Only
segars like Mr. Johnson's! and only made of brown paper with a very,
very little tobacco from the shop inside them."

Whereupon, Miss Jessamine sent a servant to the churchyard, who found
Tony Johnson lying on a tomb-stone, very sick, and having ceased to
entertain any hopes of his own recovery.

If it could be possible that any "unpleasantness" could arise between
two such amiable neighbors as Miss Jessamine and Mrs. Johnson--and if
the still more incredible paradox can be that ladies may differ over a
point on which they are agreed--that point was the admitted fact that
Tony Johnson was "delicate," and the difference lay chiefly in this:
Mrs. Johnson said that Tony was delicate--meaning that he was more
finely strung, more sensitive, a properer subject for pampering and
petting than Jackanapes, and that, consequently, Jackanapes was to
blame for leading Tony into scrapes which resulted in his being
chilled, frightened, or (most frequently) sick. But when Miss
Jessamine said that Tony Johnson was delicate, she meant that he was
more puling, less manly, and less healthily brought up than
Jackanapes, who, when they got into mischief together, was certainly
not to blame because his friend could not get wet, sit a kicking
donkey, ride in the giddy-go-round, bear the noise of a cracker, or
smoke brown paper with impunity, as he could.

Not that there was ever the slightest quarrel between the ladies. It
never even came near it, except the day after Tony had been so very
sick with riding Bucephalus in the giddy-go-round. Mrs. Johnson had
explained to Miss Jessamine that the reason Tony was so easily upset,
was the unusual sensitiveness (as a doctor had explained it to her) of
the nervous centres in her family--"Fiddlestick!" So Mrs. Johnson
understood Miss Jessamine to say, but it appeared that she only said
"Treaclestick!" which is quite another thing, and of which Tony was
undoubtedly fond.

[Illustration]

It was at the fair that Tony was made ill by riding on Bucephalus.
Once a year the Goose Green became the scene of a carnival. First of
all, carts and caravans were rumbling up all along, day and night.
Jackanapes could hear them as he lay in bed, and could hardly sleep
for speculating what booths and whirligigs he should find fairly
established, when he and his dog Spitfire went out after breakfast. As
a matter of fact, he seldom had to wait long for news of the Fair. The
Postman knew the window out of which Jackanapes' yellow head would
come, and was ready with his report.

"Royal Theayter, Master Jackanapes, in the old place, but be careful
o' them seats, sir; they're rickettier than ever. Two sweets and a
ginger-beer under the oak tree, and the Flying Boats is just a-coming
along the road."

No doubt it was partly because he had already suffered severely in the
Flying Boats, that Tony collapsed so quickly in the giddy-go-round. He
only mounted Bucephalus (who was spotted, and had no tail) because
Jackanapes urged him, and held out the ingenious hope that the
round-and-round feeling would very likely cure the up-and-down
sensation. It did not, however, and Tony tumbled off during the first
revolution.

Jackanapes was not absolutely free from qualms, but having once
mounted the Black Prince he stuck to him as a horseman should. During
the first round he waved his hat, and observed with some concern that
the Black Prince had lost an ear since last Fair; at the second, he
looked a little pale but sat upright, though somewhat unnecessarily
rigid; at the third round he shut his eyes. During the fourth his hat
fell off, and he clasped his horse's neck. By the fifth he had laid
his yellow head against the Black Prince's mane, and so clung anyhow
till the hobby-horses stopped, when the proprietor assisted him to
alight, and he sat down rather suddenly and said he had enjoyed it
very much.

The Grey Goose always ran away at the first approach of the caravans,
and never came back to the Green till there was nothing left of the
Fair but footmarks and oyster-shells. Running away was her pet
principle; the only system, she maintained, by which you can live long
and easily, and lose nothing. If you run away when you see danger, you
can come back when all is safe. Run quickly, return slowly, hold your
head high, and gabble as loud as you can, and you'll preserve the
respect of the Goose Green to a peaceful old age. Why should you
struggle and get hurt, if you can lower your head and swerve, and not
lose a feather? Why in the world should any one spoil the pleasure of
life, or risk his skin, if he can help it?

    "'What's the use'
    Said the Goose."

Before answering which one might have to consider what world--which
life--whether his skin were a goose-skin; but the Grey Goose's head
would never have held all that.

Grass soon grows over footprints, and the village children took the
oyster-shells to trim their gardens with; but the year after Tony rode
Bucephalus there lingered another relic of Fairtime, in which
Jackanapes was deeply interested. "The Green" proper was originally
only part of a straggling common, which in its turn merged into some
wilder waste land where gipsies sometimes squatted if the authorities
would allow them, especially after the annual Fair. And it was after
the Fair that Jackanapes, out rambling by himself, was knocked over by
the Gipsy's son riding the Gipsy's red-haired pony at break-neck pace
across the common.

Jackanapes got up and shook himself, none the worse, except for being
heels over head in love with the red-haired pony. What a rate he went
at! How he spurned the ground with his nimble feet! How his red coat
shone in the sunshine! And what bright eyes peeped out of his dark
forelock as it was blown by the wind!

The Gipsy boy had had a fright, and he was willing enough to reward
Jackanapes for not having been hurt, by consenting to let him have a
ride.

"Do you mean to kill the little fine gentleman, and swing us all on
the gibbet, you rascal?" screamed the Gipsy-mother, who came up just
as Jackanapes and the pony set off.

"He would get on," replied her son. "It'll not kill him. He'll fall on
his yellow head, and it's as tough as a cocoanut."

But Jackanapes did not fall. He stuck to the red-haired pony as he had
stuck to the hobbyhorse; but oh, how different the delight of this
wild gallop with flesh and blood! Just as his legs were beginning to
feel as if he did not feel them, the Gipsy boy cried "Lollo!" Round
went the pony so unceremoniously, that, with as little ceremony,
Jackanapes clung to his neck, and he did not properly recover himself
before Lollo stopped with a jerk at the place where they had started.

"Is his name Lollo?" asked Jackanapes, his hand lingering in the wiry
mane.

"Yes."

"What does Lollo mean?"

"Red."

"Is Lollo your pony?"

"No. My father's." And the Gipsy boy led Lollo away.

At the first opportunity Jackanapes stole away again to the common.
This time he saw the Gipsy-father, smoking a dirty pipe.

"Lollo is your pony, isn't he?" said Jackanapes.

"Yes."

"He's a very nice one."

"He's a racer."

"You don't want to sell him, do you?"

"Fifteen pounds," said the Gipsy-father; and Jackanapes sighed and
went home again. That very afternoon he and Tony rode the two donkeys,
and Tony managed to get thrown, and even Jackanapes' donkey kicked.
But it was jolting, clumsy work after the elastic swiftness and the
dainty mischief of the red-haired pony.

A few days later Miss Jessamine spoke very seriously to Jackanapes.
She was a good deal agitated as she told him that his grandfather, the
General, was coming to the Green, and that he must be on his very best
behavior during the visit. If it had been feasible to leave off
calling him Jackanapes and to get used to his baptismal name of
Theodore before the day after to-morrow (when the General was due), it
would have been satisfactory. But Miss Jessamine feared it would be
impossible in practice, and she had scruples about it on principle. It
would not seem quite truthful, although she had always most fully
intended that he should be called Theodore when he had outgrown the
ridiculous appropriateness of his nickname. The fact was that he had
not outgrown it, but he must take care to remember who was meant when
his grandfather said Theodore.

Indeed for that matter he must take care all along.

"You are apt to be giddy, Jackanapes," said Miss Jessamine.

"Yes aunt," said Jackanapes, thinking of the hobby-horses.

"You are a good boy, Jackanapes. Thank GOD, I can tell your
grandfather that. An obedient boy, an honorable boy, and a
kind-hearted boy. But you are--in short, you _are_ a Boy, Jackanapes.
And I hope,"--added Miss Jessamine, desperate with the results of
experience--"that the General knows that Boys will be Boys."

What mischief could be foreseen, Jackanapes promised to guard against.
He was to keep his clothes and his hands clean, to look over his
catechism, not to put sticky things in his pockets, to keep that hair
of his smooth--("It's the wind that blows it, Aunty," said
Jackanapes--"I'll send by the coach for some bear's-grease," said Miss
Jessamine, tying a knot in her pocket-handkerchief)--not to burst in
at the parlor door, not to talk at the top of his voice, not to
crumple his Sunday frill, and to sit quite quiet during the sermon, to
be sure to say "sir" to the General, to be careful about rubbing his
shoes on the doormat, and to bring his lesson-books to his aunt at
once that she might iron down the dogs' ears. The General arrived, and
for the first day all went well, except that Jackanapes' hair was as
wild as usual, for the hair-dresser had no bear's-grease left. He
began to feel more at ease with his grandfather, and disposed to talk
confidentially with him, as he did with the Postman. All that the
General felt it would take too long to tell, but the result was the
same. He was disposed to talk confidentially with Jackanapes.

[Illustration]

"Mons'ous pretty place this," he said, looking out of the lattice on
to the Green, where the grass was vivid with sunset, and the shadows
were long and peaceful.

"You should see it in Fair-week, sir," said Jackanapes, shaking his
yellow mop, and leaning back in his one of the two Chippendale
arm-chairs in which they sat.

"A fine time that, eh?" said the General, with a twinkle in his left
eye. (The other was glass.)

Jackanapes shook his hair once more. "I enjoyed this last one the best
of all," he said. "I'd so much money."

"By George, it's not a common complaint in these bad times. How much
had ye?"

"I'd two shillings. A new shilling Aunty gave me, and elevenpence I
had saved up, and a penny from the Postman--_sir_!" added Jackanapes
with a jerk, having forgotten it.

"And how did ye spend it--_sir_?" inquired the General. Jackanapes
spread his ten fingers on the arms of his chair, and shut his eyes
that he might count the more conscientiously.

"Watch-stand for Aunty, threepence. Trumpet for myself, twopence,
that's fivepence. Ginger-nuts for Tony, twopence, and a mug with a
Grenadier on for the Postman, fourpence, that's elevenpence.
Shooting-gallery a penny, that's a shilling. Giddy-go-round, a penny,
that's one and a penny. Treating Tony, one and twopence. Flying Boats
(Tony paid for himself), a penny, one and threepence. Shooting-gallery
again, one and fourpence; Fat Woman a penny, one and fivepence.
Giddy-go-round again, one and sixpence. Shooting-gallery, one and
sevenpence. Treating Tony, and then he wouldn't shoot, so I did, one
and eightpence. Living Skeleton, a penny--no, Tony treated me, the
Living Skeleton doesn't count. Skittles, a penny, one and ninepence.
Mermaid (but when we got inside she was dead), a penny, one and
tenpence. Theatre, a penny (Priscilla Partington, or the Green Lane
Murder. A beautiful young lady, sir, with pink cheeks and a real
pistol), that's one and elevenpence. Ginger beer, a penny (I _was_ so
thirsty!) two shillings. And then the Shooting-gallery man gave me a
turn for nothing, because, he said, I was a real gentleman, and spent
my money like a man."

"So you do, sir, so you do!" cried the General. "Why, sir, you spend
it like a prince.--And now I suppose you've not got a penny in your
pocket?"

"Yes I have," said Jackanapes. "Two pennies. They are saving up." And
Jackanapes jingled them with his hand.

"You don't want money except at fair-times, I suppose?" said the
General.

Jackanapes shook his mop.

"If I could have as much as I want, I should know what to buy," said
he.

"And how much do you want, if you could get it?"

"Wait a minute, sir, till I think what twopence from fifteen pounds
leaves. Two from nothing you can't, but borrow twelve. Two from
twelve, ten, and carry one. Please remember ten, sir, when I ask you.
One from nothing you can't, borrow twenty. One from twenty, nineteen,
and carry one. One from fifteen, fourteen. Fourteen pounds nineteen
and--what did I tell you to remember?"

"Ten," said the General.

"Fourteen pounds nineteen shillings and tenpence then, is what I
want," said Jackanapes.

"Bless my soul, what for?"

"To buy Lollo with. Lollo means red, sir. The Gipsy's red-haired pony,
sir. Oh, he is beautiful! You should see his coat in the sunshine! You
should see his mane! You should see his tail! Such little feet, sir,
and they go like lightning! Such a dear face, too, and eyes like a
mouse! But he's a racer, and the Gipsy wants fifteen pounds for him."

"If he's a racer, you couldn't ride him. Could you?"

"No--o, sir, but I can stick to him. I did the other day."

"You did, did you? Well, I'm fond of riding myself, and if the beast
is as good as you say, he might suit me."

"You're too tall for Lollo, I think," said Jackanapes, measuring his
grandfather with his eye.

"I can double up my legs, I suppose. We'll have a look at him
to-morrow."

"Don't you weigh a good deal?" asked Jackanapes.

"Chiefly waistcoats," said the General, slapping the breast of his
military frock-coat. "We'll have the little racer on the Green the
first thing in the morning. Glad you mentioned it, grandson. Glad you
mentioned it."

The General was as good as his word. Next morning the Gipsy and Lollo,
Miss Jessamine, Jackanapes and his grandfather and his dog Spitfire,
were all gathered at one end of the Green in a group, which so aroused
the innocent curiosity of Mrs. Johnson, as she saw it from one of her
upper windows, that she and the children took their early promenade
rather earlier than usual. The General talked to the Gipsy, and
Jackanapes fondled Lollo's mane, and did not know whether he should be
more glad or miserable if his grandfather bought him.

"Jackanapes!"

"Yes, sir!"

"I've bought Lollo, but I believe you were right. He hardly stands
high enough for me. If you can ride him to the other end of the Green,
I'll give him to you."

How Jackanapes tumbled on to Lollo's back he never knew. He had just
gathered up the reins when the Gipsy-father took him by the arm.

"If you want to make Lollo go fast, my little gentleman--"

"_I_ can make him go!" said Jackanapes, and drawing from his pocket
the trumpet he had bought in the fair, he blew a blast both loud and
shrill.

Away went Lollo, and away went Jackanapes' hat. His golden hair flew
out an aureole from which his cheeks shone red and distended with
trumpeting. Away went Spitfire, mad with the rapture of the race, and
the wind in his silky ears. Away went the geese, the cocks, the hens,
and the whole family of Johnson. Lucy clung to her mamma, Jane saved
Emily by the gathers of her gown, and Tony saved himself by a
somersault.

The Grey Goose was just returning when Jackanapes and Lollo rode back,
Spitfire panting behind.

"Good, my little gentleman, good!" said the Gipsy. "You were born to
the saddle. You've the flat thigh, the strong knee, the wiry back,
and the light caressing hand, all you want is to learn the whisper.
Come here!"

"What was that dirty fellow talking about, grandson?" asked the
General.

"I can't tell you, sir. It's a secret."

They were sitting in the window again, in the two Chippendale
arm-chairs, the General devouring every line of his grandson's face,
with strange spasms crossing his own.

"You must love your aunt very much, Jackanapes?"

"I do, sir," said Jackanapes warmly.

"And whom do you love next best to your aunt?"

The ties of blood were pressing very strongly on the General himself,
and perhaps he thought of Lollo. But Love is not bought in a day, even
with fourteen pounds nineteen shillings and tenpence. Jackanapes
answered quite readily, "The Postman."

"Why the Postman?"

"He knew my father," said Jackanapes, "and he tells me about him, and
about his black mare. My father was a soldier, a brave soldier. He
died at Waterloo. When I grow up I want to be a soldier too."

"So you shall, my boy. So you shall."

"Thank you, grandfather. Aunty doesn't want me to be a soldier for
fear of being killed."

"Bless my life! Would she have you get into a feather-bed and stay
there? Why, you might be killed by a thunderbolt, if you were a
butter-merchant!"

"So I might. I shall tell her so. What a funny fellow you are, sir! I
say, do you think my father knew the Gipsy's secret? The Postman says
he used to whisper to his black mare."

"Your father was taught to ride as a child, by one of those horsemen
of the East who swoop and dart and wheel about a plain like swallows
in autumn. Grandson! Love me a little too. I can tell you more about
your father than the Postman can."

"I do love you," said Jackanapes. "Before you came I was frightened.
I'd no notion you were so nice."

"Love me always, boy, whatever I do or leave undone. And--GOD help
me--whatever you do or leave undone, I'll love you! There shall never be
a cloud between us for a day; no, sir, not for an hour. We're imperfect
enough, all of us, we needn't be so bitter; and life is uncertain enough
at its safest, we needn't waste its opportunities. Look at me! Here sit
I, after a dozen battles and some of the worst climates in the world,
and by yonder lych gate lies your mother, who didn't move five miles, I
suppose, from your aunt's apron-strings,--dead in her teens; my
golden-haired daughter, whom I never saw."

Jackanapes was terribly troubled.

"Don't cry, grandfather," he pleaded, his own blue eyes round with
tears. "I will love you very much, and I will try to be very good. But
I should like to be a soldier."

"You shall, my boy, you shall. You've more claims for a commission
than you know of. Cavalry, I suppose; eh, ye young Jackanapes? Well,
well; if you live to be an honor to your country, this old-heart
shall grow young again with pride for you; and if you die in the
service of your country--GOD bless me, it can but break for ye!"

And beating the region which he said was all waistcoats, as if they
stifled him, the old man got up and strode out on to the Green.




CHAPTER IV.

     "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his
     life for his friends."--JOHN XV. 13.


Twenty and odd years later the Grey Goose was still alive, and in full
possession of her faculties, such as they were. She lived slowly and
carefully, and she lived long. So did Miss Jessamine; but the General
was dead.

He had lived on the Green for many years, during which he and the
Postman saluted each other with a punctiliousness that it almost
drilled one to witness. He would have completely spoiled Jackanapes if
Miss Jessamine's conscience would have let him; otherwise he somewhat
dragooned his neighbors, and was as positive about parish matters as a
ratepayer about the army. A stormy-tempered, tender-hearted soldier,
irritable with the suffering of wounds of which he never spoke, whom
all the village followed to his grave with tears.

The General's death was a great shock to Miss Jessamine, and her
nephew stayed with her for some little time after the funeral. Then he
was obliged to join his regiment, which was ordered abroad.

One effect of the conquest which the General had gained over the
affections of the village, was a considerable abatement of the popular
prejudice against "the military." Indeed the village was now somewhat
importantly represented in the army. There was the General himself,
and the Postman, and the Black Captain's tablet in the church, and
Jackanapes, and Tony Johnson, and a Trumpeter.

[Illustration]

Tony Johnson had no more natural taste for fighting than for riding,
but he was as devoted as ever to Jackanapes, and that was how it came
about that Mr. Johnson bought him a commission in the same cavalry
regiment that the General's grandson (whose commission had been given
him by the Iron Duke) was in, and that he was quite content to be the
butt of the mess where Jackanapes was the hero; and that when
Jackanapes wrote home to Miss Jessamine, Tony wrote with the same
purpose to his mother; namely, to demand her congratulations that they
were on active service at last, and were ordered to the front. And he
added a postscript to the effect that she could have no idea how
popular Jackanapes was, nor how splendidly he rode the wonderful red
charger whom he had named after his old friend Lollo.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Sound Retire!"

A Boy Trumpeter, grave with the weight of responsibilities and
accoutrements beyond his years, and stained, so that his own mother
would not have known him, with the sweat and dust of battle, did as he
was bid; and then pushing his trumpet pettishly aside, adjusted his
weary legs for the hundredth time to the horse which was a world too
big for him, and muttering, "'Tain't a pretty tune," tried to see
something of this, his first engagement, before it came to an end.

Being literally in the thick of it, he could hardly have seen less or
known less of what happened in that particular skirmish if he had been
at home in England. For many good reasons; including dust and smoke,
and that what attention he dared distract from his commanding officer
was pretty well absorbed by keeping his hard-mouthed troop-horse in
hand, under pain of execration by his neighbors in the mêlée.
By-and-by, when the newspapers came out, if he could get a look at one
before it was thumbed to bits, he would learn that the enemy had
appeared from ambush in overwhelming numbers, and that orders had been
given to fall back, which was done slowly and in good order, the men
fighting as they retired.

Born and bred on the Goose Green, the youngest of Mr. Johnson's
gardener's numerous off-spring, the boy had given his family "no
peace" till they let him "go for a soldier" with Master Tony and
Master Jackanapes. They consented at last, with more tears than they
shed when an elder son was sent to jail for poaching, and the boy was
perfectly happy in his life, and full of _esprit de corps_. It was
this which had been wounded by having to sound retreat for "the young
gentlemen's regiment," the first time he served with it before the
enemy, and he was also harassed by having completely lost sight of
Master Tony. There had been some hard fighting before the backward
movement began, and he had caught sight of him once, but not since. On
the other hand, all the pulses of his village pride had been stirred
by one or two visions of Master Jackanapes whirling about on his
wonderful horse. He had been easy to distinguish, since an eccentric
blow had bared his head without hurting it, for his close golden mop
of hair gleamed in the hot sunshine as brightly as the steel of the
sword flashing round it.

Of the missiles that fell pretty thickly, the Boy Trumpeter did not
take much notice. First, one can't attend to everything, and his hands
were full. Secondly, one gets used to anything. Thirdly, experience
soon teaches one, in spite of proverbs, how very few bullets find
their billet. Far more unnerving is the mere suspicion of fear or even
of anxiety in the human mass around you. The Boy was beginning to
wonder if there were any dark reason for the increasing pressure, and
whether they would be allowed to move back more quickly, when the
smoke in front lifted for a moment, and he could see the plain, and
the enemy's line some two hundred yards away.

[Illustration]

And across the plain between them, he saw Master Jackanapes galloping
alone at the top of Lollo's speed, their faces to the enemy, his
golden head at Lollo's ear.

But at this moment noise and smoke seemed to burst out on every side,
the officer shouted to him to sound retire, and between trumpeting and
bumping about on his horse, he saw and heard no more of the incidents
of his first battle.

Tony Johnson was always unlucky with horses, from the days of the
giddy-go-round onwards. On this day--of all days in the year--his own
horse was on the sick list, and he had to ride an inferior,
ill-conditioned beast, and fell off that, at the very moment when it
was a matter of life or death to be able to ride away. The horse fell
on him, but struggled up again, and Tony managed to keep hold of it.
It was in trying to remount that he discovered, by helplessness and
anguish, that one of his legs was crushed and broken, and that no feat
of which he was master would get him into the saddle. Not able even to
stand alone, awkwardly, agonizingly unable to mount his restive horse,
his life was yet so strong within him! And on one side of him rolled
the dust and smoke-cloud of his advancing foe, and on the other, that
which covered his retreating friends.

He turned one piteous gaze after them, with a bitter twinge, not of
reproach, but of loneliness; and then, dragging himself up by the side
of his horse, he turned the other way and drew out his pistol, and
waited for the end. Whether he waited seconds or minutes he never
knew, before some one gripped him by the arm.

"_Jackanapes_! _GOD bless you_! It's my left leg. If you could get me
on--"

It was like Tony's luck that his pistol went off at his horse's tail,
and made it plunge; but Jackanapes threw him across the saddle.

"Hold on anyhow, and stick your spur in. I'll lead him. Keep your head
down, they're firing high."

And Jackanapes laid his head down--to Lollo's ear.

It was when they were fairly off, that a sudden upspringing of the
enemy in all directions had made it necessary to change the gradual
retirement of our force into as rapid a retreat as possible. And when
Jackanapes became aware of this, and felt the lagging and swerving of
Tony's horse, he began to wish he had thrown his friend across his own
saddle, and left their lives to Lollo.

When Tony became aware of it, several things came into his head.
1. That the dangers of their ride for life were now more than doubled.
2. That if Jackanapes and Lollo were not burdened with him they would
undoubtedly escape. 3. That Jackanapes' life was infinitely valuable,
and his--Tony's--was not. 4. That this--if he could seize it--was the
supremest of all the moments in which he had tried to assume the
virtues which Jackanapes had by nature; and that if he could be
courageous and unselfish now--

He caught at his own reins and spoke very loud--

"Jackanapes! It won't do. You and Lollo must go on. Tell the fellows I
gave you back to them, with all my heart. Jackanapes, if you love me,
leave me!"

There was a daffodil light over the evening sky in front of them, and
it shone strangely on Jackanapes' hair and face. He turned with an odd
look in his eyes that a vainer man than Tony Johnson might have taken
for brotherly pride. Then he shook his mop and laughed at him.

"_Leave you?_ To save my skin? No, Tony, not to save my soul!"




CHAPTER V.

     Mr. VALIANT _summoned. His will. His last words._

     Then, said he, "I am going to my Father's.... My Sword I
     give to him that shall succeed me in my Pilgrimage, and my
     Courage and Skill to him that can get it." ... And as he
     went down deeper, he said, "Grave, where is thy Victory?"

     So he passed over, and all the Trumpets sounded for him on
     the other side.

BUNYAN'S _Pilgrim's, Progress_.


Coming out of a hospital-tent, at headquarters, the surgeon cannonaded
against, and rebounded from, another officer; a sallow man, not young,
with a face worn more by ungentle experiences than by age; with weary
eyes that kept their own counsel, iron gray hair, and a moustache that
was as if a raven had laid its wing across his lips and sealed them.

"Well?"

"Beg pardon, Major. Didn't see you. Oh, compound fracture and bruises,
but it's all right. He'll pull through."

"Thank GOD."

It was probably an involuntary expression, for prayer and praise were
not much in the Major's line, as a jerk of the surgeon's head would
have betrayed to an observer. He was a bright little man, with his
feelings showing all over him, but with gallantry and contempt of
death enough for both sides of his profession; who took a cool head, a
white handkerchief and a case of instruments, where other men went
hot-blooded with weapons, and who was the biggest gossip, male or
female, of the regiment. Not even the Major's taciturnity daunted him.

"Didn't think he'd as much pluck about him as he has. He'll do all
right if he doesn't fret himself into a fever about poor Jackanapes."

"Whom are you talking about?" asked the Major hoarsely.

"Young Johnson. He--"

"What about Jackanapes?"

"Don't you know? Sad business. Rode back for Johnson, and brought him
in; but, monstrous ill-luck, hit as they rode. Left lung--"

"Will he recover?"

"No. Sad business." "What a frame--what limbs--what health--and what
good looks? Finest young fellow--"

"Where is he?"

"In his own tent," said the surgeon sadly.

The Major wheeled and left him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can I do anything else for you?"

"Nothing, thank you. Except--Major! I wish I could get you to
appreciate Johnson."

"This is not an easy moment, Jackanapes."

"Let me tell you, sir--_he_ never will--that if he could have driven
me from him, he would be lying yonder at this moment, and I should be
safe and sound."

The Major laid his hand over his mouth, as if to keep back a wish he
would have been ashamed to utter.

"I've known old Tony from a child. He's a fool on impulse, a good man
and a gentleman in principle. And he acts on principle, which it's not
every--some water, please! Thank you, sir. It's very hot, and yet
one's feet get uncommonly cold. Oh, thank you, thank you. He's no
fire-eater, but he has a trained conscience and a tender heart, and
he'll do his duty when a braver and more selfish man might fail you.
But he wants encouragement; and when I'm gone--"

"He shall have encouragement. You have my word for it. Can I do
nothing else?"

"Yes, Major. A favor."

"Thank you, Jackanapes."

"Be Lollo's master, and love him as well as you can. He's used to it."

"Wouldn't you rather Johnson had him?"

The blue eyes twinkled in spite of mortal pain.

"Tony _rides_ on principle, Major. His legs are bolsters, and will be
to the end of the chapter. I couldn't insult dear Lollo, but if you
don't care--"

"Whilst I live--which will be longer than I desire or deserve--Lollo
shall want nothing, but--you. I have too little tenderness for--my
dear boy, you're faint. Can you spare me for a moment?"

"No, stay--Major!"

"What? What?"

"My head drifts so--if you wouldn't mind."

"Yes! Yes!"

"Say a prayer by me. Out loud please, I am getting deaf."

"My dearest Jackanapes--my dear boy--"

"One of the Church Prayers--Parade Service, you know--"

"I see. But the fact is--GOD forgive me, Jackanapes--I'm a very
different sort of fellow to some of you youngsters. Look here, let me
fetch--"

But Jackanapes' hand was in his, and it wouldn't let go.

There was a brief and bitter silence.

"'Pon my soul I can only remember the little one at the end."

"Please," whispered Jackanapes.

Pressed by the conviction that what little he could do it was his duty
to do, the Major--kneeling--bared his head, and spoke loudly, clearly,
and very reverently--

"The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ--"

Jackanapes moved his left hand to his right one, which still held the
Major's--

"--The love of GOD."

And with that--Jackanapes died.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

    "Und so ist der blaue Himmel grösser als jedes
    Gewölk darin, und dauerhafter dazu."

JEAN PAUL RICHTER.


Jackanapes' death was sad news for the Goose Green, a sorrow justly
qualified by honorable pride in his gallantry and devotion. Only the
Cobbler dissented, but that was his way. He said he saw nothing in it
but foolhardiness and vain-glory. They might both have been killed,
as easy as not, and then where would ye have been? A man's life was a
man's life, and one life was as good as another. No one would catch
him throwing his away. And, for that matter, Mrs. Johnson could spare
a child a great deal better than Miss Jessamine.

But the parson preached Jackanapes' funeral sermon on the text,
"Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose
his life for My sake shall find it;" and all the village went and wept
to hear him.

Nor did Miss Jessamine see her loss from the Cobbler's point of view.
On the contrary, Mrs. Johnson said she never to her dying day should
forget how, when she went to condole with her, the old lady came
forward, with gentle-womanly self-control, and kissed her, and thanked
GOD that her dear nephew's effort had been blessed with success, and
that this sad war had made no gap in her friend's large and happy home
circle.

"But she's a noble, unselfish woman," sobbed Mrs. Johnson, "and she
taught Jackanapes to be the same, and that's how it is that my Tony
has been spared to me. And it must be sheer goodness in Miss
Jessamine, for what can she know of a mother's feelings? And I'm sure
most people seem to think that if you've a large family you don't know
one from another any more than they do, and that a lot of children are
like a lot of store-apples, if one's taken it won't be missed."

Lollo--the first Lollo, the Gipsy's Lollo--very aged, draws Miss
Jessamine's bath-chair slowly up and down the Goose Green in the
sunshine.

The Ex-postman walks beside him, which Lollo tolerates to the level of
his shoulder. If the Postman advances any nearer to his head, Lollo
quickens his pace, and were the Postman to persist in the injudicious
attempt, there is, as Miss Jessamine says, no knowing what might
happen.

In the opinion of the Goose Green, Miss Jessamine has borne her
troubles "wonderfully." Indeed, to-day, some of the less delicate and
less intimate of those who see everything from the upper windows, say
(well behind her back) that "the old lady seems quite lively with her
military beaux again."

The meaning of this is, that Captain Johnson is leaning over one side
of her chair, whilst by the other bends a brother officer who is
staying with him, and who has manifested an extraordinary interest in
Lollo. He bends lower and lower, and Miss Jessamine calls to the
Postman to request Lollo to be kind enough to stop, whilst she is
fumbling for something which always hangs by her side, and has got
entangled with her spectacles.

It is a two-penny trumpet, bought years ago in the village fair, and
over it she and Captain Johnson tell, as best they can, between them,
the story of Jackanapes' ride across the Goose Green; and how he won
Lollo--the Gipsy's Lollo--the racer Lollo--dear Lollo--faithful
Lollo--Lollo the never vanquished--Lollo the tender servant of his old
mistress. And Lollo's ears twitch at every mention of his name.

Their hearer does not speak, but he never moves his eyes from the
trumpet, and when the tale is told, he lifts Miss Jessamine's hand and
presses his heavy black moustache in silence to her trembling fingers.

The sun, setting gently to his rest, embroiders the sombre foliage of
the oak-tree with threads of gold. The Grey Goose is sensible of an
atmosphere of repose, and puts up one leg for the night. The grass
glows with a more vivid green, and, in answer to a ringing call from
Tony, his sisters, fluttering over the daisies in pale-hued muslins,
come out of their ever-open door, like pretty pigeons form a dovecote.

And, if the good gossips' eyes do not deceive them, all the Miss
Johnsons, and both the officers, go wandering off into the lanes,
where bryony wreaths still twine about the brambles.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sorrowful story, and ending badly?

Nay, Jackanapes, for the end is not yet.

A life wasted that might have been useful?

Men who have died for men, in all ages, forgive the thought!

There is a heritage of heroic example and noble obligation, not
reckoned in the Wealth of Nations, but essential to a nation's life;
the contempt of which, in any people, may, not slowly, mean even its
commercial fall. Very sweet are the uses of prosperity, the harvests
of peace and progress, the fostering sunshine of health and happiness,
and length of days in the land.

But there be things--oh, sons of what has deserved the name of Great
Britain, forget it not!--"the good of" which and "the use of" which
are beyond all calculation of worldly goods and earthly uses; things
such as Love, and Honor, and the Soul of Man, which cannot be bought
with a price, and which do not die with death. And they who would fain
live happily EVER after, should not leave these things out of the
lessons of their lives.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jackanapes, by Juliana Horatio Ewing

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACKANAPES ***

***** This file should be named 20351-8.txt or 20351-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/3/5/20351/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland and Sankar Viswanathan

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
