The Project Gutenberg eBook, Toni, the Little Woodcarver, by Johanna
Spyri, Translated by Helen B. Dole


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Toni, the Little Woodcarver

Author: Johanna Spyri

Release Date: November 23, 2004  [eBook #14128]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TONI, THE LITTLE WOODCARVER***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Michael Ciesielski, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 14128-h.htm or 14128-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/1/2/14128/14128-h/14128-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/1/2/14128/14128-h.zip)





TONI, THE LITTLE WOOD-CARVER

by

JOHANNA SPYRI

Author of _Heidi_

Translated by Helen B. Dole

1920

New York
Thomas Y. Crowell Company
Publishers







[Illustration: Toni the Little Woodcarver.]




  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                                      |
  |                    JOHANNA SPYRI'S ALPINE STORIES                    |
  |                                                                      |
  |                                                                      |
  |  GRITLI'S CHILDREN. Complete Edition. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS.   |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  | HEIDI. Complete Edition. Translated by HELENE S. WHITE. 16 full-page |
  |                     illustrations in color. 8vo.                     |
  |                                                                      |
  | LITTLE ALPINE MUSICIAN. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in  |
  |                             color. 8vo.                              |
  |                                                                      |
  |   RICO AND WISELI. Complete Edition. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS.    |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  | UNCLE TITUS. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS. Illustrated in color. 8vo. |
  |                                                                      |
  |  VERONICA. Translated by LOUISE BROOKS. Illustrated in color. 8vo.   |
  |                                                                      |
  |  JO, THE LITTLE MACHINIST. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated  |
  |                            in color. 8vo.                            |
  |                                                                      |
  | LITTLE CURLY HEAD. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in color |
  |                                 8vo.                                 |
  |                                                                      |
  | LITTLE MISS GRASSHOPPER. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in |
  |                   color by CHARLES COPELAND. 8vo.                    |
  |                                                                      |
  |   MONI, THE GOAT BOY. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in    |
  |                   color by CHARLES COPELAND. 8vo.                    |
  |                                                                      |
  |   TRINI, THE LITTLE STRAWBERRY GIRL. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE.    |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  |      TONI, THE LITTLE WOOD CARVER. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE.      |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  | TISS, A LITTLE ALPINE WAIF. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated |
  |                            in color. 8vo.                            |
  |                                                                      |
  |  THE ROSE CHILD. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE. Illustrated in color.  |
  |                                 8vo.                                 |
  |                                                                      |
  |     WHAT SAMI SINGS WITH THE BIRDS. Translated by HELEN B. DOLE.     |
  |                      Illustrated in color. 8vo.                      |
  |                                                                      |
  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+




[Illustration: In front of him next to the wall, stood a glass case.]





CONTENTS


AT HOME IN THE LITTLE STONE HUT

A HARD SENTENCE

UP IN THE MOUNTAINS

IN THE SANITARIUM




CHAPTER FIRST

AT HOME IN THE LITTLE STONE HUT


High up in the Bernese Oberland, quite a distance above the
meadow-encircled hamlet of Kandergrund, stands a little lonely hut, under
the shadow of an old fir-tree. Not far away rushes down from the wooded
heights of rock the Wild brook, which in times of heavy rains, has carried
away so many rocks and bowlders that when the storms are ended a ragged
mass of stones is left, through which flows a swift, clear stream of
water. Therefore the little dwelling near by this brook is called the
stone hut.

Here lived the honest day-laborer Toni, who conducted himself well in
every farm-house, where he went to work, for he was quiet and
industrious, punctual at his tasks, and reliable in every way.

In his hut at home he had a young wife and a little boy, who was a joy to
both of them. Near the hut in the little shed was the goat, the milk of
which supplied food for the mother and child, while the father received
his board through the week on the farms where he worked from morning until
night. Only on Sunday was he at home with his wife and little Toni. The
wife Elsbeth, kept her little house in good order; it was narrow and tiny,
but it always looked so clean and cheerful that every one liked to come
into the sunny room, and the father, Toni, was never so happy as when he
was at home in the stone hut with his little boy on his knee.

For five years the family lived in harmony and undisturbed peace. Although
they had no abundance and little worldly goods, they were happy and
content. The husband earned enough, so they did not suffer want, and they
desired nothing beyond their simple manner of life, for they loved each
other and their greatest delight was little Toni.

The little boy grew strong and healthy and with his merry ways delighted
his father's heart, when he remained at home on Sundays, and sweetened all
his mother's work on week-days, when his father was away until late in the
evening.

Little Toni was now four years old and already knew how to be helpful in
all sorts of small ways, in the house and the goat's shed and also in the
field behind the hut. From morning until night he tripped happily behind
his mother for he was as content as the little birds up in the old
fir-tree.

When Saturday night came the mother scrubbed and cleaned with doubled
energy, to finish early, for on that day the father was through his work
earlier than other days, and she always went with little Toni by the hand,
part way to meet him. This was a great delight to the child. He now knew
very well how one task followed another in the household. When his mother
began to scrub, he jumped around in the room, with delight and cried out
again and again: "Now we are going for Father! Now we are going for
Father!" until the moment came when his mother took him by the hand and
started along.

Saturday evening had come again in the lovely month of May. Outdoors the
birds in the trees were singing merrily up to the blue sky; indoors the
mother was cleaning busily, in order to get out early into the golden
evening, and meanwhile now outside, now in the house, little Toni was
hopping around and shouting:

"Now we are going for Father!"

It was not long before the work was finished. The mother put on her shawl,
tied on her best apron and stepped out of the house.

Toni jumped for joy and ran three times around his mother, then seized her
hand and shouted once more:

"Now we are going for Father!"

Then he tripped along beside his mother in the lovely, sunny evening.
They wandered to the Wild brook, over the wooden bridge, which crosses it,
and came to the narrow foot-path, winding up through the flower-laden
meadows to the farm where the father worked.

The last rays of the setting sun fell across the meadows and the sound of
the evening bells came up from Kandergrund.

The mother stood still and folded her hands.

"Lay your hands together Toneli," she said, "it is the Angelus."

The child obeyed.

"What must I pray, Mother?" he asked.

"Give us and all tired people a blessed Sunday! Amen!" said the mother
devoutly.

Toneli repeated the prayer. Suddenly he screamed: "Father is coming!"

Down from the farm some one was running as fast as he could come.

"That is not Father," said his mother, and both went towards the running
man. When they met, the man stood still and said, gasping:

"Don't go any farther, turn around, Elsbeth. I came straight to you, for
something has happened."

"Oh, my God!" cried the woman in the greatest anguish, "has something
happened to Toni?"

"Yes, he was with the wood-cutters, and then he was struck. They have
brought him back; he is lying up at the farm-but don't go up there," he
added, holding Elsbeth fast, for she wanted to start off as soon as she
heard the news.

"Not go up?" she said quickly. "I must go to him; I must help him and see
about bringing him home."

"You cannot help him, he is--he is already dead," said the messenger in an
unsteady voice. Then he turned and ran back again, glad to have the
message off his mind.

Elsbeth threw herself down on a stone by the way, unable to stand or to
walk. She held her apron before her face and burst into weeping and
sobbing, so that Toneli was distressed and frightened. He pressed close
to his mother and began to cry too.

It was already dark, when Elsbeth finally came to herself and could think
of her child. The little one was still sitting beside her on the ground,
with both hands pressed to his eyes, and sobbing pitifully. His mother
lifted him up.

"Come, Toneli, we must go home; it is late," she said, taking him by the
hand.

But he resisted.

"No, no, we must wait for Father!" he said and pulled his mother back.

Again she could not keep back the tears. "Oh, Toneli, Father will come no
more," she said, stifling her sobs; "he is already enjoying the blessed
Sunday, we prayed for, for the weary. See, the dear Lord has taken him to
Heaven; it is so beautiful there, he will prefer to stay there."

"Then we will go too," replied Toneli, starting

"Yes, yes, we shall go there too," promised his mother, "but now we must
first go home to the stone hut," and without a word she went with the
little one back to the silent cottage.

The proprietor of the Matten farm sent word to Elsbeth the following day
that he would do everything necessary for her husband, and so she need not
come until it was time for the service, for she would not recognize her
husband. He sent her some money in order that she would not have too much
care in the next few days, and promised to think of her later on.

Elsbeth did as he advised and remained at home until the bells in
Kandergrund rang for the service. Then she went to accompany her husband
to his resting place.

Sad and hard days came for Elsbeth. She missed her good, kind husband
everywhere, and felt quite lost without him. Besides, cares came now which
she had known little about before, for her husband had had his good, daily
work. But now she felt sometimes as if she would almost despair. She had
nothing but her goat and the little potato field behind the cottage, and
from these she had to feed and clothe herself and the little one, and
besides furnish rent for the little house.

Elsbeth had only one consolation, but one that always supported her when
pain and care oppressed her; she could pray, and although often in the
midst of tears, still always with the firm belief that the dear Lord would
hear her supplication.

When at night she had put little Toni in his tiny bed she would kneel down
beside him and repeat aloud the old hymn, which now came from the depths
of her heart, as never before:

  Oh, God of Love, oh Father-heart,
    In whom my trust is founded,
  I know full well how good Thou art--
    E'en when by grief I am wounded.

  Oh Lord, it surely can not be
    That Thou wilt let me languish
  In hopeless depths of misery,
    And live in tears of anguish.

  Oh Lord, my soul yearns for thine aid
    In this dark vale of weeping;
  For thee I've waited, hoped and prayed
    Assured of thy safe keeping.

  Lord let me bear whate'er thy Love
    May send of grief or sorrow,
  Until Thou, in thy Heaven above
    Make dawn a brighter morrow.


And in the midst of her urgent praying, the mother's tears flowed
abundantly, and little Toni, deeply moved in his heart by his mother's
weeping and earnest prayer, kept his hands folded and wept softly too.

So the time passed. Elsbeth struggled along and little Toni was able to
help her in many ways, for he was now seven years old. He was his mother's
only joy, and she was able to take delight in him for he was obedient and
willing to do everything she desired. He had always been so inseparable
from his mother that he knew exactly how the tasks of the day had to be
done, and he desired nothing but to help her whenever he could. If she
was working in the little field, he squatted beside her, pulled out the
weeds, and threw the stones across the path.

If his mother was taking the goat out of the shed so that she could nibble
the grass around the hut, he went with her step by step, for his mother
had told him he must watch her so that she would not run away.

If his mother was sitting in winter by her spinning-wheel, he sat the
whole time beside her, mending his winter shoes with strong strips of
cloth, as she had taught him to do. He had no greater wish than to see his
mother happy and contented. His greatest pleasure was, when Sunday came
and she was resting from all work, to sit with her on the little wooden
bench in front of the house and listen as she told him about his father
and talk with her about all kinds of things.

But now the time had come for Toni to go to school. It was very hard for
him to leave his mother and remain away from her so much. The long way
down to Kandergrund and up again took so much time, that Toni was hardly
ever with his mother any more through the day, but only in the evening.
Indeed he always came home so quickly that she could hardly believe it
possible, for he looked forward with pleasure all day long to getting home
again. He lost no time with his school-mates but ran immediately away from
them as soon as school was over. He was not accustomed to the ways of the
other boys since he had been constantly alone with his quietly working
mother and used to performing definite tasks continually without any
noise.

So it was altogether strange to him and he took no pleasure in it, when
the boys coming out of the school-house, set up a great screaming, one
running after another, trying to see which was the stronger, and throwing
one another on the ground, or wrestling so that their caps were thrown far
away and their jackets half torn off.

The wrestlers would often call to him:

"Come and play!" and when he ran away from them they would call after
him: "You are a coward." But this made little difference to him; he didn't
hear it long, for he ran with all his might in order to be at home again
with his mother.

Now a new interest for him arose in the school: he had seen beautiful
animals drawn on white sheets, which the children of the upper classes
copied. He quickly tried to draw them, too, with his pencil and at home
continued drawing the animals again and again as long as he had a bit of
paper. Then he cut out the animals and tried to make them stand on the
table, but this he could not do. Then suddenly the thought came to him
that if they were of wood they could stand. He began quickly with his
knife to cut around on a little piece of wood until there was a body and
four legs; but the wood was not large enough for the neck and the head; so
he had to take another piece and calculate from the beginning how high it
must be and where the head must be placed. So Toni cut away with much
perseverance until he succeeded in making something like a goat and could
show it with great satisfaction to his mother. She was much delighted at
his skill and said:

"You are surely going to be a wood-carver, and a very good one."

From that time on Toni looked at every little piece of wood which came in
his way, to see if it would be good for carving, and if so he would
quickly put it away, so that he often brought home all his pockets full of
these pieces, which he then collected like treasures into a pile and spent
every free moment carving them.

Thus the years passed by. Although Elsbeth always had many cares, she
experienced only joy in her Toni. He still clung to her with the same
love, helped her in every way as well as he could and spent his life
beside her, entirely at his quiet occupation, in which he gradually
acquired a quite gratifying skill. Toni was never so content as when he
was sitting in the little stone hut with his carving and his mother came
in and out happily employed, always saying a kindly word to him and
finally sat down beside him at her spinning-wheel.




CHAPTER SECOND

A HARD SENTENCE


Toni was twelve years old in the winter, and now his school days were
over, and the time had come to look about for some kind of work which
would bring him in some money and by which he could learn something
necessary for future years.

Spring had come and work had begun in the fields. His mother thought it
would be best to ask the proprietor of the Matten farm, if he had some
light work for Toni; but every time she spoke about it he would say
beseechingly:

"Oh, Mother, don't do that; let me be a wood-carver!"

She would have had no objection to this, but knew no way to bring it
about, and she had known the farmer up on the Matten farm ever since her
husband had worked there, and ever since his death, from time to time he
had sent her a little wood or meal.

She hoped that he would employ Toni at first for light tasks in the field,
so that he would gradually learn to do the heavier work.

So on Saturday night after the day's work was ended and she sat down with
Toni to their scanty supper, she said once more:

"Toni, now we must take a decided step; I think it is best for me to go up
to the Matten farm to-morrow."

"Oh, Mother, don't do that!" said Toni quite beseechingly. "Don't go to
the farmer! If you will only let me be a wood-carver, I will work so hard,
that I will earn enough, and you will not have to do so much, and then I
can stay at home with you. Besides you would be all alone, and I can't
bear it, if I have to be always away from you. Let me stay with you; don't
send me away, Mother."

"Oh, you good Toni," said his mother, "what wouldn't I give to be able to
keep you always with me! But that really cannot be. I know of no way for
you to be a wood-carver; some one would have to teach you, and when you
had learned, how should we sell the carvings? You would have to know
people and go about, or else your work wouldn't bring any money. If only I
could talk with some one, who could give me good advice!"

"Don't you know any one, Mother, you can ask?" said Toni anxiously and
racked his brain to try to think of some one. His mother too began to
consider.

"I think I will go to the pastor, who has already given me advice," said
his mother, delighted to have found a way out of the difficulty.

Toni was quite happy and now was determined that early the next morning
they should go down to the church and then his mother could go in to see
the pastor and Toni would wait outside.

Everything was carried out on Sunday morning as they had planned. His
mother had put two of the little carved animals in her pocket to show the
pastor as examples of her boy's good ability. The pastor received her very
cordially, had her sit down beside him and enquired with interest about
her affairs, for he knew Elsbeth and how bravely she had helped herself
through all the hard times.

She told him now the whole story, how Toni from a very early age had
worked at the carving with so much interest and now wished for nothing so
much as to carry on this work, but how she knew of no way for him to
learn, nor how, later, the work could be sold. Finally she showed him the
two little animals as examples of Toni's skill.

The pastor replied to the mother that the plan would be very difficult to
carry out. Although the two little goats were not badly carved, yet in
order to perform the work right and to earn his bread by it, Toni would
have first to learn from a good carver, because making only little animals
or boxes would not amount to anything or bring in any money, and he would
only be wasting his time.

However, down in the village of Frutigen there was a very skillful,
well-known wood-carver, who made wonderful large works which went far into
the world, even to America. He carved whole groups of animals on high
rocks, chamois and eagles and whole mountains with the herdsman and the
cows. Elsbeth could talk with this carver. If Toni studied with him he
could help him to sell the finished work, for he had ways open for it.

Elsbeth left the pastor with gratitude and new hope in her heart. In front
of the house Toni was waiting in great suspense. She had to tell him at
once everything the pastor had said, and when she finally related about
the wood-carver in Frutigen Toni suddenly stood still and said:

"Then come, Mother, let us go to the place at once."

However, his mother had not thought it over--she made many objections, but
Toni begged so earnestly, that she finally said:

"We must go home first and have something to eat, for it is very far
away; but we can do that quickly and then start off again right away."

So they hurried back to the house, took a little bread and milk and
started on their way again. They had several hours to travel, but Toni was
so busy with his plans and thoughts for the future, the time flew like a
dream and he looked up in great surprise, when his mother said:

"See, there is the church tower of Frutigen!"

They were soon standing in front of the wood-carver's house, and learned
from the children before the door, that their father was at home.

Inside in the large, wainscotted room, sat the wood-carver with his wife
at the table, looking at a large book of beautiful colored pictures of
animals which he would be able to make good use of in his handicraft. When
the two arrived he welcomed them and invited them to come and be seated on
the wooden bench, where he and his wife were sitting and which ran along
the wall around the entire room. Elsbeth accepted the invitation and
immediately began to tell the wood-carver why she had come and what she
so much desired of him.

Meanwhile Toni stood as if rooted to the floor and stared motionless at a
single spot. In front of him next the wall was a glass case, in which
could be seen two high rocks, carved out of wood. On one was standing a
chamois with her little ones. They had such dainty, slender legs, and
their fine heads sat so naturally on their necks that it seemed as if they
were all alive and not at all made of wood. On the other rock stood a
hunter, his gun hanging by his side, and his hat, with even a feather in
it, sat on his head, all so finely carved, that one would think it must be
a real hat and a real little feather, and yet all was of wood.

Next the hunter stood his dog, and it seemed as if he would even wag his
tail. Toni was like one enchanted and hardly breathed.

When his mother finished speaking, the wood-carver said it seemed to him
as if she thought the affair would half go of itself, but it was not so.

If a thing was to be done right, it cost much time and patience to learn.
He was not averse to taking the boy, for it seemed to him that he had a
desire to learn; but she would have to pay for his board for a couple of
months in Frutigen, besides paying for his instruction, which would be as
much as his board, and she herself must know whether she could spend so
much on the boy. On the other hand he would promise that the boy would be
taught right, and she could see there in the glass case, what he could
learn to do.

At first Elsbeth was so disappointed and dismayed she was unable to speak
a word. Now she knew that it would be absolutely impossible for her to
fulfill her boy's greatest wish. The necessary expense of board and
instruction was beyond anything that she could manage, so much so that it
was quite out of the question. It was all over with Toni's plans.

She rose and thanked the wood-carver for his willingness to take the boy,
but she would have to decline his offer. Then she beckoned to Toni, whose
eyes were still so fastened to the glass case that he paid no attention.
She took him by the hand and led him quietly out of the door.

Outside Toni said, drawing a deep breath:

"Did you see what was in the case? Mother, did you see it?"

"Yes, yes, I saw it, Toni," replied his mother with a sigh, "but did you
hear what the wood-carver said?"

Toni had heard nothing; all his mind had been directed to one point.

"No, I didn't hear anything; when can I go?" he asked longingly.

"Oh, it is not possible, Toni, but don't take it so to heart! See, I can't
do it, although I would like to so much," declared his mother; "but
everything would come to more than I earn in a year, and you know how hard
I have to work to manage to make the two ends meet."

It was a hard blow for Toni. All his hopes for many years lay destroyed
before him; but he knew how his mother worked, how little good she
herself had, and how she always tried to give him a little pleasure when
she could. He said not a word and silently swallowed his rising tears, but
he was very much grieved that all his hopes were over, since for the first
time he had seen what wonderful things could be made out of a piece of
wood.




CHAPTER THIRD

UP IN THE MOUNTAINS


The next morning, the farmer on the Matten farm sent word to Elsbeth, to
come up to see him towards evening, as he had something to talk with her
about. At the right time she laid aside her hoe, tied on a clean apron,
and said:

"Finish the hoeing, Toni; then you can milk the goat and give her some
fresh straw, so she will have a better bed. Then I will be back again."

She went up to the Matten farm. The farmer was standing in the open
barn-door gazing with satisfaction at his beautiful cows, wandering in a
long procession to the well. Elsbeth stepped up to him.

"Well, I am glad you have come," he said, holding out his hand to her. "I
have been thinking about you on account of the boy's welfare. He is now at
an age to do some light work and help you a little, at least to take care
of himself."

"I have already been thinking about that," replied Elsbeth, "and wanted to
ask you, if you could give him a little light work in the fields?"

"That is fortunate," continued the farmer. "I have a little job for him,
healthy and not very hard, that is to say not hard at all. He can go up to
the small mountain with the cows. The herdsman with his boys is on the big
mountain and a man is also there to come every morning and evening for the
milking, so the boy will not be entirely alone and will have nothing to do
but watch the cows so that none wander off, that they don't hook each
other or do anything out of the way. While he sits there on the mountain
he is master and can have all the milk he wants. A king couldn't have
anything better."

Elsbeth was a little frightened by the offer. If Toni had been more with
the farm men, and had been with cows, or if he had naturally a different
disposition, wilder and more roving and commanding-but as he was so quiet
and shy, and besides without any knowledge of such things, to be for the
first time all alone for several months, away from home, up on the
mountains, watching a herd of cows, this seemed to her too hard for Toni.
What would the poor boy, who was not particularly strong, do if anything
happened to him or to the herd? She expressed all her thoughts to the
farmer, but it made no difference; he thought it would be good for the boy
to get out for once, and up on the mountain he would be much stronger than
at home, and nothing could happen to him, for he would be given a horn and
if anything went wrong he could blow lustily, and immediately the farm man
would come from the other mountain; in a half hour he would be there.

Elsbeth finally thought the farmer understood it much better than she, and
so it was decided that the next week, when the cows went up to the
mountain pasture, Toni should go with them.

"He shall have a good bit of money and a new suit of clothes when he comes
down. That will be a help for the winter," said the farmer finally.

Elsbeth thanked him as she said good-by, and turned homeward.

Toni was at first opposed to this, when he heard that he would be away so
long without being able to come home a single time; but his mother
explained to him how easy the work would be, that he would grow stronger
up there, so as to be able to do better things later on, and that the
Matten farmer would give him a new suit and a good bit of money as pay. So
Toni objected no longer, but said he would be glad to do something and not
let his mother work alone.

Then it occurred to Elsbeth that, if Toni was going to be away the whole
summer she could perhaps go to one of the big hotels in Interlaken where
so many strangers go for the summer. There she could earn a good sum of
money and meet the coming winter without anxiety. She was already known in
Interlaken for she had served as chambermaid in one of the hotels for
several summers before her marriage.

When the day came for the big herd of cows to be taken up to the mountain
pasture, Toni's mother gave him his little bundle and said:

"Go now, in God's name! Don't forget to pray, when the day begins, and
when it ends, and the dear Lord will not forget you, and His protection is
better than that of men."

So Toni started off with his little bundle behind the herd up the
mountain.

Immediately after this Elsbeth closed her cottage. She took the goat up to
the Matten farm. When the farmer heard that she was going to Interlaken,
he promised her to take the goat, and thought when Elsbeth came home
again, she would give twice as much milk, and what he made from her, he
would give back to Elsbeth in cheese. Then she started down to Interlaken.

The herd had already been climbing the mountain for several hours. The
herdsman turned off to the left with the big herd, and the man went with
Toni up towards the right, followed by the smaller herd, which consisted
of fewer cows but many young cattle, for not many cows could be kept on
the small mountain pasture, because the milk had to be carried across to
the big one where the herdsman's hut stood.

They now reached the highest point of the pasture. There stood a little
hut. All around there was nothing but pasture, not a tree, not a bush. In
the hut on one side was a narrow seat fastened to the wall in front of
which stood a table. On the other side stood a bed of hay. In the corner
was a little, round stool and on this a wooden jug.

Toni and the man stepped inside. The latter placed on the floor the big
wooden milk-pail, which he had brought up on his back, took out of it a
round loaf of bread and a huge piece of cheese, laid both on the table and
said: "Of course you have a knife," to which Tony assented.

Then the man took the wooden jug, swung the milk-pail on his back and went
out. Toni followed him. The man lifted a wooden basin out of the big pail,
seated himself on the little round stool which he had brought out of the
hut and began to milk one cow after another. If one was too far away, he
would call out: "Drive her here!" and Toni obeyed. When the basin was full
he poured it into the big pail and silently went on until all the cows had
been milked. At the last the man filled the jug with milk, handed it to
Toni, took the pail on his back, the basin in his hand and saying "Good
night!" went down the mountain.

Then Toni was all alone. He put his jug of milk in the hut and came out
again. He looked around on every side. He looked over to the big mountain,
but between that and his pasture was a wide valley so one had to descend
in order to climb up to the big one. But all around both pastures great
dark masses of mountains looked down, some rocky, gray and jagged, others
covered with snow, all reaching up to the sky, so high and mighty and with
such different peaks and horns and some with such broad backs, that it
almost seemed to Toni as if they were enormous giants, each one having his
own face and looking down at him. It was a clear evening. The mountain
opposite was shining in the golden evening light, and now a little star
came into sight above the dark mountains, and looked down to Toni in such
a friendly way that it cheered him very much.

He thought of his mother, where she was now and how she was in the habit
of standing with him at this time in front of the little cottage and
talking so pleasantly. Then suddenly there came over him such a feeling of
loneliness that he ran into the hut, threw himself down on the cot, buried
his face in the hay and sobbed softly, until the weariness of the day
overcame him and he fell asleep.

The bright morning lured him out early. The man was already outside. He
milked the cows, spoke not a word and went away.

Now a long, long day followed. It was perfectly still all around. The cows
grazed and lay down around in the sun-bathed pasture. Tom went into the
hut two or three times, drank some milk and ate some bread and cheese.
Then he came out again, sat down on the ground and carved on a piece of
wood he had in his pocket, for although he no longer dared to cherish the
hope of becoming a wood-carver, yet he could not help carving for himself
as well as he could. At last it was evening again. The man came and went.
He said not a word, and Toni had nothing to say either.

Thus passed one day after another. They were all so long! so long! In the
evening, when it began to grow dark it always seemed terrible to Toni, for
then the high mountains looked so black and threatening, as if they would
suddenly do him some harm. Then he would rush back into the hut and crawl
into his bed of hay.

Many days had passed like this, one exactly the same as the other. The
sun had always shone in a cloudless sky; always at evening the friendly
little star had gleamed above the dark mountain. But one afternoon, thick,
gray clouds began to chase one another across the sky; now and then
blinding lightning flashed, and suddenly frightful thunder-bolts sounded,
which echoed roaring from the mountains, as if there were twice as many
and then a terrible storm broke. It was as dark as night; the rain beat
against the hut, and meanwhile the thunder rolled with fearful
reverberations through the mountains; quivering lightning lighted up the
black, frightful giant-forms, which seemed quite specter-like to come
nearer and look down menacingly. The cattle ran together in alarm and
bellowed loudly, and great birds of prey flapped around with piercing
shrieks.

Toni had long since fled into the hut, but the lightning showed him the
frightful forms and it seemed every minute as if the rolling thunder
would overthrow the hut to the ground. Toni was so alarmed he could
hardly breathe. He climbed up on the table expecting every minute that the
hut would fall and crush him. The storm lasted for hours, and the man
never came over. It was now really night but still the blinding lightning
flashed and new peals of thunder rolled and the storm howled and raged as
if it would sweep the hut away.

Toni stood half the night stiff with fright, clinging to the table, and
with no thought, only a feeling of a frightful power, which was crushing
everything. How he reached his bed he did not know, but in the morning he
lay stretched across the hay, so exhausted he could hardly rise. He looked
anxiously out of the window. How must it look outside after such a night?
Then he went out to see about the cows. The ground was still wet, but the
animals were peacefully grazing.

The sky was gray, and thick, black clouds were passing over it. Gloomy and
frightful the high mountains stood there. They had come so near and
looked more threateningly than ever at Toni. He ran back into the hut.

Many days of thunder storms followed, one after another and if the sun
came out between, it burned unbearably, and new storms followed so
unceasingly and violent, that the herdsman, on the other mountain often
said that he had not known such a summer for years, and if it didn't
change he wouldn't make half so much butter as in former summers, because
the cows gave no milk, as they didn't like the fodder.

During this time the man-servant chose the most favorable time to come
over to the small pasture, milked the cows as quickly as possible and did
not look after the boy at all; only now and then, when he thought Toni had
no more milk, he would bring the jug out quickly, fill it and put it back
again. Then he often saw Toni sitting on his bed of hay, and would call
out in passing:

"You are lazy!"

But then he ran right away in order to get back without being wet, and
did not trouble himself further about the boy.

So June had passed, and already a good part of July. The thunder storms
had become less frequent, but thick fog often so enveloped the mountain
that one could hardly see two steps away, and only here and there a black
head appeared, looking gloomily through the mist. The cattle often
wandered so far that the man found some of them between the two mountains
and brought them up again. This would not do. He called up to the boy, but
received no answer. He ran to the hut and went in. Toni crouched in the
corner was sitting on his bed and staring straight before him.

"Why don't you look after the cows?" asked the man.

He received no answer.

"Can't you speak? What is the matter with you?"

No answer.

Then the man looked at the bread and cheese, to see if Toni had eaten
everything and was suffering from hunger. But more than half the bread was
there and the larger part of the cheese. Toni had taken almost nothing but
milk.

"What is the matter with you, then? Are you sick?" asked the man again.

Toni gave no answer. He seemed not to hear anything and stared so
motionless before him that the man was quite alarmed. He ran out of the
hut. He told the herdsman how it was with the boy and they decided that
when one of the herdsman's boys went down with the butter, he must tell
the Matten farmer about it.

Another week passed. Then the news was brought to the farmer. He thought
the boy would be happy again, that the heavy thunderstorms had only
frightened him a little. But he sent word for the herdsman to go over; he
had boys of his own and would understand better about this than the hired
man. If anything was wrong with Toni he must be brought down.

Some days later the herdsman really went over with one of his boys and
found Toni still crouched in the corner just as the man had seen him. Toni
made no sound to anything the herdsman said to him, did not move and kept
staring always before him.

"He must go down," said the herdsman to his boy, "go with him right away,
but take care that nothing happens to him and be good to him; the boy is
to be pitied," and he looked at Toni with sympathy, for the herdsman had a
good heart and took delight in his own three big, healthy boys. The one he
had with him was a strong, sturdy fellow of sixteen years. He went up to
Toni and told him to stand up, but Toni did not move. Then the lad took
him under the arms, lifted him up, like a feather, then swung him on his
back, held him firmly with both hands, and went with his light burden down
the mountain.

When the Matten farmer saw Toni in such a sad condition, which remained
just the same, he was alarmed, for he had not expected such a thing. He
did not know at all what to do with the boy. His mother was far away, no
relatives were there, and he himself did not want to keep Toni while in
this condition. He could take such a responsibility, but he did not want
to do so. Suddenly a good thought came to him, the same as the people
there in every difficulty, in every need and every trouble, always have
first of all:

"Take him to the Pastor," he said to the herdsman's boy, "he will have
some good advice to give, which will help."

The lad immediately started off and went to the Pastor, who allowed the
boy to tell him as much as he knew about the details of the case, how Toni
came to be in this condition and how long it had lasted; but the lad knew
very little about it all. The Pastor first tried every means to make Toni
speak, and asked him if he would like to go to his mother, but it was all
in vain, Toni did not give the least sign of understanding or interest.

Then the pastor sat down, wrote a letter and said to the herdsman's boy:

"Go back to the Matten farm and tell the farmer to harness his little
carriage and send it to me, and then I will see that Toni goes to-day to
Bern. He is very sick; say that to the farmer."

The farmer harnessed immediately, glad that further responsibility was
taken from him and he had only to carry Toni as far as the railway. But
the Pastor sent down to his sexton, an older, kindly man, who had given
him a helping hand for years in many matters of responsibility. He was
commissioned to take Toni with all care to the great sanitarium in Bern
and to give the letter to the doctor there, a good friend of the Pastor's.
A half hour later, the open carriage with the high seat drove up in front
of the Pastor's house. The sexton climbed up, placed the sick boy beside
him, held him carefully but firmly and thus Toni drove out into the world,
with a horse, for the first time in his life. But he sat there with no
sign of interest. It was as if he were no longer conscious of the outer
world.




CHAPTER FOURTH

IN THE SANITARIUM


The doctor of the sanitarium was sitting with his family around the family
table, engaged in merry conversation on various subjects. Even the lady
from Geneva, who spent several hours a day with the family, seemed to-day
a little infected by the children's gayety. She had never before taken so
lively a part in the discussion, which the school-children carried on
about different interests.

This lady's beloved and gifted son had died not long before; on this
account she had fallen into such deep sadness that her health had suffered
greatly and therefore she had been brought to the sanitarium to recover.

The animated conversation was suddenly interrupted by a letter which was
handed to the doctor.

"A letter from an old friend, who is sending me a patient to the
sanitarium. He is a young boy, hardly as old as our Max--there, read it."
Whereupon the doctor handed the letter to his wife.

"Oh, the poor boy!" exclaimed his wife. "Is he here? Bring him in. Perhaps
it will do him good to see the children."

"I think he is quite near," said the doctor; he went out, and soon came in
again with the sexton and Toni. He led the former into a bay window and
began talking with him in a low tone. Meanwhile the doctor's wife drew
near to Toni, who on entering had pressed into the nearest corner. She
spoke kindly to him and invited him to come to the table and eat something
with her children. Toni did not move. Then lively little Marie jumped down
from her chair and came to Toni with a large piece of bread and butter.

"There, take a bite," she said encouragingly.

Toni remained motionless.

"See, you must do so," and the little girl bit a good piece from the bread
and held it to him, then again a little nearer, so he only needed to bite
into it. But he stared in front of him and made no motion. This silent
resistance frightened Marie and she drew back quietly.

Then the doctor came, took Toni by the hand and went out followed by the
sexton.

Poor Toni's appearance had made a great impression on the children. They
had become perfectly quiet.

Later when they had gone to bed and the two women were sitting alone
together, the doctor came back again. In reply to their urgent questions
he informed them about all that the sexton had told him concerning Toni's
illness and his life with his mother, and that no one had ever noticed
anything wrong with the boy before, only he had always been a quiet,
gentle child and more slenderly built than any of the other village
children.

The women asked how he had come into this condition in the summer up on
the beautiful mountain, and the doctor explained that it was not so
strange, if one knew how terrible the thunder storms were up in the
mountains. "Besides," he concluded, "a delicate child, such as this boy,
all alone without a human being near, for whole weeks, even months long,
without hearing a word spoken, might well be so terrified through fear and
horror in the awful loneliness that he would become wholly benumbed."

Then the lady from Geneva, who took an unusual interest in poor Toni's
fate, exclaimed in great excitement:

"How can a mother allow such a thing to happen to her child! It is wholly
inconceivable, quite incomprehensible!"

"You really can have no idea," replied the doctor soothingly, "what poor
mothers are obliged to let happen to their children. But don't believe
that it causes them less pain than others. You see how many suffer that we
know nothing about, and how hard poverty oppresses."

"Will you be able to help the poor young boy?" asked the lady from Geneva.

"If I can only bring out the right emotion in him," he replied, "so that
the spell, which holds him imprisoned, can be broken. Now everything in
him is numbed and lifeless."

"Oh, do help him! Do help him!" begged the sick lady imploringly. "Oh, if
I could do something for him!" And she walked to and fro thinking about a
way to help, for Toni's condition went deeply to her heart.

It was the second week of August, when Toni came to the sanitarium. Day
after day, week after week passed and the doctor could only bring the same
sad news to the two women, who every morning awaited his report with great
anxiety. Not the slightest change was noticed. Every means was tried to
amuse the boy, to see if he would perhaps laugh. Other attempts were
devised to disturb him, to make him cry. They performed all kinds of
tricks to attract his attention. All, all were in vain; no trace of
interest or emotion was aroused in Toni.

"If he could only be made to laugh or to cry once!" repeated the doctor
over and over again.

When he had been four weeks in the sanitarium all hope disappeared, for
the doctor had exhausted every means.

"Now I will try one thing more," he said one morning to his wife. "I have
written to my friend, the Pastor, and asked him if the boy was very much
attached to his mother, and if so, to send for her right away. Perhaps to
see her again would make an impression on him."

The two women looked forward in great suspense to Elsbeth's arrival.

In the first week of September the last guests left the hotel in
Interlaken where Elsbeth had spent the summer. She immediately started on
her way home, for she wanted to get everything in order before Toni came
down from the mountain. She never thought but that he was still up there,
and had no suspicion of all that had happened. When she reached home, she
went at once to the Matten farm to enquire for Toni and to bring the goat
home.

The farmer was very friendly, and thought her goat was now by far one of
the finest, because she had had good fodder so long. But when Elsbeth
asked after her Toni, he broke off abruptly and said he had so much to do,
she must go to the Pastor, for he would have the best knowledge about the
boy. It immediately seemed to Elsbeth that it was a little strange for the
Pastor to know best what happened up on the mountain and while she was
leading home the goat, and thinking about the matter, a feeling of anxiety
came over her and grew stronger and stronger. As soon as she reached home,
she quickly tied the goat, without going into the cottage at all, and ran
back the same way she had come, down again to Kandergrund.

The Pastor told her with great consideration, how Toni had not borne the
life on the mountain very well and they had been obliged to bring him
down, and since it seemed best for him that he should go at once to a good
physician for the right care, he had sent the boy immediately to Bern.

His mother was very much shocked and wanted to travel the next day to see
for herself if her child was very ill.

But the Pastor said that would not do, but that she should wait until the
doctor allowed a visit, and she could be sure that Toni was receiving the
best care.

With a heavy heart Elsbeth went back to her cottage. She could do nothing
but leave it all to the dear Lord, who alone had been her trust for so
many years. But it was only a few days later when the Pastor sent her word
that she was to go to Bern at once, as the doctor wished her to come.

Early the following day Elsbeth started. About noon she reached Bern and
soon was standing in front of the door of the sanitarium.

She was led to the doctor's living-room and here received with great
friendliness by his wife and with still keener sympathy by the lady from
Geneva, who had so lived in the history of poor Toni and his mother that
she could hardly think of anything else but how to help these two. She had
had only the one child and could so well understand the mother's trouble.
She had even asked the doctor to allow her to be present when he took the
boy to his mother, in order to share in the joy, if the poor boy's delight
at seeing her again would affect him as they hoped.

Soon the doctor appeared, and after he had prepared the mother not to
expect Toni to speak at the first moment, he brought him in. He led him by
the hand into the room, then he let go and stepped to one side.

The mother ran to her Toni and tried to seize his hand. He drew back and
pressed into the corner staring into vacancy.

The women and the doctor exchanged sad looks.

His mother went up to him and caressed him. "Toneli, Toneli," she said
again and again in a tender voice, "don't you know me? Don't you know your
mother any more?"

As always before Toni pressed against the wall, made no motion and stared
before him.

In tender tones the mother continued mournfully:

"Oh, Toneli, say just a single word! Only look at me once! Toneli, don't
you hear me?"

Toneli remained unmoved.

Still once again the mother looked at him full of tenderness, but only met
his staring eyes. It was too much for poor Elsbeth, that the only
possession she had on earth, and the one she loved with all her heart, her
Toni, should be lost to her, and in such a sad way! She forgot everything
around her. She fell on her knees beside her child, and while the tears
were bursting from her eyes, she poured out aloud the sorrow in her heart:

  Oh God of Love, oh Father-heart,
    In whom my trust is founded,
  I know full well how good Thou art--
    E'en when by grief I am wounded.

  Oh Lord, it surely can not be
    That Thou wilt let me languish
  In hopeless depths of misery
    And live in tears of anguish.


Toni's eyes took on a different expression. He looked at his mother. She
did not see him and went on imploring in the midst of her tears:

  Oh Lord, my soul yearns for thine aid
    In this dark vale of weeping;
  For Thee I have waited, hoped and prayed,
    Assured of thy safe keeping.


Suddenly Toni threw himself on his mother and sobbed aloud. She threw her
arms around him and her tears of sorrow turned to loud sobs of joy. The
child sobbed aloud also.

"It is won," said the doctor in great delight to the women, who, deeply
moved, were looking on at the mother and boy.

Then the doctor opened the door of the next room and beckoned Elsbeth to
go in there with Toni. He thought it would be good for both to be alone
for a while. In there after a while Toni began to talk quite naturally
with his mother and asked her:

"Are we going home, Mother, to the stone hut? Shan't I have to go up on
the mountain any more?"

And she quieted him and said she would now take him right home, and they
would stay there together. Soon all Toni's thoughts came back again quite
clearly, and after a while he said:

"But I must earn something, Mother."

"Don't trouble about that now," said Elsbeth quietly; "the dear Lord will
show a way when it is time."

Then they began to talk about the goat, how pretty and fat she had grown,
and Toni gradually became quite lively.

After an hour the doctor brought them both into the living-room back to
the ladies. Toni was entirely changed, his eyes had now an earnest but
quite different expression. The lady from Geneva was indescribably
delighted. She sat down beside him at once, and he had to tell her where
he had been to school and what he had liked to study.

But the doctor beckoned to Elsbeth to come to him.

"Listen, my good woman," he began, "the words which you repeated made a
deep, penetrating impression on the boy's heart. Did he know the hymn
already?"

"Oh, my Lord," exclaimed Elsbeth, "many hundred times I have repeated it
beside his little bed, when he was very small, often with many tears, and
he would weep too, when he didn't know why."

"He wept because you wept, he suffered because you suffered," said the
doctor. "Now I understand how he was aroused by these words. With such
impressions in early childhood it is no wonder he became a quiet and
reserved boy. This explains to me much in the past."

Then the lady from Geneva came up for she wanted to talk with the mother.

"My dear, good woman, he certainly must not go up on the mountain again.
He is not fit for it," she said in great eagerness. "We must find
something different for him. Has he no taste for some other occupation?
But it must be light, for he is not strong and needs care."

"Oh, yes, he has a great desire to learn something," said his mother.
"From a little boy he has wished for it, but I hardly dare mention it."

"There, there, my good woman, tell me right away about it," said the lady
encouragingly, expecting something unheard-of.

"He wants so much to be a wood-carver, and has a good deal of talent for
it, but the cost of board and instruction together is more than eighty
francs."

"Is that all?" exclaimed the lady in the greatest surprise, "is that all?
Come, my boy," and she ran to Toni again, "would you really like to
become a wood-carver--better than anything else?"

The joy which shone in Toni's eyes, when he answered that he would, showed
the lady what she had to do. She had such a longing to help Toni, that she
wanted to act immediately that very hour.

"Would you like to learn at once, go to a teacher right away?" she asked
him.

Toni gladly replied that he would.

But now came a new thought. She turned to the doctor. "Perhaps he ought to
recover his health first?"

The doctor replied that he had been already thinking about that. The
mother had told him that she knew a very good master up in Frutigen. "Now
I think," he went on to say, "that carving is not a strenuous work, and
one of the most important things for Toni is to have for some time good,
nourishing food. In Frutigen there is a very good inn, if he only could--"

"I will undertake that, Doctor, I will undertake that," interrupted the
lady. "I will go with him. We will start to-morrow. In Frutigen I will
provide for Toni's board and lodging and for everything he needs." In her
great delight the lady shook hands with both the mother and the boy
repeatedly, and went out to instruct her maid about preparations for the
journey.

When the mother with her boy had been taken to their room, the doctor said
with great delight to his wife:

"We have two recoveries. Our lady is also cured. A new interest has come
to her, and you will see she will have new life in providing for this
young boy. This has been a beautiful day!"

On the following morning the journey was made to Frutigen, and the little
company were so glad and happy together that they reached there before
they were aware of it.

At the wood-carver's the lady was told everything that would be needed for
the work, and after he had showed them all kinds of instruments, he
thought a fine book with good pictures, from which one could work, would
be useful.

After the lady had charged him to teach Toni everything in any way
necessary for the future, they went to the inn. Here the lady engaged a
good room with comfortable bed, and herself arranged with the host a bill
of fare for every day in the week. The host promised, with many bows, to
follow everything exactly, for he saw very well with whom he had to deal.

Then Toni and his mother had to eat with the lady in the inn, and during
the meal she had much more to say. She was going now, she said, the next
day, home to Geneva, where there were large shops, in which nothing was
sold but carvings. There she would immediately arrange for Toni to send
all his articles, so he could begin to work with fresh zeal. Moreover, she
insisted that Toni should remain, not two, but three months with the
carver, so that he could learn everything from the foundation. He could go
from here to visit his mother on Sundays, or she could come to him.

Elsbeth and Toni were so full of gratitude, they could find no words to
express it, but the lady understood them nevertheless and bore home a
happy heart, such as she had not had for a long time.

It came about just as the doctor had foreseen. The lady, who had not been
able to think any more about her home now desired to return to Geneva. She
had so many plans to carry out there, that she could hardly wait for the
day when she was to go back.

The doctor was delighted to consent to her going soon.

Toni, who had hardly begun with his new teacher, applied himself with so
much zeal and skill to his work, that the carver said to his wife in the
fourth week:

"If he goes on like this, he will learn to do better than I can."

The three months had come to an end, and Christmas was drawing near. One
morning Toni waded through the deep snow up to his home. He looked round
and fresh, and his heart was so happy he had to sing aloud as he came
along.

But when after a long walk, he suddenly saw the stone hut with the
fir-tree thickly covered with snow behind it, tears of joy came to his
eyes. He was coming home, home for all time. He ran to the little house,
and his mother, who had already seen him, hurried out, and which one of
the two was the more delighted, no one could tell; but they were both so
happy, as they sat together again in the cottage, that they could think of
no greater fortune on earth. Their highest wish was fulfilled. Toni was a
wood-carver, and could carry on his work at home with his mother. And with
what blessings besides the dear Lord was still overwhelming them! From
Geneva such good things kept coming to Elsbeth, that she no longer had to
dread anxious days, and with each package came new assurance of the ready
acceptance of Toni's work.

Such a Christmas festival as was celebrated two days later in the stone
hut, neither Elsbeth nor Toni had ever known before, for the candles which
his mother had lighted shone out upon a quantity of things, which Toni had
received to wear, and also a whole set of the most beautiful knives for
carving and a book with pictures, of a size and beauty such as Toni had
never in all his life seen before. His master's book was a mere child's
toy beside it. Elsbeth too was lovingly provided for. The lady from Geneva
had planned everything, and the bright reflection from it fell back
radiantly into her own heart.

The most beautiful deer and huntsman and the wonderful eagles on the rock,
standing in the high show-window in Geneva was carved by Toni, and was
considered by him to be a particularly successful piece, so it went, not
to the dealer in Geneva, but to the lady for whom Toni preserved a
thankful heart all his life long.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TONI, THE LITTLE WOODCARVER***


******* This file should be named 14128.txt or 14128.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/4/1/2/14128



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
