Project Gutenberg's Children and Their Books, by James Hosmer Penniman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Children and Their Books

Author: James Hosmer Penniman

Release Date: September 15, 2007 [EBook #22604]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN AND THEIR BOOKS ***




Produced by Suzanne Lybarger and the booksmiths at
http://www.eBookForge.net











        CHILDREN AND THEIR
        BOOKS

        BY
        JAMES HOSMER PENNIMAN, LITT. D.

[Illustration: School Bulletin Publications emblem]

        SYRACUSE, N. Y.
        C. W. BARDEEN, PUBLISHER




Copyright, 1921, by C. W. BARDEEN




CHILDREN AND THEIR BOOKS


The most vital educational problem will always be how to make the best
use of the child's earlier years, not only for the reason that in them
many receive their entire school training, but also because, while the
power of the child to learn increases with age, his susceptibility to
formative influences diminishes, and so rapid is the working of this
law that President Eliot thinks that

    "the temperament, physical constitution, mental
    aptitudes, and moral quality of a boy are all well
    determined by the time he is 18 years old."

Great waste of the child's time and mental energy in the precious
early years is caused by disregard of the way in which his mind
unfolds. Not only are children set at work for which they are not yet
fitted, but frequently they are kept at occupations which are far
below what they might profitably engage in. The child should be
guided, not driven; to force his mind is an educational crime. Long
continued attention and concentration are injurious, but by using tact
a great deal may be accomplished without strain.

At first the aim should be not so much to fill the mind with knowledge
as to develop the powers as they are ready for it, and to cultivate
the ability to use them. The plasticity of the child's mind is such
that a new impression may be erased quickly by a newer one; his
character receives a decided bent only through repeated impressions of
the same kind. The imaginative faculty is one of the earliest to
appear, and a weakness of our educational systems is the failure to
realize its importance and to pay sufficient attention to its
development. It is well known that imagination is the creative power
of the mind which gives life to all work, so that without it Newton
would never have found the law of gravitation, nor Columbus have
discovered America. The world of make-believe is filled with delight
for the small child. He loves stories of imaginary adventure that he
can act out in his play,

        "Now with my little gun I crawl
        All in the dark along the wall,
        And follow round the forest track
        Away behind the sofa back.
        I see the others far away,
        As if in fire-lit camp they lay;
        And I, like to an Indian scout,
        Around their party prowled about."

Cultivate his imagination by helping the child to image what he has
read. Let us play that we are sailing with Columbus in a little ship
over the great green ocean. When we look far off from the top of a
wave we see nothing but sky and white-capped water; all around us are
angry faces and angry waves.

It is easy to work on the emotions of a little child and thoughtless
persons may find it amusing but it is a serious matter, for it has an
injurious effect upon his nerves. Ghost stories and books which
inspire fear of the supernatural often do much harm to imaginative
children.

The boundless curiosity of the child may be aroused and stimulated so
that he gets to know himself and the world about him in a way that
furnishes him with constant and delightful employment. The growth of
his mind is rapid and healthful, because he is reaching out to
comprehend and verify and apply to his own purposes the knowledge that
he derives from books and that which he obtains from observation. It
is not easy to realize the ignorance of children. Dr. G. Stanley Hall
found by experiments with a large number of six-year-olds in Boston,
that 55 percent did not know that wooden things are made from trees.
The world is strange to them; they must grope their way, they are
attracted by the bright, the flashy, the sensational, and their tastes
will develop in these directions unless they are taught better.
Grown-ups estimate in terms of previous experience; the child has had
little previous experience to which to refer. Edward Thring says:

"The emptiness of a young boy's mind is often not taken into account,
at least emptiness so far as all knowledge in it being of a
fragmentary and piecemeal description, nothing complete. It may well
happen that an intelligent boy shall be unable to understand a
seemingly simple thing, because some bit of knowledge which his
instructor takes it for granted he possesses, and probably thinks
instinctive, is wanting to fill up the whole."

To impart the desire for knowledge and the power of getting it is next
to character-building the most important work of the school. Encourage
self-activity to the fullest extent. When the child asks a question be
careful not to put him off or discourage him, but if it is possible to
show him how to find the answer for himself do so, even at the expense
of considerable time and trouble. Aid that quenches curiosity retards
mental growth. Many children ask questions merely for the sake of
talking, and forget the question before they have heard the answer. As
the child gradually becomes able to use them show him how to employ
books as tools. Keep reference books on low shelves or tables in
convenient places, where it is easy to get at them. Show the child
that the dictionary, the atlas, and the encyclopaedia contain stores
of knowledge accumulated by the work of many scholars for many years
and laboriously classified and arranged for the benefit of seekers
after information. Show him how to investigate a subject under several
different titles and how to get what he needs from a book by the use
of the table of contents, index, and running head lines, and how to
use card catalogues and Poole's Index. Help him to look up on the map
the places he reads about. Explain the scale of miles and teach him to
use his imagination in making the map real; show him that the dots
represent towns and cities with churches, parks, and trolley cars, and
that the waving lines are rivers on which are steam boats carrying the
productions of one section to another.

As he grows older teach him to draw his own conclusions from
conflicting statements and to preserve the happy medium between
respect for the authority of books and confidence in his own
observation. Most boys and girls do not observe and they do not think;
they have no opinions except those made for them by others. We are too
apt to cultivate the memory and to neglect observation, imagination,
and judgment. The result is a wooden type of mind which has too great
respect for printed matter and little initiative in accurate
observation and in using the imagination and the judgment in making
what has been observed and read practically useful.

Encourage the child to talk about what he reads in a natural way, but
do not allow him to become a prig by saying what he supposes you would
like to have him rather than what he really thinks.

Do not be too eager to stamp your individuality upon the child; he has
a right to his own. Find out what his tastes and inclinations are and
develop him through them. Ascertain what he is really interested in;
very often it is something quite different from what you suppose. His
point of view is different from yours. Translate what you wish him to
be interested in into terms of his own life and experience. Success
in education comes to a great extent from skill in establishing
relations between what the child already knows and that which you wish
him to acquire.

No part of education has more to do with character-building than the
inculcating of a love of good literature. S. S. Laurie calls
literature "the most potent of all instruments in the hands of the
educator, whether we have regard to intellectual growth or to the
moral and religious life". "It is easy," he says, "if only you set
about it in the right way, to engage the heart of a child, up to the
age of eleven or twelve, on the side of kindliness, generosity,
self-sacrifice; and to fill him, if not with ideals of greatness and
goodness, at least with the feelings or emotions which enter into
these ideals. You thus lay a basis in feeling and emotion on which may
be built a truly manly character at a later period--without such a
basis you can accomplish nothing ethical, now or at any future time.
But when the recipient stage is past, and boys begin to assert
themselves, they have a tendency to resist, if not to resent,
professedly moral and religious teaching; and this chiefly because it
then comes to them or is presented to them in the shape of abstract
precept and authoritative dogma. Now, the growing mind of youth is
keen after realities, and has no native antagonism to realities merely
because they happen to be moral or religious realities. It is the
abstract, preceptive, and barren form, and the presumptuous manner in
which these are presented that they detest. How, then, at this
critical age to present the most vital of all the elements of
education, is a supremely important problem. It is my conviction that
you can only do so through literature; and the New Testament itself
might well be read simply as literature. The words, the phrases, the
ideals which literature offers so lavishly, unconsciously stir the
mind to lofty motives and the true perception of the meaning of life.
We must not, of course, commit the fatal blunder of making a didactic
lesson out of what is read. We take care that it is understood and
illustrated, and then leave it to have its own effect."

Children behave better when their minds are occupied; an interest in
literature has proved in numerous instances to be an aid to discipline
in the schoolroom. It is sad to think how little that is refining and
elevating comes into the lives of many children. The attitude of the
average school boy toward life is shown by the fact that he refers to
any stranger as a "guy". The rough horse play of the movies fills such
a boy with exquisite delight. To see on the screen a man have a lot of
dough slapped in his face is the highest form of humor. His mind is
active but it has no suitable nourishment. What is needed is to direct
it. President Angell has told us how boys were inspired by that great
teacher Alice Freeman Palmer:

"I attended a class in English Literature which she was teaching. The
class was composed of boys from fifteen to eighteen years of age, in
whom one would perhaps hardly expect much enthusiasm for the great
masters of English Literature. But it was soon apparent that she had
those boys completely under her control and largely filled with her
own enthusiasm. They showed that at their homes they had been
carefully and lovingly reading some of the great masterpieces and were
ready to discuss them with intelligence and zest."

"Mind grows," says Carlyle, "like a spirit--thought kindling itself at
the fire of living thought."

To keep the heart open to elevating influences, to enjoy really
beautiful things, to take a dignified and noble view of life, these
are the results that must follow association with the best thoughts of
the best minds, which is literature. And it is one of the wonders of
literature that some of the best of it is adapted to every order of
intelligence. When one gets older his mental field widens, he cannot
then read all the best, he must choose; but the classic books for
children are not so numerous that the child may not read and reread
them.

Cultivation of the literary taste of the child may begin as soon as he
can talk. He will early take an interest in simple stories and poems
and sooner than many suppose, he may be taught to read those which he
has already learned by heart. From the beginning reading should be
easy and interesting. The child should look forward to it with
pleasure. He loves stories, let him see that the best of them are in
books told by better story tellers than he can find elsewhere. Help
the child to appreciate the book, to take an intelligent interest in
it, and gradually lead him up to that love of the best which is the
foundation of culture. Do not think that he can see all there is to
enjoy at the first reading; a book is classic because it may be read
over and over and always show something that was not seen before.
There is a distinction which teachers and parents do not always
recognize between books, which are beyond the child merely because of
the hard words in which the idea is clothed and those in which the
thought itself is above his comprehension. "Children possess an
unestimated sensibility to whatever is deep or high in imagination or
feeling so long as it is simple likewise. It is only the artificial
and the complex that bewilder them," said Hawthorne, and because of
his knowledge of this fact he wrote his exquisite classics for
children. The phraseology of books is frequently different from that
to which the child is accustomed. He must be taught to understand
thought as expressed in printed words, his vocabulary is limited; in
reading aloud he will often pronounce words correctly without any idea
of what they mean and far more frequently than you imagine he will
receive a wrong impression by confusing words like _zeal_ and _seal_
of similar sound and totally different meaning. A teacher accidentally
found out that her class supposed that the "kid" which railed at the
wolf in Aesop's fable was a little boy, and I have had a child tell me
that he saw at Rouen the place, where Noah's ark was burned, of course
he meant Jeanne d'Arc. "The mastery of words," says Miss Arnold, "is an
essential element in learning to read. Our common mistake is, not that
we do such work too well, but that we make it the final aim of the
reading lesson, and lead the children to feel that they can read when
they are merely able to pronounce the words." "Observation has
convinced me," wrote Melvill Dewey, "that the reason why so many people
are not habitual readers is, in most cases, that they have never
really learned to read; and, startling as this may seem, tests will
show that many a man who would resent the charge of illiteracy is
wholly unable to reproduce the author's thoughts by looking at the
printed page."

Children make their first acquaintance with books from the pictures.
They like plenty of them with bright colors and broad simple treatment
and prefer a rude sketch with action to the finest work of Walter
Crane or Kate Greenaway. Illustrations should help the child to
understand the story. Pictures of historic places and objects and
adequate reproductions of works of great artists are of value later,
for, while the aesthetic sense of the child may be cultivated by
surrounding him with the beautiful--flowers, pictures, books, a
recognition of the fact that the love of the artistic is of
comparatively late development, will prevent much discouragement.

The child learns from his reading what kind of a world he lives in,
through books he also becomes acquainted with himself and with his
tastes and abilities and sometimes he finds out from them what he is
fitted for in life. When carefully directed, reading may be made to
cultivate common sense, self-reliance, initiative, enthusiasm, and
ability to turn one's mental and physical capital to the best
advantage and to make the most of one's opportunities--qualities which
ensure success in life, and it also should cultivate the affections
and those kindly feelings which make the world a better place to live
in. Try to interest the child in books which give true and noble ideas
of life where wrong-doing brings its natural consequences without too
much preaching. The moral should not be dragged in, the day of the
sugar-coated pill in literature is past. The right books are those
that teach in a straightforward way that character is better than
superficial smartness, that success does not always mean the
accumulation of a large amount of money and that it is not a matter of
luck but that it depends upon perseverance in faithful work; books
which develop the child's sympathies by teaching consideration for the
feelings of others, kindness to animals and to all weak and dependent
creatures. Lack of reverence is common in the youth of today and books
and papers which ridicule old age, filial duty and other things which
ought to be respected are all too common. Few have added more to the
happiness of mankind than he who has written a classic for children.
It takes very unusual qualities to write for them. Sympathy with the
child: brightness and simplicity of diction are much rarer than one
would suppose until he seeks for them with the child. The first
requisite of a book is that it should interest the child, the next is
that it should inspire and uplift him. The imparting of information is
less important, but whatever information the book contains should be
accurate and useful. When a child has learned to appreciate those
classics which are suited to his comprehension he will not be likely
to waste his time on such futile things as tales of imaginary
adventure thickened with a little inaccurate history. He will prefer
books which describe what really happened to those which tell what
someone writing long after thinks possibly might have happened.

We have a good deal of nervous prostration now-a-days but little
refining leisure. Shorter days of labor give more spare time and the
schools can render a great service to the nation by teaching how to
make the best use of this time and by creating the desire to devote a
part of it to the reading of good books and especially to the reading
of the American classics. How few resources most persons have in
themselves and how flat and unprofitable their lives are. They devote
their moments of leisure to killing time, when association with the
right reading in early life would have taught them to cultivate that
inward eye which has been called the bliss of solitude. He who has a
love of reading, however limited his means or however restricted his
opportunities may give himself, if he will, a good education. He, who
has a taste for good books in youth, will rarely read anything else in
maturer years.

"From the total training during childhood," says President Eliot,
"there should result in the child a taste for interesting and
improving reading, which should direct and inspire its subsequent
intellectual life. That schooling which results in this taste for good
reading, however, unsystematic or eccentric the schooling may have
been, has achieved a main end of elementary education; and that
schooling which does not result in implanting this permanent taste has
failed. Guided and animated by this impulse to acquire knowledge and
exercise his imagination through reading, the individual will continue
to educate himself all through life. Without that deep-rooted
impulsion he will soon cease to draw on the accumulated wisdom of the
past and the new resources of the present, and as he grows older, he
will live in a mental atmosphere which is always growing thinner and
emptier. Do we not all know many people who seem to live in a mental
vacuum--to whom indeed, we have great difficulty in attributing
immortality because they apparently have so little life except that of
the body? Fifteen minutes a day of good reading would have given any
one of this multitude a really human life. The uplifting of the
democratic masses depends on this implanting at school of the taste
for good reading."

The great men of letters have usually been those who have been
accustomed to good books from the mother's knee. Where the taste for
reading has not been inherited it must be acquired by continuous
effort and some of the world's greatest achievements have been made by
men who toiled on in poverty and distress to improve their faculties.
There is no fact more uniformly evident in the biographies of great
men than that they read great books in youth. Nicolay and Hay say of
Abraham Lincoln:--

"When his tasks ended, his studies became the chief pleasure of his
life. In all the intervals of his work--in which he never took
delight, knowing well enough that he was born for something better
than that, he read, wrote, and ciphered incessantly. His reading was
naturally limited by his opportunities, for books were among the
rarest of luxuries in that region and time. But he read everything he
could lay his hands upon, and he was certainly fortunate in the few
books of which he became the possessor. It would hardly be possible to
select a better handful of classics for a youth in his circumstances
than the few volumes he turned with a nightly and daily hand--the
Bible, "Aesop's Fables," "Robinson Crusoe," "The Pilgrim's Progress,"
a history of the United States, and Weem's "Life of Washington". These
were the best, and these he read over and over till he knew them
almost by heart. But his voracity for anything printed was insatiable.
He would sit in the twilight and read a dictionary as long as he could
see. He used to go to David Turnham's, the town constable, and devour
the "Revised Statutes of Indiana," as boys in our day do the "Three
Guardsmen." Of the books he did not own he took voluminous notes,
filling his copy-book with choice extracts, and poring over them until
they were fixed in his memory. He could not afford to waste paper upon
his original compositions. He would sit by the fire at night and cover
the wooden shovel with essays and arithmetical exercises, which he
would shave off and then begin again. It is touching to think of this
great-spirited child, battling year after year against his evil star,
wasting his ingenuity upon devices and makeshifts, his high
intelligence starving for want of the simple appliances of education,
that are now offered gratis to the poorest and most indifferent. He
did a man's work from the time he left school; his strength and
stature were already far beyond those of ordinary men. He wrought his
appointed tasks ungrudgingly, though without enthusiasm; but when his
employer's day was over his own began."

Boys like Abraham Lincoln may be relied upon to direct their own
reading, but the average child is unable to do this. An important
thought which is not always kept in mind by educators is stated thus
by Huxley:--"If I am a knave or a fool, teaching me to read and write
won't make me less of either one of the other--unless somebody shows
me how to put my reading and writing to wise and good purposes." It is
not easy to interest in real literature a child whose father reads
nothing but newspapers and whose mother derives her intellectual
inspiration from novels, but such a child at least lives in a home
where there are books, though of an inferior kind, and there is
warmth and good lights and leisure to read in quiet and comfort. How
different is the case of the poor child, who comes from a tenement
where a large family congregate in one room, where the wash is drying,
where younger children are playing, there is little light, and no
books of any kind. It is with the occupants of such homes that the
children's librarian does the most wonderful work. To see a ragged,
barefooted child come into a palatial public library, knowing that he
has a right to be there and going directly to the shelf choose a book
and sit down quietly to enjoy it gives hope for the future of our
country. Consider the influence of such a child in his home; he not
only interests his brothers and sisters in good books, but also his
father and mother. One such child asked a librarian "Will you please
start my father on some new fairy tales, he has read all the others."
According to the New York Public Library "Reading room books have done
more to secure clean hands and orderly ways from persistently dirty
and disorderly children than any remedy hitherto tried." There should
be enough copies of suitable books and they should be kept on low
shelves where the children can have direct access to them. When we
spend millions teaching children to read, we should be willing to go
to some expense in order to provide them with what is worth reading.
It is impossible for those who have not studied the subject to realize
the quantity of inane trash with which many children stultify their
minds. They read so much that their thought is confused and they
cannot even remember the names of the books whose pages are passing
before their eyes. The market is flooded with books ranging from the
trivial to the harmful which, unless he is properly directed, will
divert the child from the real books which he should read and read
again. "Ninety children out of one hundred in the public schools below
the high school," says Caroline M. Hewins, "read nothing for pleasure
beyond stories written in a simple style with no involved sentences.
Nine out of the other ten enjoy novels and sometimes poetry and
history written for older readers, and can be taught to appreciate
other books, but not more than one in a hundred, has a natural love of
the best literature and desires without urging to read the great books
of the world," and she adds "Stories of the present day in which
children die, are cruelly treated, or offer advice to their elders,
are not good reading for boys and girls in happy homes."

To form an impression on the white page of the child's mind is a great
privilege as well as a grave responsibility. He who makes sin
attractive in a child's book or dims the clear-cut distinction between
right and wrong will never be able to measure the far-reaching
consequences of his work. The child's reading should be constructive
rather than destructive. He should learn what to imitate rather than
what to avoid, but it is preferable that he should get necessary
knowledge of the evil side of human nature from a classic like Oliver
Twist than from his own experience or from cheap thrillers. The boy
needs to be kept from the vulgar cut-throat story, the girl from the
unwholesome romance. Girls should read books that exalt the sweet
home virtues. Cheap society stories are not necessarily immoral but
they give false ideas of life, warp the mind and encourage
selfishness.

The normal boy reads the easiest and most exciting thing that comes to
hand, he devours detailed accounts of baseball and football matches
and is familiar with the record of every player. The books he reads
deal with deeds rather than descriptions. He likes a story that he can
act out with not too many characters and with one central figure, he
identifies himself with the hero and undergoes in imagination his
dangers and triumphs, he likes play with a purpose to it, he is always
trying to make something, to accomplish something; he feels
unconsciously that he is part of the organic whole of the universe and
has work to do. The charm of books like Robinson Crusoe and the Swiss
Family Robinson consists in the fact they personify and epitomize the
perpetual struggle of mankind with the forces of nature. The boy takes
up fads; for a while all his interests are concentrated in boats, then
in postage stamps, then in something else. His mind must be occupied,
if we cannot fill it with good the bad will get in. Encourage the boy
to read books like Tom Brown, or Captains Courageous which show moral
worth expressed through physical activity. When he has been interested
in the deeds described in such a book have him do something of a
similar character to impress the lesson on his mind, for, as Herbert
Spencer states:--

"Not by precept, though it be daily heard; not by example, unless it
be followed, but only through action, which is often called forth by
the relative feeling, can a moral habit be formed," and Edward Thring
says:--

"Boys or men become brave, and hardy, and true, not by being told to
be so, but by being nurtured in a brave and hardy and true way,
surrounded with objects likely to excite these feelings, exercised in
a manner calculated to draw them out unconsciously. For all true
feeling is unconscious in proportion to its perfection." Building up
knowledge without cultivating the power to use it is of small value.
Impression should go hand in hand with expression. Knowledge does not
become power until you use it. Children should read a great deal and
reading should be made attractive to them. The amount of real
literature suited to their taste and comprehension is not large and
as much as possible of it should be read. Matthew Arnold says that
school reading should be copious, well chosen and systematic. There is
often a great difference between the books which the child reads when
under observation, and those to which he resorts for solace and
comfort and turns over and over again when he is alone. The latter are
the ones that stamp his character. The school and the public library
can never take the place of the home library. It is the books that we
own that influence us. The child should know the joy of the ownership
of books and there is no better way to interest him in them, than by
giving them to him one by one as he reads them. He should have a place
where he may keep them in safety and should be taught to respect them
and to keep them clean. His books should have all the charm that
pretty and durable binding, clear type and bright pictures can give
them. When trash is served up in so many alluring forms something must
be done to make literature attractive. It is not enough that the child
is reading what will do him no harm, his attention should be
concentrated on the permanent classics which are suited to his
comprehension and taste. He who does not read Aesop and Robinson
Crusoe and the Wonder Book in youth will very likely never read them
at all. There are a number of books like The Pilgrim's Progress, which
are constantly referred to but seldom read. A great deal of the time
and mental energy of children is wasted. The total freedom from books
and from all other refining influences during vacations is as
unnecessary as it is deplorable. An hour a day wisely employed and
directed during the summer would give a boy or girl an acquaintance
with Longfellow or Hawthorne, that would be a joy and inspiration in
all after life. The study of the author's biography in connection with
his works has an educational value which nothing else can replace.
Consider the influence of a thorough acquaintance with Longfellow or
Lowell. The atmosphere which surrounded them, the things that
interested them, the sources of their inspiration, the way in which
the common experiences of life grew beautiful under the influence of
their poetic imagination would be a civilizing force throughout life.
That chance is to but a small extent a factor of success, that nothing
is attained by the brightest mind without that infinite patience and
labor which in itself is genius, the brave way in which such men met
trial and adversity:--these are lessons which are not studied as they
should be.

Because the imagination is developed early, children are able to find
a real delight in poetry even when it is beyond their complete
understanding. Sir Walter Scott says:--"There is no harm, but, on the
contrary, there is benefit in presenting a child with ideas beyond his
easy and immediate comprehension. The difficulties thus offered, if
not too great or too frequent, stimulate curiosity and encourage
exertion."

As a melody once heard keeps on repeating itself in the ears, so a
beautiful thought makes an impression upon the mind that may never be
effaced. Charles Eliot Norton says:--

"Poetry is one of the most efficient means of education of the moral
sentiment, as well as of the intelligence. It is the source of the
best culture. A man may know all science and yet remain uneducated.
But let him truly possess himself of the work of any one of the great
poets, and no matter what else he may fail to know, he is not without
education."

The inspiration and delight derived from familiarity with the best
poetry is one of the most precious results of education. The child
should be made to understand that school training is but the
preparation for the broader education which it is his duty and should
be his pleasure to acquire for himself; and to this end it is
essential that he be so taught that after leaving school he may look
not to the newspaper and the last novel for his ideals, but to the
high and worthy thoughts of the classics and especially of the poets
of America. Many of the most inspiring deeds of our history have been
embodied in poems like Paul Revere's Ride with which every child
should be familiar. The works of Longfellow, Whittier, Lowell and
Holmes abound in teachings of the highest form of American patriotism
and in character studies of the great men who have made our country
what it is. The poetry that we have known and loved in childhood has
from its very association a strength and sweetness that no other can
have. It is to be regretted that children are by no means as familiar
with poetry as they should be and that the old-time custom of
committing poetry to memory is not more general. Bryant has wisely
remarked that "the proper office of poetry in filling the mind with
delightful images and awakening the gentler emotions, is not
accomplished on a first and rapid perusal, but requires that the words
should be dwelt upon until they become in a certain sense our own, and
are adopted as the utterance of our own minds." The value of reading
poetry aloud is very great. Few school children do it well, and it is
especially difficult for them to avoid reading in a sing-song way with
a decided pause at the end of every line. "Accuracy of diction," says
Ruskin, "means accuracy of sensation, and precision of accent,
precision of feeling." Reading poetry aloud is therefore an
accomplishment worthy of earnest cultivation. "Of equal honor with him
who writes a grand poem is he who reads it grandly," Longfellow has
said, and Emerson, "A good reader summons the mighty dead from their
tombs and makes them speak to us." To sit still and listen
attentively is a polite accomplishment and to reproduce accurately
what one has heard is as practically useful as it is unusual.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Punctuation normalised.

Page 18, "she" changed to "the" (in which the)

Page 23, "rep-spected" changed to "respected" (to be respected)

Page 24, "leis-sure" changed to "leisure" (little refining leisure)

Page 44, "is" changed to "it" (reads it grandly)





End of Project Gutenberg's Children and Their Books, by James Hosmer Penniman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN AND THEIR BOOKS ***

***** This file should be named 22604.txt or 22604.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/0/22604/

Produced by Suzanne Lybarger and the booksmiths at
http://www.eBookForge.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
