The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ethel Hollister's Second Summer as a
Campfire Girl, by Irene Elliott Benson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Ethel Hollister's Second Summer as a Campfire Girl

Author: Irene Elliott Benson

Release Date: November 26, 2004 [EBook #14169]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPFIRE GIRL ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Mary Meehan, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team







           Ethel Hollister's Second Summer as a Campfire Girl

                        By IRENE ELLIOTT BENSON

                                 1912




CONTENTS


SYNOPSIS OF PRECEDING BOOK

      I--ETHEL'S PLANS

     II--ETHEL ENTERS COLLEGE

    III--ETHEL AND HARVEY BECOME FIRM FRIENDS

     IV--ETHEL'S SECOND TRIP

      V--CAMP AGAIN

     VI--UNCLE JOHN'S

    VII--MRS. HOLLISTER'S VISIT TO CAMP

   VIII--THE SCOUTS ARRIVE

     IX--NORA GIVES SERVICE

      X--A HEROINE

     XI--BREAKING UP OF CAMP AND A SURPRISE

    XII--MATTIE MAKES GOOD

   XIII--JUDGE SANDS AND KATE MARRY

    XIV--A BIRTHDAY PRESENT

     XV--MRS. HOLLISTER ENTERTAINS

    XVI--CHRISTMAS EVE

   XVII--CHRISTMAS DAY

  XVIII--ANOTHER SURPRISE

    XIX--MR. CASEY BUYS A HOUSE

     XX--ARCHIBALD'S CHANGE FOR THE BETTER




SYNOPSIS OF PRECEDING BOOK


Ethel would have never become a Camp Fire Girl excepting for her
great-aunt Susan.

Susan Carpenter was her Grandmother Hollister's only sister, living in
Akron, Ohio. Her family consisted of Mr. Thomas Harper and herself. Tom's
parents had been her friends, and when they were taken Aunt Susan legally
adopted him and his little brother Fred, but the younger one died before
graduating, while Tom went through college and was now a rising young
lawyer.

Aunt Susan Carpenter was a philanthropist. At the time of her adopting
the boys she was reputed to be a millionaire. She gave her beautiful home
to the city for an Asylum for partially insane people and endowed it with
fifty thousand dollars, after which the leading men in town raised fifty
thousand more, thereby making it self-supporting. She was also on the
board of managers of many other charities, and was adored by her
townspeople.

Four years previous to her visit to New York, she had lost every penny of
her immense fortune,--lost it through the rascality of a large and well
advertised concern calling itself the "Great Western Cereal Company." The
whole thing was a rotten affair from the first and was floated by ten
unscrupulous men who after obtaining all the money they could fled from
the country before the exposure came; that is, save three, one of whom
was arrested while the other two committed suicide. Aunt Susan wrote
nothing of it to her sister lest it should worry her, and as she had
never met her nephew's family in New York, and they knowing no one in
Akron, they were in ignorance of the change in Aunt Susan's affairs and
still thought her a wealthy woman.

Mrs. Archibald Hollister--Ethel's mother--was worldly and ambitious;
not so much for herself as for her daughter. Grand-mother Hollister,
whose husband had belonged to one of New York's oldest families, owned
the house in which they lived, free and clear. It was an old-fashioned
brown-stone affair near Riverside Drive. Archibald, her son, paid the
taxes in lieu of rent, but as his salary was only three thousand a year
it was extremely difficult to make both ends meet, and Grandmother had no
money save what was in the house. But Mrs. Archie was clever. She could
make a dollar do the work of five. With her own hands she would fashion
for Ethel the most dainty and up-to-date gowns, wraps, hats, etc.,
imaginable.

The Hollisters kept but one maid. She always appeared trim and tidy, yet
she did the entire housework. Upon the days that Mrs. Archie gave bridge
parties or afternoon teas for Ethel's young friends, she hired two extra
girls who had been so perfectly trained that the guests never once
doubted but that they were part of the household--allowing to Mrs.
Archie's clever management.

Ethel attended a fashionable school costing her father more money than he
could afford, but she met there the very best class of girls and really
formed for herself the most desirable acquaintances. Her mother scrimped
and saved in every way possible, while the guests who came to the
old-fashioned house with its handsome antique furniture and portraits
were wont to declare that "the Hollisters were certainty aristocratic and
of blue blood, as their house showed it--so severe and yet elegant." So
Mrs. Archie felt that the Hollister name alone should procure for Ethel a
monied husband, and she held it constantly before the girl. She must
associate only with those in the "upper circle," and marry a man who
could give her a "fine establishment."

Among Ethel's school friends was a girl--Nannie Bigelow by name--of
whom she was very fond. Nannie had a brother in Yale whom she (Ethel)
disliked. He was a member of the ultra fashionable set and was desirous
of making a wealthy match, as his family as well had little but their
name. One of his sisters had married a titled man and lived abroad. It
was Mrs. Hollister's ambition to have Ethel like Harvey Bigelow, although
she knew that he had as little money as she. She tried to adjust things
satisfactorily, and being a clever woman she hit upon a plan which we
shall reveal later. Of course, the girl was only sixteen and must first
graduate. Ethel, who had imbibed many of her mother's fallacies, did not
openly rebel. She was quite a little snob in her way, nor did she realize
what the family daily sacrificed for her, although her heart smote her
when she saw how her father was aging, for she adored him; nor were her
eyes opened until after she had joined the Camp Fire.

Grandmother Hollister had two sons, John and Archie. Kate Hollister was
the daughter of the former. They lived in Columbus, Ohio, and Kate had
been invited to visit her New York relatives. She was a tall, handsome
girl much older than Ethel, for she was over thirty. Kate was the
Guardian of a company of eight Camp Fire Girls called the "Ohio." She had
told her grandmother and Ethel all about the new movement one evening,
and Ethel who loved the romantic side of camping out was crazy to have
Kate obtain permission from her mother to let her join, as her father had
said that she might visit Columbus that coming summer. But lo! when she
spoke to Mrs. Archie--or Aunt Bella--about it she was politely snubbed.
When Kate tried to explain how wonderful was the organization and what
benefit a girl--especially a delicate girl like Ethel--could derive from
belonging, the lady sneered and likened it to the Salvation Army and
forbade her guest from mentioning it to the girl or even speaking of it
in her presence. But alas! the deed had been done and Ethel knew of it;
but while in New York Kate had refrained from again touching on the
subject. At that time an aunt of one of Ethel's schoolmates had formed a
company and many of the swell set had joined. Ethel longed to belong but
dared not offend her mother.

Now for Mrs. Hollister's plan. She suddenly conceived the idea of
inviting Aunt Susan on for a visit, supposedly to give Grandmother a
chance to see her only sister once more, but in reality to have Ethel
ingratiate herself with the old lady, thereby causing her to leave the
girl the bulk of her fortune. Ethel read between the lines and at first
refused, but after listening to her mother for a while and thinking
perhaps she was right, she allowed herself to promise to further the
plan.

Aunt Susan was a woman with fine eyes and teeth, as well as a charming
manner, but her style of dressing dated back to the eighties--full
skirts, flat hats with strings, beaded plush dolmans, etc. Ethel was
ashamed to be seen with her but she had promised to help and she had to
do her share. In the meanwhile her mother had spread the report that Aunt
Susan was a millionaire and that Ethel was to have her fortune at her
death. Everyone fell in love with Aunt Susan and ascribed her peculiar
dressing to the eccentricities of a wealthy woman.

Mrs. Hollister's joy knew no bounds when Aunt Susan invited Ethel to
return with her to Akron. Her scheme was beginning to work. Ethel was a
lovely girl. Aunt Susan would grow fond of her and the fortune was
assured. Besides, as it would cost a small fortune to take Ethel to a
fashionable summer resort, Mrs. Archie could save money for the winter.
But, accompanying the invitation, Aunt Susan requested that during July
and August, Ethel might join her other grand niece's "Camp Fires" and
live in the woods. "It will be the making of your girl," she added,
"as now she looks thin and peaked."

At first Mrs. Archie indignantly refused. She almost felt that she had
been trapped, but Aunt Susan met every objection and even told the lady
that she feared she was shallow and an unnatural mother to refuse to
consider her daughter's health. Mrs. Archie dared not let Aunt Susan know
that she considered the whole organization conspicuous and common, nor
that she did not wish Ethel to learn to do the work of a servant, etc.,
or run the risk of meeting girls of humble origin. So after some sharp
rebukes administered to her by the old lady on the sin of worldliness
and the fact that she was not doing a mother's duty by her daughter, she
consented, mentally declaring that she would see that Ethel should forget
all about it on her return.

While visiting Aunt Susan and living in Camp in a truthful atmosphere
Ethel Hollister began to change. She saw how the old lady was beloved.
She heard on every side of the good she had done, and when one day Aunt
Susan told her that she had been a wife and mother, and what she had
suffered at the hands of a brutal husband, she was spellbound. For years
she had been deserted, but when one day he was supposed to be dying she
was sent for that he might beg her forgiveness. She went and found that
for four years he had been stone blind and that he had sunk so low that
she shrank from the squalid house in which he was living. She took him
away and stayed with him until his death, making the last days of his
life more bearable.

As the girl listened and thought of the old lady's goodness and how she
was visiting her and making over her old gowns, hats, etc., into
fashionable ones to ingratiate herself for an object she saw herself as
she was--a hypocrite--and she fell on her knees to Aunt Susan confessing
everything and begging her forgiveness, whereupon the old lady took her
in her arms and told her that she knew everything--that Grandmother and
she had made up their minds that Ethel might lose her worldliness under
different environments. Then she told her of the loss of her fortune and
the girl was glad, saying as she kissed her, "Now you know that I love
you for yourself, Aunt Susan."

Ethel liked Tom Harper. He was a fine young man. He supported Aunt Susan
and gave her a liberal allowance but she banked nearly all of it, as she
told Ethel "to have something at her death to leave to those whom she
loved."

After visiting her Uncle John's family, whom she liked at once, Kate,
Ethel, and the eight girls started for Camp. It was situated in a stretch
of woods on the banks of the Muskingum river. One of the girls--Patty
Sands--became Ethel's chum. She was motherless and the only child of
Judge Sands, ex-congressman of Ohio, and greatly respected. The rest of
the girls were also congenial save two--one a Mattie Hastings, whom Ethel
avoided saying that her eyes were too close together. Mattie's parents
were poor people but she was one of Kate's Sunday School class and has
asked to be allowed to join the "Ohios." The other girl was a large,
raw-boned Irish girl, or rather of Irish parentage. Her voice was shrill
and unpleasant, while her hair was black and her eyes dark blue and
lovely, her face was covered with freckles and she dressed loudly and in
bad taste. Pat Casey--her father---was one of the wealthiest men in town.
He was a contractor and an honest, respectable man, but his wife was
a pusher, trying to bluff her way into society. She was ignorant and
disagreeable. People refused to receive her. Nora had been only half
educated at a convent. Mrs. Casey, hearing of the Camp Fire Girls,
bethought herself that it would be an opening for Honora, so she boldly
called upon Miss Kate and asked--yes, begged--that Nora might belong; and
Kate, who was kind-hearted, received the girl to the great joy of Mrs.
Pat. Having been born in the old country, both parents spoke with a
brogue. Occasionally, from association, Nora would use it; then she would
stop suddenly, turn red, and speak perfect English. Ethel disliked her
even more than she did Mattie.

One day as she was helping wash dishes she lost a valuable diamond ring.
It had been her Grandmother's engagement ring and she was heart-broken.
Although they searched everywhere no trace of it could they find, but as
they were walking up the hill a week or so afterwards they thought they
saw Mattie Hastings through the trees. They called as a jest, "We've seen
you and you're discovered--come out!" Whereupon someone shrieked, and
proceeding to the spot they found Mattie lying upon the ground. She had
walked in the sun and had started to run and had fallen over some stumps.
Instantly they saw that she had been prostrated by the heat, and having
recently studied "First aid to the injured" they proceeded to remove her
blouse and open her corset, when lo! there upon a silver chain around her
neck was not only Ethel Hollister's ring but another belonging to Honora
Casey. She had missed it a few days after Ethel had lost hers, but she
wisely refrained from speaking of it to anyone but Patty Sands, adding,
"Shure, it would only be afther worryin' Miss Kate, and it might turn up.
I'll bide me time."

Mattie, upon recovering consciousness and seeing that her secret had been
discovered handed the rings to Ethel saying that she should kill herself.
The girls, seeing that she was desperate, replied that as one of their
"seven laws" was to "render service," if she would confess why she had
taken the rings they would shield her. Overjoyed, the girl did so. She
told everything. She had done it for her young sister who had dislocation
of the spine, whereby she might be converting them into money have the
child placed in the Cripples Hospital and treated. A physician had
assured her that the case was not incurable, and for two hundred dollars
the child could be watched and nursed, and eventually her spine might be
straightened. She said that since the accident that had made the child
as she was, her mother had become a drug fiend. One evening her cousin--a
young man who was a chauffeur--invited her mother to join a party and
they took a joy ride. On their way home, being under the influence of
wine, they knocked down and ran over a child near Mrs. Hasting's house.
Letting her out, they sped quickly on for fear of arrest. Upon
discovering that it was her own child, and what was worse, that from that
night she was to be a hopeless cripple, the mother nearly went insane.
Still she kept her secret and no one suspected that she had been one of
the parties in the car. Her remorse drove her to take the drug. Under its
influence she told Mattie. At that time the girl was earning six dollars
a week, three of which she was paying to her mother, supposing her to be
buying food for the invalid. When she discovered the truth she threatened
her with exposure and tried to buy little Mollie nourishing delicacies
herself, but three dollars would barely pay for the necessities of life,
and she became discouraged and desperate. In the store she saw a customer
drop her purse. She placed her foot upon it and when the lady had gone
she picked it up. The purse contained forty dollars and some cards, etc.
After depositing thirty-five dollars in the bank she took five and bought
the child fruit, books, and ice cream. It seemed to put new life into
Mollie. She took small articles from time to time, and pretending that
they had been given her she sold them. Her remorse was terrible. She was
unhappy. If only she could work harder and earn more. At that time she
heard of the Camp Fire Girls--of the useful and wonderful things that
they learned so that in time they became competent to demand and receive
large salaries. She loved Miss Kate and asked her if she might join. Kate
assented, and it was then that the girls first met her. Gradually the
desire to collect the two hundred dollars for Mollie came back, and with
it the temptation to steal. She took money from every girl. She was even
willing, after placing Mollie in the Hospital, to go to prison, if only
the child could be cured. She felt that some day she would be caught with
the goods. She adored Miss Kate and took nothing from her. Finally she
began taking jewelry to sell.

This morning she was on her way to find a hiding place for the two rings
and a diamond locket taken from another girl, when she heard Ethel and
Patty call. Then she was sure that they had discovered her secret, and
trying to run away she tripped and lost consciousness. "Now that I have
told you all," she added, "your father--Judge Sands--will send me up,"
and she sobbed piteously. Her grief was sincere. She had not stolen for
herself. She had been desperate. Pity crept into the hearts of the two
girls and they constituted themselves her friends. They made her replace
the jewelry in Nora's and Edna's suit cases. They found the lady's card
from whom she had taken the purse and had Mattie return the money and bag
with a note withholding her name. They had her draw out the money
obtained from the sale of the purloined articles and return it to the
head of the Department Store saying that the things had been taken and
sold under great provocation for a sick child, enumerating them and the
prices, after which she felt happier, for she knew that the girls would
remain her friends. "Some day," she said, "I may make good."

Ethel wrote and got Aunt Susan interested in little Mollie. Being a
manager of a Cripples School that lady at once placed her free of charge
in one of the wards as a boarder and pupil. The resident physician
said that in a year's time he should send her out cured. Poor Mr. and
Mrs. Hastings were overjoyed, while Mattie's gratitude knew no way to
express itself. She simply regarded Ethel and Patty with looks of
adoration, while in time they overcame their prejudice, Ethel even
kissing her goodbye.

There had been wrought in Ethel Hollister a great change. Much of her
pride and worldliness had dropped from her. She had gradually become an
earnest believer in truth despising all subterfuges and shams.

Upon her arrival home, Mrs. Hollister, while noting her new and splendid
health, was appalled at the change. From an obedient child, easily
convinced that no matter what her mother said was right, she had become
a girl of great character with ideas of her own. Mrs. Hollister angrily
denounced her mother-in-law and Aunt Susan, saying that it was their work
and that her child, for whom she had slaved all of her life, had become
wilful, stubborn and disobedient. "She even refuses to go into Society
this winter. She talks of taking up low down settlement work. She'll
end in becoming a suffragette, and standing on a soap box she'll address
the street rabble, perhaps wearing a large bonnet and standing beside a
kettle holiday time ringing a bell and holding out a tambourine,--a
Salvation Army woman. Oh! what a fool I was to let her go away from my
influence," and she sobbed,--"to toil and save for her to make a
brilliant match. See the way she rewards me. Why did I bring into this
world such an ungrateful child! It's all that wretched Camp Fire
business."

Then Ethel gently put her arm around her mother and told her that only
since she had been a Camp Fire girl had she appreciated how hard she had
worked for her. "I know, Mamma," she said, "how you and Papa, and even
Grandmamma, have sacrificed for me. I see myself as I have been, (not as
I am now)--a selfish, wicked girl, not even appreciating what you have
done for me, and I am appalled. I am going to do for you now. I am going
to see the roses come back into your cheeks and the wrinkles leave your
pretty face. Uncle John is Papa's senior by ten years but he looks much
younger--why? Because Papa is bent and worn getting money for me--for
us to make a show on. Everything is sham, Mamma, and let us give it
up--let us keep only friends who care for us ourselves and we shall be
happier. I shall take you up to camp next summer. You can help us so
much; you are so clever and can teach the girls. And as for a grand
marriage for me, I'll promise never to marry at all unless you approve of
the man, and I may make a better marriage than you dream of. So just let
us be happy and natural and live within our means," and she took her
sobbing mother in her arms.




Ethel Hollister's Second Summer as a Camp Fire Girl




CHAPTER I

ETHEL'S PLANS


The morning after Ethel had declared herself her mother came up to her
room. She could see that Mrs. Hollister had not slept and her eyes were
red from weeping. Ethel kissed her, saying:

"Mamma, we are going to be very happy together--you and I. I don't want
to disappoint you, dear, nor would I do so willingly; but I simply can
not live as I've been living. Sit down and let us talk."

Then she told of Aunt Susan,--of her kindness, unselfishness and
self-sacrifice. She told of Mattie and how they had helped her, and
of her Uncle John; of Patty and Judge Sands; and lastly of Kate and
what a wonderful character she was.

"Wait, dear, I want to show you my ceremonial gown," and she quickly
slipped it on. The girl's hair was still hanging unbound, having slept in
it that way, and she hooked about it her coronation band. Said her
mother:

"Well, I must say it is becoming. What a Pocahontas you would make in
private theatricals!" she exclaimed with maternal pride; "But then, why
should I speak of theatricals? You've given up all such things."

"Why, Mamma," laughed Ethel, "I'm not going into a convent. I have given
up nothing but the unreal part of life."

"I suppose you'll tell everyone how poor we are, and how I have put you
forward under false colors. Then people will despise me."

"No, Mamma, I shall not do a thing to put you in any awkward position.
Keep on. Give your teas for me if you wish,--even have the two extra
maids. It costs very little and we have a social time; it cheers
Grandmamma and there's no need to stop them. But this is what I shall
not do: First I shall tell Harvey Bigelow that Aunt Susan was once a
millionaire but that she lost all of her money. I shall tell of her
wonderful gifts to Akron,--of her charities, and how well she is beloved,
but that I shall inherit no money from her. Harvey will tell his mother
and she'll spread the news. If people care any the less for us after
hearing it, let them go; but I don't propose to tell what Papa's salary
is, or that you--poor dear--sit until morning sewing for me,--a thing
that I'm not going to allow you to do any longer.

"Then I shall give up attending Madam's. Yes, don't start. Every bill
Papa pays is a nail in his coffin, I know. Tomorrow I shall go to Barnard
and try to pass an examination, and for one quarter what Madam charges I
can get a sound and solid education, and were Papa to die I can leave
with my teacher's diploma knowing something that will be of use to me.
I could help support you and Grandmamma. What could I do were I forced
to support myself after leaving Madam's. Why, an education such as her
girls receive is of no earthly account unless for music or such
accomplishments; but with a degree from Barnard I can earn good money.
I am so glad that I am young and that I shall have a chance. You'll be
proud of me, Mamma,--just wait and see," and she kissed her mother
affectionately.

They went down to breakfast. Archibald Hollister listened to his
daughter's plans. He was proud of her and his face showed it.

"You see, Papa," continued Ethel, "every penny is spent on me. Do you and
Mamma ever go to a theatre? No. Do you ever take a drive? Never,--why?
Because you can't spare the money. Now at least we shall be able to go
to the moving picture shows and take Grandmamma. I bet you'd enjoy it,
wouldn't you, Grandmamma? And, do you know, the best people go, and a
quarter is the highest priced seat."

The girl chatted on until the postman delivered the mail.

"Oh! a letter from Kate. Let's see what news she has written," and she
gave a gasp as she read the first page.

"Poor Mrs. Casey died Saturday from pneumonia. Nora is heartbroken, and
poor Pat Casey acts as though he knew not which way to turn. Nora looks
really refined in black,--almost handsome. She loved Mrs. Casey, who in
spite of her peculiarities was a good wife and mother. Later: Mr. Casey
wishes to take Nora away. He suggested New York, so you may see her,
etc."

Then Ethel described Honora.

"It is strange but I can never like that girl. There's something about
her that's antagonistic to me, and yet when she comes here I must be
polite and ask her to visit me."

"If she's in mourning she'll not expect to meet people," said Mrs.
Hollister quickly, "nor to go to any places of amusement, thank heavens."

"Oh, she's very generous. Probably she'd invite us, Mamma. Well, poor
Nora, she loved her mother. I'm sorry for her."




CHAPTER II

ETHEL ENTERS COLLEGE


The next morning Ethel Hollister walked up to Barnard and put in her
application for admittance. The following week upon her first examination
she failed, but she entered the class with conditions. The girl studied
hard and soon made good.

She liked the girls of her class. They were intelligent, athletic, and
agreeable.

Her former friends and companions from La Rue's declared that of
late--in fact, since she had become a Camp Fire Girl--Ethel Hollister
had developed fads. This Barnard was one. But as Ethel kept on
steadily progressing in college, and she was so very young--not yet
seventeen--people began to consider her a girl of great ability and
intelligence. Mrs. Hollister grew to be proud of hearing her praised
on every side and Archibald seemed less worried over money matters.
She was rather glad that things had changed. Perhaps it was all for
the best, and people would respect them no less.

Grandmother never wearied of hearing her grandchild tell of her visit.
"And to think," she'd say, "that Susan has had all the trouble she tells
of and has made no sign. How gladly would I have helped her. Still, had
I done so we would have had no house. Well, the Lord knows what's best.
We could only have offered her a home. I'm glad the Insane Asylum was
endowed and the boys educated before the crash came."

Nora did not visit New York in the winter. She went South with her
father. The girls--Kate and Ethel--corresponded, and in that way Ethel
heard all of the news. The Judge came often and took Patty and Kate on
long motor trips. Mattie was doing nicely. She was employed in a Woman's
Exchange where she received twelve dollars a week and taught cooking and
sewing. Mollie was improving daily. Mr. Hastings had a fine position with
Judge Sands. Honora was away, but the rest of the girls were as usual.
The Camp Fires met weekly and everyone missed Ethel, but no one missed
her as did Aunt Susan. "Why," wrote Kate, "she says the light has gone
out of her life, and Tom roams around disconsolate. But," she added, "you
should see the up-to-date way in which he dresses. He is the pink of
fashion, I tell you."

Ethel laughed, and while reading would stop every now and then to
explain.

Then Ethel answered:

"I have joined Miss Westcott's Camp Fire Girls, and if you believe it,
Mamma goes with me. She doesn't like it, but she's a great help to me and
to the girls, for she teaches them so much. She's consistent and it will
take her some time to overcome her prejudices. Nanny Bigelow belongs,
and Harvey takes us when Mamma can not go. By the way, Harvey seems
quite interested in medicine, and after graduating he is going to study
it. We call him 'Doctor' Bigelow.

"Dorothy Kip's Day Nursery has proved a great success. It is the dearest
little flat, and the babies are sweet. Dorothy's old woman is a great
help, and I want you to know that Dorothy works hard. Why, she almost
runs the place on contributions and her allowance, and the little ones
are just as happy and comfortable as possible. She has books and toys,
and we girls take turns in going in and reading to the elder children, as
well as amusing the younger ones. That is a good charity, and Grandmother
(Kate noticed that Ethel had begun to call Mrs. Hollister 'Mother' and
the old lady 'Grandmother') goes nearly every pleasant day and takes
flowers. She generally spends the afternoon with them, so in a small way
Dorothy Kip is emulating Jane Addams. Who knows but some day she may be
her equal,--Oh!"

The second letter said:

"I must tell you something. The other evening Harvey Bigelow called. You
know I never liked him any more than I liked Mattie nor Nora. Now I like
Mattie and I am beginning to like Harvey. I hope I shall change towards
Nora, but I see no sign now. Well, Harvey began.

"'Miss Ethel,' he said, 'I've determined to become a physician. I presume
you've heard that, and I'm determined to become a good one, too. You may
not know it, but I have always liked boys. I don't say that I dislike
girls,--but I do like boys. (Harvey is developing a sense of humor.)
When I visited my college chum--Joe Atkinson--this last summer, I was
surprised to learn that he was the Scout Master to a troop of eight boys.
He lives in Springfield, Illinois. I had a corking visit and a fine time
with the kids, two of whom are his young brothers.

"'Do you know, I became mightily interested in the movement. I have
studied and watched it and I think it's the finest thing ever started.
I came home quite enthusiastic and I talked of it to the two younger
Kip boys and Alan McAllister,--Grace's brother. If you'll believe it,
before I realized what I'd done, these boys had formed a troop and began
to importune me to be the Scout Master of it. There's the two Kips, Tom
Wilder (Sara Judson's cousin), a brother of Grace McAllister, Tommy
Westcott, and my cousin, Jack Atwater, besides two other boys from the
East Side Y.M.C.A. Miss Westcott, the Guardian of the Camp Fire Girls,
asked that they might be allowed to join, making eight in all.'

"I caught him by the hand and I said:

"'Harvey Bigelow, I take off my hat to you. I never liked you so well in
my life."

"He blushed awfully and seemed embarrassed, but he simply said:

"'Don't you think it about time that I became in earnest over something
in life? The opportunity presented itself and I grasped it--that's all.'

"Well, to make a long story short, several of these boys are desirous
of going West next summer and spending their vacations instead of East,
and he called to ask me about the Muskingum Camp. He is going there,
Kate, and he'll be near us. I made him write to Mr. Adams--your father's
man--who did everything for us, and ask him to reserve a place for the
Scouts. I'm just wild for summer to come. I'm going to bring Mother and
Grandmother. Grandmother will visit Aunt Susan, and Mother can spend her
time between Aunt Susan's, your house, and the Camp. She doesn't say
much but I really think the change is a relief to her--poor dear little
mother. I was the selfish juggernaut who made her sacrifice everyone for
me. I realize it now, and thank God it's not too late to mend.

"I am doing finely at college. I should like to form from some of my
class another Company of Camp Fire Girls, but the trouble is they are too
busy with study. They say that they're worn out when summer comes and
have to go away to rest, but they intend to join during their third year.
Then it won't be such a continuous _grind_ as it is now.

"I am so glad that I had the good sense to start in college. I intend to
be self-supporting after I graduate. I consider it a glorious thing for
an unmarried woman--don't you?

"Well, dear, I must close. Kiss Uncle John, etc."

That was great news for Kate--that Harvey Bigelow should have become a
man. It was too good to be true. She sent the letter to Aunt Susan, whom
she knew would be interested in it.

"I tell you, Ethel is made of good stuff!" ejaculated Uncle John. "She
was in the right church but in the wrong pew--that's all."




CHAPTER III

ETHEL AND HARVEY BECOME FIRM FRIENDS


Vacation arrived. Ethel had acquitted herself well, and her examinations
were excellent. She and her mother began making preparations to go West.

This time it was Grandmother and Mrs. Hollister whose wardrobes needed
replenishing. Ethel bought for herself two new suits and some blouses.
She had actually outgrown hers of the preceding summer.

"My dear, I am spending very little money now," said Mrs. Hollister, "and
I'm going to put some by for your trousseau."

Ethel laughed merrily.

"Why, Mother, where's the man?"

"Never mind," replied her mother, "he'll come."

"Mother, you're a born matchmaker!" exclaimed the girl. "I wish you had
had other daughters."

"Heaven forbid!" ejaculated Mrs. Hollister with a funny little smile.
"One is enough."

"Is that intended for a compliment?" laughed the girl. "If so it's a
doubtful one."

During the month of May, Harvey would invite her to go horseback riding
up to Van Cortlandt Park. They had to make it Saturdays, as that was
Ethel's only free day. They usually started early. On the country roads
the apple and peach blossoms were like pictures. To the girl they brought
back the previous spring at Aunt Susan's, and especially the morning when
she had revealed to Ethel the sad story of her married life. On one of
these excursions the girl related it to Harvey.

"By George!" he ejaculated when she had finished, "that old lady is
a sport and no mistake. She's all right. I imagined she was made of
different stuff from other women, and do you know I sort of suspected
that she hadn't all the money that your mother thought she had. She was
too refined and showed good blood. Had she been so wealthy, from her
dressing people might have taken her for a miser, and gentle folks are
seldom misers. I thought that it was necessity that caused her to wear
those old-fashioned clothes, so I argued that though Mrs. Hollister
imagined her wealthy and that you were in a line to inherit her money
there was a great mistake somewhere. But pshaw! as for that every mother
is ambitious for her daughter. Why, my mother left no stone unturned
until she had married Edith to Lord Ashurst, and I must admit that I was
easily led by my mother. Why, I've been out for a rich wife ever since I
left school; but, Ethel, I've changed. Now I propose to pay my bills with
the money I earn, not with hers; nor shall I allow her to buy what she
wears."

"Does your mother realize how you feel?" asked Ethel, pushing her fair,
curling locks from her eyes.

"Bless you, yes. She and I had one long talk, and after it I tell you
there was something doing in the Bigelow family; but Nannie who has lots
of horse sense sided with me, and together we were too many for mother.
She saw that it was up to her to make the best of it and she did, but
like your mother she still cherishes her ambitions. Nan said to her:

"'You have one daughter who has done the grand marriage stunt and she's
some class. Do let us choose for ourselves."

"What did your mother say to that?" laughed Ethel.

"I think she boxed Nannie's ears and then apologized. She loses her
self-control sometimes. Poor mother," and Harvey laughed. "Nannie has
some temper, too, and don't you make any mistake."

Ethel was beginning to have a real friendly feeling for Harvey. He asked
many questions about her cousin Kate.

"She rings true," he said. "I liked her from the first."

"She _is_ true," replied Ethel. "You'll see her this summer, and I'm sure
you'll like Uncle John and his wife. He's just a dear."

Those were red letter days for Ethel. She enjoyed the air, the
scenery, and the rides; and she enjoyed talking to Harvey, for now
that he understood she could talk to him as though he were one of
the family--without restriction and without embarrassment.

"What puzzles me," said Ethel, "is the way our mothers argue. When they
plan our marriages it's only money and position. Love never seems to
enter into their heads. Oh! I grew so tired of it. Thank God it's over,
and our family are now normal. Even Grandmother wished me to marry well.
I had far rather be an old maid than to be tied to a man for whom I care
nothing, and have to sit opposite and pour tea for him three hundred and
sixty-five days in a year. Imagine the horrible monotony of that. I heard
that advice given to a girl in a play and I never forgot it; and if only
girls could be brought to realize beforehand the sin of it there would be
fewer unhappy marriages."




CHAPTER IV

ETHEL'S SECOND TRIP


The time arrived for the Hollisters to start. There were tears in
Archibald Hollister's eyes as he kissed them goodbye at the train. Within
the last year his life had been happier. He had seen more of his wife and
had grown to love her better than he had since Ethel was a child. She and
he were together nearly all of the time, and it was like reading over a
forgotten love story.

"Don't you worry, papa," said Ethel, patting his cheek. "We're going
to keep well and have a lovely summer, and when you come up for your
vacation you'll be like a boy again."

"Yes, Archie," spoke up Mrs. Hollister "Be sure that Mirinda gives you
good things to eat and has them well cooked. She'll have little else to
do, and you go out and call on the Bigelows and Judsons. Take in the
moving pictures and roof gardens. I'll trust you," she laughed, "but
don't fail to write me three times a week, will you, telling me how
things are going on. And don't let Mirinda's young man come to the house
but once a week and on Sundays."

"Remember everything," laughed Ethel.

Grandmother kissed her son and murmured:

"God bless you, Archie. I expect to take on a new lease of life."

"Do mother," said the man, "we all need you."

The trip was pleasant. The scenery was fine and the country looked as
though it had been freshly swept and dusted, everything seemed so clean.
Grandmother's eyes glistened with pleasure. They were to stop at Akron
first, where they were to leave Grandmother, and after a visit of a week
Ethel and her mother were to go on to Columbus and hence to Camp.

As the train drew into the depot at Akron, there stood Tom with Aunt
Susan, but what a metamorphosis! Tom just escaped being a fashionably
dressed swell. He was too manly for that. He wore a blue serge suit,
colored negligee shirt with tie to match, a Panama hat, and russet ties.
His handsome face was so full of character that Mrs. Hollister whispered
to Ethel:

"What a remarkably distinguished looking man he is. You never told me of
his being so."

Ethel blushed when Tom took her up and kissed her as he might have done
had she been his sister, and as for Aunt Susan, even Grandmother gazed
at her with amazement. She was attired in a modish little automobile
bonnet, close fitting and of grey, while her grey linen suit gave her
an up-to-date air, for now, she proudly informed Ethel, Tom owned his
own car.

"Aunt Susan, you look out of sight," said Ethel, kissing her. "I never
knew you."

Mrs. Hollister was happy. Ethel had not half told her, and she was
agreeably disappointed. They took their seats in the new and commodious
car and soon reached the little house. The ingrain and rag carpets had
disappeared. In their places were Oriental rugs. Striped red awnings
shaded the windows and piazzas. The porch had been converted into the
cosiest of lounging places with willow furniture, scarlet cushions, rugs,
birds, plants, etc., as well as small tables filled with the latest
magazines and Aunt Susan's sewing baskets. They had a hammock at either
end, and altogether it was lovely. Mrs. Hollister simply raved over it
and the artistic interior with its fine old furniture.

"Ethel is responsible for this change," said Tom, removing his hat and
wiping his handsome brow. "Last summer when she came here I dressed like
a countryman, but in the most tactful manner she suggested high collars,
different ties, and fairly talked my army hat right off my head, saying
that I looked like a G.A.R. Little by little she's converted Aunt Susan
into a fashionable woman. But how careless of me. Let me get you a cup of
tea," he said to Mrs. Hollister, placing a table before her and a stool
under her feet.

He soon returned, bringing the tray and a plate of delicious jumbles.

"You see," he continued, "Aunt Susan will not keep two girls, so I have
to be waitress now and then. She is attached to Jane, who though is a
good cook, but her trouble is she's set in her way and refuses to stay
if we allow another girl to enter the house. We are handicapped, you
see, for we can't spare Jane, nor could we replace her."

Gradually he took Mrs. Hollister into his confidence and told her of
his early life and of Aunt Susan's misfortunes. "But bless you," he
continued, "the Lord is good to us. She'll never need a penny for my
income is increasing and my practice is more than I can attend to. I
should have a partner but she won't hear of my taking one. She is too
cautious. So I have several young students who study law in my office
and help me as well."

Then he proceeded to extol Ethel.

"Mrs. Hollister," he said, "she's a girl of wonderful character and
she'll make a magnificent woman. I notice she's improved since she was
here."

"Yes, it's her college," replied her mother, "and the life at camp last
summer. I must admit she knew more than I when she broke loose from my
foolish and unwise influence. I was not fit to guide her, Mr. Harper,
I realize it now."

"Never mind, madam; it's to you she owes her beauty. Why, you and she
look exactly like sisters," whereupon Mrs. Hollister capitulated to Tom
Harper. She couldn't speak of him with enough enthusiasm and praise. She
wrote pages to Archibald.

"My dear, everyone says he'll yet be Governor, and while I wouldn't have
you breathe it for the world I'm sure he's in love with Ethel. What a
couple they'd make. Of course she has no suspicion of such a thing, nor
would I hint it to her; but you wait and see."

Mr. Hollister smiled as he read his wife's letter, and his heart was
glad. He had known Tom Harper's father and had respected him highly.

"Well," he thought, "this time Bella is on the right tack. I'll not
interfere," and he softly whistled "Comin' Thro' the Rye."




CHAPTER V

CAMP AGAIN


"Aunt Susan, you've grown so young," said Ethel, "and as for Tom, well
he's the glass of fashion and mould of form. He looks fine. Oh! I'm so
glad to be back and to have Mother and Grandmother with me; and Father
will be here soon. It seems like a dream--too good to be true. Hasn't
Mother grown lovely?"

"Never saw anything like the change," replied the old lady. "In fact,
you've worked wonders in us all, my dear," she said. "Look at me. Why! I
feel like an up-to-date fashion plate."

Ethel laughed.

"Yes, Madam, you're up-to-date all right and no mistake. I didn't know
you that day at the depot."

"I often wonder," continued the elderly woman, "if people think I'm
putting on airs. Really, Jane told me of some woman who said 'old Mrs.
Carpenter was mighty upraised, dressing like a young girl.' It's funny,
isn't it, what dress will do. But I should look young for I'm so happy
to have Alice here again, and to think that we shall be together all
summer. I don't yet seem to realize it."

"Did you notice how Grandmother cried as this house came to view,--her
birthplace?"

"No wonder. She hasn't been here," said Aunt Susan, "since Mother's
funeral, I presume it brought it all back to her. Poor Alice! I ought
not to say it, but Archie Hollister was not the man to make her happy.
He ran through with nearly all of her money. It slipped through his
fingers just like water, and I guess her life with his family was none
too peaceful and happy. They had the name of being great fighters. Of
course she has her recompense in John and Archibald--that's something.
A woman needs peace. Now take your mother, for instance. Why has she
grown young? Because she's quit worrying--that is the secret."

"Yes, and when I think that she did it all for me--why, Aunt Susan,
I can't lay up anything against her; I love her too well. She sees
now how useless it all was. But what do you know about Harvey Bigelow?
Isn't he developing into a fine man?"

"He certainly is," replied Aunt Susan, "and I always liked him. He looked
one squarely in the eye, and such a man can be trusted."

"I don't know," answered Ethel, "of late everyone seems to be changing
for the better. The whole world appears different to me. It makes me
happy to see others happy," and the girl went out to call her mother and
Tom in to tea.

"I'm transferring my allegiance to your mother, young woman," said Tom.

"I'm not a bit jealous," replied Ethel. "Mother is really more
interesting to men than I, and what's more, she's always been. But
hurry in; Jane will be furious if her biscuits grow cold."

The two weeks passed only too quickly. They spent their days touring
all over Ohio, so it seemed to Ethel, and at night the young people came
in shoals to see her, while the grown-ups had bridge parties. Said Mrs.
Hollister:

"How hospitable and lovely these Westerners are. I had no idea that they
were so refined."

"What did you expect to meet, Mother?" laughed Ethel--"not cowboys?"

"Susan," said Grandmother one morning, "I notice that you curl your hair.
It's very becoming, I think."

"Alice, you don't consider me too old, do you? Sometimes I wonder if I'm
not sort of making a fool of myself, but Ethel got me in the way of it
and I try to keep the front as fluffy as possible, for she asked me to.
And I've another confession to make," said Aunt Susan. "Alice, I blue my
hair--regular bluing water so as to keep it white. There now--what do you
think of that?"

"So do I, Susan," laughed her sister. "I've done it for several years. It
certainly does improve the color. Grey hairs grow so yellow looking. The
child is right. We ought to keep ourselves up while we're able. We polish
up old mahogany and keep it fresh and clean--why not old women?" and the
two laughed merrily.

"I think the Camp Fire business has made a woman of Ethel, don't you?"

"How could it fail to?" said Aunt Susan. "Women are coming into
their own, Alice. They're growing sensible and self-reliant. Look
at our Grandmothers and at us. Do you notice the difference? And
our grandchildren will be just as far ahead of us as we are of our
grandmothers. Isn't it wonderful?"

"I like you Western people," said Mrs. Hollister, coming in at that
moment followed by Ethel.

"I've just told Mother," said the girl, "that Western people can give
points to us. They are natural, kind-hearted, hospitable, and they seldom
measure their friendship by the amount of people's bank accounts. With
them it's character that talks."

"How did you like my sanitarium, Bella?" asked Aunt Susan.

"I couldn't half express myself," replied Mrs. Hollister. "You're a
wonderful woman, Aunt Susan, and the people here have cause to bless
you. I've never before admitted this to Ethel, but I'm very glad that
she came here last summer. I see my short-sightedness every day when
I look back and realize how I was bringing her up," and Mrs. Hollister
wiped her eyes.

"You've been a lovely and kind mother to me," replied Ethel. "You have
sacrificed far too much for me and I never half appreciated it."

"I have been an unwise mother my dear," said she, "and you stopped
me just in time. I only now begin to realize my limitations. I've been
self-centered and conceited."

Ethel kissed her mother affectionately, and the two old ladies coughed
and knitted vigorously.

"We are all liable to make mistakes, Bella," said Aunt Susan. "Yours has
been in loving your child too dearly."




CHAPTER VI

UNCLE JOHN'S


They arrived in Columbus where Uncle John greeted them affectionately and
insisted upon kissing his sister-in-law. Mrs. Hollister was persuaded not
to go to camp until after a few days, when the girls should be settled.
Then Uncle John was to take her up. So Ethel, Kate, and the girls, with
one new member, went alone.

Save that Nora Casey wore mourning and seemed quiet, everything was the
same as the summer before. Patty Sands was wild with delight upon seeing
Ethel. Edna Whitely was the same happy-go-lucky Edna as of old. Mollie
Long and Edith Overman had grown very tall, while Sallie Davis had become
a perfect roly poly. She had gained twenty pounds and was constantly
dieting and taking long walks.

Mattie Hastings cried when she beheld Ethel. Mattie had grown quiet and
dignified, while in her face she showed more character.

Ethel looked at them all, especially at Honora.

"Can I not put my dislike of that girl behind me?" she thought. "Why
can't I be nice to her?"

She tried hard. She began asking her of her mother, and tears filled
Nora's eyes, but after a while her voice began to take on its old shrill
tones, while in her manner there came that indescribable something that
had always repelled Ethel.

"That girl is my cross," she thought. "I must like her, and yet I can't.
I shall never become worthy to be a Camp Fire Girl until I overcome it.
I wonder if she'll affect Mother as she does me."

Ethel was now a Fire Maker. In addition to her Wood Gatherer's ring she
wore the pretty silver bracelet of the Fire Maker.

The second evening they had a Council Fire. The wood and kindling
had been gathered and brought by Edna Whitely and a new girl named
Kate Winthrop, who had never been to Camp before. Edna couldn't seem
to advance. She was actually too lazy to work for honors and it worried
Kate Hollister not a little.

"What's the difference?" she would say. "Someone will have to gather
wood and we have but one new girl--that's Kate. You may be glad that
I stayed."

The girls looked pretty in their brown ceremonial gowns and their long
hair banded with the ceremonial band. Ethel advanced and lighted the
fire, intoning the usual Fire Makers' song. Then they had the exercises.
Honors were awarded and several girls advanced to the next higher grade.
This is the Fire Makers' ode to Fire that they intoned as Ethel lighted
the Council Fire: "Oh, Fire, long years ago when our fathers fought with
the great animals you were their protection. From the cruel cold of
winter you saved them. When they needed food you changed the flesh of
beasts into savory meat for them. During all the ages your mysterious
flame has been a symbol to them for Spirit. So (tonight) we light our
fire in remembrance of the great Spirit who gave you to us."

In the darkness of the woods with the bright flames shooting upward the
effect of the chanting was weird, mysterious and unusual.

Then Kate showed Ethel the typed copy of the Legend of Ohio which had
been attached to each count book, handing her a copy for her own.

The roll was called, reports read of the last Council Fire, and of the
weekly meeting. Edna Whitely had really exerted herself and had written
it in clever rhyme.

Then to their surprise a report of Ethel's and Patty's kindness to Mattie
Hastings was read. It seems that Mattie's conscience had troubled her and
at one of the meetings she had confessed it all and how she had been
saved by the two girls. She also requested that it should be read upon
Ethel's return. It told how under unusual distress she had been tempted
to do a great wrong,---how the two girls caused her to make restitution,
and how after that they placed Mollie in the Cripples School, and that
now she was on her way to recovery. It said that she began from then to
try and lead a better life and that with God's help she was doing so.

The girls looked at one another, but although they made no sign they knew
what the wrong was. But they smiled at Mattie in the most friendly way,
Nora grasping her by the hand said:

"I hope yere sister will be after walkin' soon."

Then came the Wohelo ceremony. Mattie came forward and lighted a
branch, throwing it on the ashes, while Patty Sands knelt and lighted
it chanting:

"Wohelo means work. We glorify work because through work we are free. We
work to win, to conquer, to be masters. We work for the joy of working
and because we are free."

Then she stepped back and Edith Overman came forward chanting and
lighting another branch.

"Wohelo means health. We hold on to health because through health we
serve and are happy; in caring for the health and beauty of our persons
we are caring for the very shrine of the Great Spirit. Wohelo means
health."

Then Sallie Davis stepped forward while Edith retired. She lighted the
third branch which crackled and threw up numberless red sparks, after
which she chanted the last verse:

"I light the light of love, for Wohelo means love. We love Love, for
love is life and light and joy and sweetness. And love is comradeship
and motherhood and fatherhood, and all dear kinship. Love is the joy
of service so deep that self is forgotten. Wohelo means love."

After that this song was sung:
"Lay me to sleep in thy sheltering flame.
    O Master of the Hidden Fire.
Wash pure my heart and cleanse for me
    My Soul's desire.
In flame of sunrise bathe my soul
    O Master of the Hidden Fire.
That when I wake clear-eyed may be
    My Soul's desire."

This is by Fiona Macleod.

They stood around talking to Miss Kate for a little while, who walking
over to Mattie kissed her tenderly, after which each girl followed her
example before retiring, and poor Mattie was all broken up over it.




CHAPTER VII

MRS. HOLLISTER'S VISIT TO CAMP


When the morning dawned on the day Mrs. Hollister was expected, great
were the preparations made for that lady.

"Listen to me, girls; she's the cleverest woman you ever met," said
Cousin Kate. "She has not been exactly in favor of our organization,
so I wish each of you girls to do your best, and Mrs. Hollister can
teach you so many useful things."

"Yes, indeed," said Ethel. "Cousin Kate is right. There's very little
that Mother can not do."

Old Mr. Adams came up with a load of delicacies which had been ordered by
the thoughtful Uncle John.

He paid no attention to the girls but as on previous occasions he gave
his entire attention to his horses. He wiped off their foaming sweat with
his hands. Last year it had been his handkerchief varied with bundles of
grass and leaves. After cleaning them to his satisfaction he calmly
walked to the clear brook and washed his hands thoroughly.

"Isn't that awful?" whispered Patty to Miss Kate. "I shall never feel
like drinking water from that brook again."

"Why my dear," laughed Kate, "that water changes every minute. It's gone
now and in its place there's fresh--don't worry."

"Here they are!" called Nora, and there came to view Uncle John and a
lady whom from Ethel's resemblance to her they at once knew and fell
deeply in love with, especially Mattie.

And everything pleased Mrs. Hollister,--the girls, their costumes, their
tents, and the delicious dinner cooked over an open fire interested her
greatly. She even held one of the forked branches on which reposed the
chicken and broiled it as well as a chef, but she thought the green corn
was the most delicious thing that she'd ever tasted. After dinner she
said:

"Now girls, see if I have it correct: 'After tying a string to the end
of each ear, soak the corn in water for an hour. Then lay it on the hot
coals, turning frequently. Draw it out by the string and eat with salt
and melted butter.' Well, it's simply great. I wish I were young again.
I think I'd like to be a Camp Fire Girl." She was as enthusiastic as a
child. Ethel looked at Kate and they smiled over the change that had
taken place since the day Kate wished to explain to her aunt what the
Camp Fire Girl was.

"Don't you think that Mother grows young?" asked Ethel proudly of her
cousin.

"She's a changed woman," replied Kate, "in every way. She's simply
lovely."

Mrs. Hollister adapted herself and made friends quickly. She became
tactful, a quality that had hitherto been unknown. She liked Nora and
the girl loved Mrs. Hollister. Ethel marveled. That her mother who
disliked anything savoring of loudness could tolerate Nora seemed
wonderful.

"The fault must lie with me," she thought. "Even Mother likes her."

Mrs. Hollister went right to work and taught the girls how to cut and
fit. She taught them many of the little arts and niceties of dressmaking,
and the girls became proficient and at the next Council meeting each
received several honors. Then she taught them to trim hats and make the
daintiest bows; and after she had taught them how to crochet and make
Irish lace their gratitude was boundless.

She also taught them how to cook--how to make delicious corn bread
with one egg, where they had been in the habit of using two, insisting
upon their first scalding their meal. Then she made them delicious
gingerbread, using cold coffee left from breakfast in place of milk
or cream and many other dishes of which they had never heard.

"Really, Aunt Bella," said Kate, as the girls were receiving their
honors, "I feel that you deserve some of these beads."




CHAPTER VIII

THE SCOUTS ARRIVE


Great was the surprise of the girls when the next afternoon they beheld
walking towards the Camp two young men in Scout costume. They were none
other than Harvey Bigelow and young Teddy Kip, the Master and assistant
Scout Master of the "Flying Eagles" Scout Patrol. Each wore a small flag,
and upon a red ground was a black and white eagle. As they advanced they
gave their cry--"Yeh--yeh--yeh!"

"Oh! Harvey," screamed Ethel, and rushed forward, greeting them warmly.

Then Cousin Kate came and welcomed them cordially, introducing them to
the nine girls.

"Why, Mrs. Hollister," said Harvey, catching sight of her in her tent,
"it does seem good to see you here," and he gazed at her thoughtfully
and curiously. "'Pon my word you've grown so young I thought you were
Ethel at first."

She wore one of her daughter's costumes and really she did look
wonderfully youthful.

"Well, you can't complain. The Camp life has done you some good, and
there you were so down on it."

"Yes, I was, but people change. Look at yourself," replied she seriously.

"Mrs. Hollister," said he, "I've been here only one week, but I already
feel that I'm another man. It's splendid for both boy and girl. It's a
boon to be able to get away from city people and fashionable resorts.
Nan has put up a big fight and, Ethel, she's coming out to see you next
month," he said.

"Oh, how lovely! Kate, hear this: Nannie Bigelow is coming here to see us
next month."

"I shall be here until the middle," said Harvey, "and she'll go home
with us. I've an aunt in Springfield and she'll go there for a visit
first. After that she'll come on here and spend a few days if you
girls want her to."

"I'm so glad," said Ethel, and she ran to tell her mother.

Teddy Kip was a handsome lad of about eighteen. Immediately Patty Sands
suggested that he must see everything, so she took him off under her
wing. The rest sat on the ground while Harvey related several anecdotes
and funny experiences that had befallen his patrol since they came to
Camp.

"Now you must stay and dine with us," said Kate. "Our cooking may not
surprise you, as it is the Scouts' way as well, but we'll give you a
change--a shore dinner. Father sent up some very fresh clams. We'll
steam them, and we'll have roasted potatoes, corn, and broiled chicken,
a little salad and a ripe watermelon to finish."

"Well, I declare--'pon my word, one might imagine himself in Rhode
Island. We'll stay," and he smacked his lips.

"Nora, will you take Mr. Bigelow and show him our cellar. And the
boys--perhaps they'll help us to prepare our meal," said Kate.

The young fellows were delighted to help the girls. Nora arose slowly and
Harvey followed.

Kate remarked to Ethel that Nora had changed so since her mother's death
and asked her if she had noticed it.

"Yes, I do notice that she seems more quiet," replied Ethel.

"But you still dislike her though?" asked Kate.

"I don't know," replied Ethel. "I'm ashamed to admit it, Cousin Kate,
but I can never seem to overcome that antipathy to her. If only her voice
would lower a little, and if she'd cease to come up and slap one on the
back I might feel differently, but she's so rough and unladylike."

"Ethel, environments may have had much to do with that. She seems to love
your mother. But here comes Patty with young Kip."

"What a dandy site you have here for a Camp," said the young man. "Gee!
it's choice. It beats ours."

When dinner was ready how they ate! They pronounced it equal to the
best shore dinner ever prepared, and when finished there was nothing
left excepting clam shells and corn cobs.

That was Mrs. Hollister's last day in Camp. She had been with the girls
for two weeks. After leaving Camp she was to spend half of her time with
Kate's parents and the remaining with Aunt Susan.

Harvey and Teddy stayed until nearly five o'clock, and it was with regret
on both sides that they had to go.

The next day being Sunday, Kate read the prayers while they all sung
several hymns, after which each girl was left to do as she chose. Ethel
proposed to ride horseback. Several joined together and hired a buckboard
for the afternoon.

"We'll meet you at the Lake," they said to Ethel, and off they went.

It was a warm afternoon. The sky looked alternately bright, then cloudy,
but they started not minding though it rained.

Nora declined to join the buckboard party and strolled off by herself.
She looked almost pretty in her clean, white linen suit and her hair
tightly bound by a broad black ribbon. The goldenrod and sumac were
opening, but the summer flowers looked old and tired, as though they
needed new gowns and freshening up a bit. The girl thought of how alone
she was and sighed. Then her mother came into her mind. To think that
she had to be taken while so young--not yet forty-five, and the tears
rolled down her cheeks. But "Thank God," she thought, "I never caused
her any unhappiness, and I still have my dear, kind father," and Nora
wiped her eyes. "It's Miss Ethel who dislikes me. No matter what I say
to her nor how friendly I am, she won't like me. And when I try to joke
or do her a little kindness, if she smiles sure her smile chills me. It's
like a piece of ice going down me back. And her 'thank you, Honora' is
as cold as charity. I like her mother the best. And yet Miss Ethel kissed
me goodbye at the train last summer; but she was kissing everyone and I
suppose she had to kiss me, for she's too much of a lady to slight a
body. Yet she'd be glad to see the last of me--that I know."




CHAPTER IX

NORA GIVES SERVICE


Honora was an unconscious lover of Nature. She turned and beheld the sun
slowly sinking.

"Ah! it must be nearly six o'clock," she thought. "I must make haste,"
but she stood spellbound, watching the glowing crimson, purple and yellow
changing into orange, green, and greyish pink, and she gazed at the fiery
ball sinking slowly behind the hills.

"How lovely!" she thought, "and it's gone down in a cloud. That means
rain. It's growing very dark. Me for a quick walk down these hills before
I lose my way."

She started down the path not a little worried. She had strayed off the
main road and was on a side one leading through the woods. If only it
would keep light until she reached Camp, and then if she could strike
the broad road she'd be all right.

Walking rapidly through the woods she suddenly fancied that she hard a
low moan, as though from someone in pain.

"It's a tramp perhaps," she thought. "He may be in trouble. Well, tramp
or no tramp I must help him. I'll see."

Unafraid, Nora walked to the spot whence the cry had proceeded. Her eye
fell upon an object huddled together on the ground. As it was out of the
beaten path she stepped from branches and logs to stones and rocks
before she reached it. She stooped down and gazed at it intently; then
she uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"It's Miss Ethel!" she gasped. "God help her."

She was right. There lay Ethel Hollister--the girl who had never liked
her--the girl from whom, no matter how hard she might try, Nora could
get nothing beyond a cool "Thank you very much, Nora."

From the arm of this young woman trickled a stream of bright, red blood.
Honora wondered if she was dead. She gently shook her.

"Miss Ethel!" she called once and twice, "Are ye much hurt?" Then she
half lifted her to a sitting posture and Ethel opened her eyes.

"Oh, Miss Casey--Honora!" she gasped feebly. "Thank God it is you who
have found me. I have been so frightened. Two men were searching for
me. I passed them on the road before my horse took fright and threw me.
I heard them say: 'It must be the same girl. She rode a white horse.
Now I know who she is. She's the niece of John Hollister. Her father
is a rich New Yorker. We can sell the horse. We've got him safe, and
we can keep the girl for a ransom. Probably she's injured and is lying
somewhere around here.' Nora, I dared not breathe lest they should find
me. I prayed to God as I've never prayed before to let them pass me and
to send me help. He has answered my prayer and I'm grateful. When I heard
your footsteps I thought they had returned. Oh! I am so glad that it's
you," and she burst into tears.

Nora knelt down and took her by the hand.

"Where is your pain, my dear?" she asked.

"My leg. I guess it must be broken, and my arm---I have had that nearly
cut off. The horse became frightened and unmangeable. He turned into
these woods and started to run. I was knocked off by the branch of a
tree. I don't know how long I've lain here--it seems for hours. I must
have fainted, but Nora the pain in my arm and leg is terrible. Whatever
can we do?"

The girl's hat hung from the tree. Her hair was unloosed and hanging
about her face. Evidently she was suffering agony, and to make matters
worse upon the leaves overhead Nora heard a pattering of rain.

"This will never do," she said to herself. Not a sign of a house or a
vehicle in sight. A damp chill pervaded the air. They were too far from
the main road to seek assistance.

"Your arm has been cut by this jagged stone, Miss Ethel," said Nora,
kneeling and starting to roll from the girl's arm the sleeve of her
blouse. "I don't think there are any bones broken. But first I must stop
its bleeding."

Nora, having had considerable experience with cuts, wounds and bruises,
went to work as though she were about to teach the girls "first aid."

Her handkerchief was soiled. Ethel had lost hers. Both women wore silk
petticoats. How could she manage to secure a bandage?

Suddenly her mother wit came to the rescue. She slipped off her linen
skirt. It was perfectly clean. With her strong teeth she tore into strips
the front breadth.

"Hark!" she exclaimed. "Glory be to God! I think I hear running water."
She said it devoutly and in gratitude, for now it was water that she
needed. Taking Ethel's hat from the tree she started up the road where to
her joy she beheld a watering trough that was fed by a little waterfall
trickling down the side of the rocks.

After thoroughly washing the long linen strips so as to be sure that the
starch was out of them she filled Ethel's hat with water and hurried
back.

"Here, dearie," she said, "Let me wash your face. I brought the water in
your hat," and with the balance of her skirt she washed the girl's face
and then proceeded to tear open the sleeve, cleansing the wound with a
fresh hatful of water. She did it carefully and thoroughly, with the
skill of a surgeon. It was an ugly wound, but she bound the arm firmly
with the strips.

"There now! So much for that," ejaculated Nora, rising and pushing back
from her brow one curly lock that always insisted upon falling over her
eyes.

"Oh, Honora! you are an angel," exclaimed Ethel, "and I have always been
so unfriendly."

Nora appeared not to hear but went on:

"Can you stand, my dear?" she asked.

"No," sobbed the girl, "I guess my leg must be broken. However are we
to reach Camp? Oh, Nora, for God's sake don't leave me. I should die of
fright were you to do so, and the men may be hiding near even now. Don't
go, I beseech. I know I am selfish and I've been unkind to you, but
forgive me, Nora. I'll be your slave after this if only you'll stay with
me. Don't go for help. Just stay here until I die," and the girl fell to
sobbing.

"I'm cold," she murmured--"I'm so chilly, Nora," and she shivered.

Quickly Nora removed her heavy white sweater that she had just put on,
and raising Ethel to a sitting posture she first put in her good arm.
Then she fastened the sweater about the girl's neck.

"There, dear, that will keep you warm, and I'll not be after leaving
you--never fear--not if we stay together all night in these woods. But
I must think how we can manage with you and your injuries. Faith it's
raining and you may catch your death."

"And I have your sweater on, Nora!" exclaimed Ethel. "Oh, how selfish I
am."

"Keep still," replied Nora. "I couldn't wear it now, for I'm going to try
and carry you home."

For a moment Nora gazed tentatively at Ethel. Then suddenly there
appeared a dawn of hope in her strong honest face.

"Miss Ethel, listen," she began. "When a child did ye ever play
pig-a-back? Perhaps I might get you home that way."

"Yes, Nora. Papa always carried me up to bed that way," and the girl
burst into tears.

"Ye mustn't cry," said Nora. "If ye do I shan't be able to carry ye. Now
wipe your pretty eyes and help me carry ye as Papa used to. Forget your
pain and try to be patient, for, Ethel, we must reach camp some way.
Doubtless they are searching for us even now, but this is a side road far
from the main one. They'll never think to look here, nor could they hear
us were we of call. And then those men you spoke of. They may be near.
There's no time to lose. Get on my back and cling for dear life."

Nora had great sense. She realized that until she had thoroughly
frightened Ethel she would not exert herself and forget her pain. Then,
too, if what she had told her were true, the men might really be lying in
wait to capture the supposed wealthy New York girl.

Sitting on the ground with her back before Ethel she first gently raised
the wounded arm, bringing the other one around to meet it. Thanks to the
low branch of a tree and to Nora's recent physical culture exercises,
making an almost superhuman effort she arose with her burden on her
back. Then grasping the girl's knees she held them firmly, thereby
supporting her injured leg, and started for the road, stopping now and
then by a fence or stone to take breath and rest. On and on in that
failing light she bravely walked.

As she descended the hill she seemed to have gained new strength. Now and
then she'd speak cheering words to the wounded girl, trying to encourage
her to bear her pain. The rain pelted in Honora's face, often blinding
her. The thunder rolled and the lightning played, but she showed no
sign of faltering. Onward she went, even faster.

Soon to her joy she beheld the main road, and after a few more rods a
light from the Camp Fire.

"Shure," she thought, "now I know why men in olden times looked for the
fire from their camps. It does cheer a body and give them new life."

She was ready to drop when she reached Camp. Ethel was no light weight.
While in Camp she had gained, and now she weighed nearly a hundred and
thirty-seven pounds. As Nora neared home she saw parties of men about to
start on searching tours. They had sent word by Mr. Adams to Harvey, and
there he and his patrol stood ready to start. Uncle John with the second
party were there as well. In some way the horse had escaped from the two
men and had returned to Camp, but without Ethel. Then they knew that she
had been thrown. And as for Nora, something dreadful must have happened
to her, for Nora was so strong and self-reliant.

A shout rent the air when they beheld Nora Casey drenched to the skin,
hatless, coatless, with nearly all of her skirt missing, and carrying on
her back a hysterical, shrieking girl, while with no apparent effort
she walked steadily towards them. Harvery Bigelow's admiration for one so
strong and courageous showed itself on every line of his face.

Uncle John took Ethel from Nora and laid her on the Camp bed that had
been brought from the tent.

"By Jove!" ejaculated Harvey as he examined Ethel's ankle and pronounced
it a compound fracture, "you're all right, Miss Casey, first to staunch
the blood and bandage her arm, and second to bind her ankle in such a
surgeon-like manner, say nothing of carrying her on your back for over a
mile and a half and holding her leg so that you saved her pain. I take
off my hat to you, Miss Casey. You have the nerve and strength of a man."

"I don't see," said Uncle John, "how in the name of heaven you managed to
raise her, wounded as she was, upon your back--let alone bringing her
through the pouring rain a dark night like this. Why! it's been a regular
thunder shower. I'm glad that her mother knows nothing of it."

Nora sighed. She was very tired. Miss Kate came forward and put her arm
around her.

"My dear, you are an honor to the Camp Fires. We owe a vote of thanks to
this brave girl," and taking Nora's face between her hands she kissed her
affectionately.

"I've done nothing wonderful," replied Nora simply, taking her sweater
from Patty Sands. "Luckily I heard her moan and found her. I couldn't go
away and leave her helpless and alone in a blinding storm, and two men
waiting to seize her." Then she told Ethel's story of the conversation
that she had overheard.

"Nor could we stay in the woods over night alone."

A buckboard appeared and Mrs. Hollister jumped out. She had heard of the
accident through Mr. Adams and had made him bring her up.

After seeing Ethel for a few moments she rushed out and threw her arms
about Nora.

"You are a dear brave girl," she sobbed, kissing her. "You have saved
Ethel's life. Never while I live shall I forget it."

"Nor I," broke in Uncle John, grasping the hands of the girl. "Miss Nora,
you're a fine young woman and you're father has cause to be proud of his
daughter."

"Miss Nora," ejaculated Harvey, "allow me to congratulate you. You're a
dead game sport," and he wrung her hands heartily, after which Teddy Kip
grasped her by the arm saying:

"Why, Miss Casey, you're a regular Scout--you are, and no mistake."

Nora smiled faintly.

"Thank you all," she said. "I am very tired. I think I shall go to bed.
Good night."




CHAPTER X

A HEROINE


So Nora Casey became the heroine of the Camp. An account of her bravery
was in all the papers and the entire Camp was written up. The once
neglected and disliked girl was now in a fair way to be spoiled. But
Nora could not be spoiled. She was too sensible.

"I say, Miss Nora," exclaimed Harvey the next day, "I don't think I'd
dare marry a woman with your strength. You'd put me to shame."

Nora laughed good naturedly.

"Quit yere blarney," she said.

As for Ethel, she couldn't bear to let Nora out of her sight, and Nora
whose heart was tender and whose nature was forgiving devoted herself to
the girl, reading aloud, relating funny stories of her father, and when
tired of talking Patty, Mattie, she and Ethel would play bridge.

The men considered that Ethel had had a narrow escape. Uncle John
consulted with Judge Sands as to what was best to do about the kidnapers.
A few days later two suspicious looking creatures were arrested. They had
escaped from Joliet jail and admitted having been for days in the woods.
Ethel rode to the trial and identified their voices but she had not seen
their faces. They were returned to jail in Joliet and before they left
they confessed that they had contemplated finding the girl and holding
her for a ransom. They were intending to sell the horse but they had not
tied him securely and he had broken loose. They were ugly looking
customers.

The next week before the breaking up of camp, when Mr. Casey came to
take Nora home, everyone flocked around him telling of his daughter's
brave act. He took Ethel by the hand and remarked simply:

"It was like Honora to do that. There's none more brave than she--God
bless her."

From that day Nora had no better friend than Ethel. She felt that the
girl had saved her life and her gratitude was boundless.

"Tell me," asked; Nora, "why did you dislike me so?"

"I was wicked, Nora," replied Ethel, "I am ashamed of it now."

"But," persisted the girl, "did you think me vulgar?"

"No," replied Ethel. "I thought you had a loud voice, and there's
something about a loud voice that I dislike. But even so I should have
overlooked that, had I been a good girl. You are so far above me, Nora,
that I am ashamed to even acknowledge it."

"Miss Ethel--" said Nora.

"Call me Ethel in future," said the girl--"please do."

"Well--Ethel--you are not the first one who has criticised my voice. My
teachers have always done so, and even my mother used to say, 'Not so
loud, Nora dear. Speak more gentle like.'"

"Did she?" asked Ethel.

"Yes, my mother had her faults, Ethel, but at heart she was a lady. So
your dislike of me was not so strange after all."

"But," interrupted Ethel, "Nora, perhaps I wasn't thankful to hear your
loud voice when I lay there wounded and helpless, and I'm ashamed to even
have told you."

"I wish you to help me," broke in Nora. "I wish to make myself
different--more of a lady. Will you tell me when I talk too loud?
It will be a favor if you will."

Ethel assented and kissed Nora affectionately.

Nannie Bigelow arrived and the girl became a general favorite. She at
once fell in love with Nora.

"Why, she's a heroine," she said. "She'd give her life for another. I
think she's splendid."

Nannie had much to say of their New York Camp Fire, and of the girls who
belonged.

"You know some of them are quite unlike us, but Miss Westcott says
they'll improve--that being with us will make them more gentle. And
you have no idea how they _are_ improving. And as for Dorothy's nursery,
it's just booming. There is a waiting list a mile long," and she chatted
on, entertaining the girls with her talk.

At the next and last Council Meeting, the girls received honors for
having slept three months out of doors, for learning to swim, and rowing
twenty miles on the Muskingum River, and for sailing a boat without
help for fifty miles. They also received extra honors for cooking, and
for learning and making a mattress out of the twigs of trees; for long
walks, and for washing and ironing, which the girls did well.

Whenever she looked at Nora, Ethel's conscience troubled her. She seemed
to feel her own unworthiness. Mrs. Hollister suggested to Mr. Casey that
Nora should visit them for a couple of months in the city.

"I'll gladly let her go to ye next winter, Ma'am, but not to visit. I
would like her to be wid a grand lady like yourself, and if you'll let
me pay her board I'll consider it a great favor. And if she might go to
some fine school, Ma'am, where she could learn how to be a lady and stay
at your house I would pay any price."

At first Mrs. Hollister objected to the money part, but Mr. Casey begged
so hard that, realizing what Nora had done for Ethel, she felt she should
be willing to do anything to benefit her. So she consented.

"You can put me anywhere," said Nora, "I will be like one of your
family."

Mrs. Hollister put her arm around the girl.

"My dear," she said, "the best I have ought not to be good enough for
you. It's little enough for me to take you, and I should like to do so
without having your father pay me a penny."

So it was all arranged. In November, Nora was to become an inmate of the
Hollister household.

Ethel had made up her mind to give the girl her room, she taking one on
the top floor.

"I would gladly sleep on bare boards for her," she said to her
mother,--"the brave girl to whom I have been so unjust. I'm glad
she's coming. I'll devote all my extra time to her happiness."




CHAPTER XI

BREAKING UP OF CAMP AND A SURPRISE


The time had arrived for the girls to separate. The Scouts came up and
carried Nannie off. She had become a great favorite. As Patty expressed
it, Nannie was a comfortable visitor because she seemed to "belong." She
made no fuss and adapted herself to their ways.

She promised to return the following summer and Harvey pronounced their
camp as fine as any place they might select.

"So there's no reason why we boys should not come back, too; but you
must let us entertain you Camp Fire girls next year. It's been all on
your side this."

So they all went to the train to see them off, and people crowded around
as though they might be a circus troupe, staring curiously at them and
making remarks.

Then after saying goodbye the different members went to their homes.
Ethel and her cousin Kate were to go to Akron for a week or so, as
Uncle Archie Hollister was coming up to spend his vacation.

The girls met him at the train and Ethel was overjoyed.

"Oh, Papa," she said, "if only you could have been here before Camp
broke up. But we are going up for the day and give you a regular Camp
Fire dinner," and she kissed him affectionately.

"Next year I'll get off earlier," replied Mr. Hollister, "but our
President was very ill and none of us liked to leave."

They gave Mr. Hollister a rousing dinner. Nearly all of the girls were
present. They did their cooking like desserts, bread, etc., at home, but
the meat, corn and potatoes were roasted on the coals. They had Uncle
John, Judge Sands, Mr. Casey and Mr. Hollister for guests, and everything
went off finely. Mr. Hollister was loud in his praises of the cooking,
and in fact, the whole organization.

"It's great," he said, smacking his lips. "I think the person who
invented it should have a gold medal."

They spent a few days at Columbus. Ethel went to see Mattie and her
mother. She also spent the night with Nora. Their home was very handsome
and Ethel could not help but respect kind-hearted Mr. Casey, who tried
to make it so pleasant for her. She had grown very fond of Nora. She saw
her good traits,--her splendid unselfishness, and her tenderness towards
her father as she tried to take her mother's place with him.

"What a narrow, selfish girl I've been," she thought, "never to have
noticed them before. Why, the way Nora shielded Mattie when the girl took
her ring was a lesson to me, and I never took it."

During their stay at Uncle John's Mrs. Hollister came up, and the meeting
between her husband and self was like lovers. Ethel was glad.

"And it was I that kept them apart," she told Kate--"I with my society
and expensive schools. Poor Father! what could he do but grind from
morning until night; and Mother with her hopes and ambitions--what
could she do? Why, they had no time to speak to each other except on
business and money. It was all so false and wrong. Now they are as
they should have been, but think of the lost years, and all for me."
"Never think of it, Ethel," said Kate, "it's past and over. Everything
has come smooth. Forget it, dear; you were not to blame."

Judge Sands called nearly every evening. He and Uncle Archie struck
up quite a friendship. The Judge took him on auto trips far into the
country, Kate, Patty, and Ethel going along.

One evening, after they all had gone back to Akron, Judge Sands called
Patty into the library.

"I wish to have a little talk with you, my dear," he said.

"Are you going to scold me for running over my allowance last month?"
she replied, "because if you are I just couldn't help it. I wanted to
give all of the girls a little remembrance, and--"

"Patty, my child, have I ever scolded you for anything--think? Haven't
you done exactly as you chose since your childhood?"

"Yes," replied the girl, "but I know that there are times when you should
scold me, Papa, for I know I am self-willed and disobedient."

"Well, we shall forget that. You're a pretty good girl considering that
you have but one parent. Now this is what I wish to see you about. Your
mother died when you were three, dear, and you've been with me ever
since. It's been lonely for both of us at times, and for me especially
so while you are away at school. Patty, how should you like a mother? Of
course, no one can take the place of her who has gone, but I mean another
one."

The girl began to cry.

"I should not like it, Papa."

Then she looked at him. He was a handsome man, and if ever she were to
marry he would be alone, in the prime of life.

"I suppose I'm selfish," she sobbed, clinging to him, "but I should hate
a stepmother. Think of her taking Mamma's place. Oh, Papa! I couldn't
bear it."

"But supposing she was a woman of whom you were fond. Would you feel that
way then?"

"I couldn't be fond of her."

"You might be fond of her already," said the Judge.

"Who--who can it be?" asked Patty, wiping her eyes and pushing back her
hair.

The Judge smiled.

"Think, my dear."

"Is it Miss Kate Hollister?" cried the girl joyfully. "Tell me quick."

Then Judge Sands blushed like a schoolboy.

"Yes," he said, "she is the only woman who can take your mother's place,
Patty. No--not that--no one can take her dear place; but she is the only
woman upon earth whom I should ask to be my wife."

Then Patty jumped up and kissed her father many times.

"Oh, Papa!" she said, "why didn't you tell me at first and not frighten
me to death. Oh! I should love her so, and I should never be jealous of
her. Are you engaged?"

"No," laughed the Judge, "I have never asked her. I thought you deserved
the compliment of being first consulted on the matter."

"But, Papa, perhaps she'll refuse you."

"That's my end of it," laughed her father, "but when I do ask her I wish
to say that you desire it, too, for Kate might not think it agreeable to
you."

"Papa, she's got to say 'yes.' I'll go along and make her if you wish.
I'd just love her for a mother," and the girl clung to his neck and wept.
"I only now realize how lonely you must have been all these years, and
you've done it for me. But don't let her refuse. Tell her I desire it
above all things."

"All right, dearie," said the Judge. "I'll go tonight."

"And wake me up, Papa. I shall be so anxious."

Judge Sands laughed and promised.

That night no matter how hard Patty tried she couldn't keep awake. Now
that she knew who it was that her father desired she was happy, and one
can always sleep when one is happy.

The Judge ran up the stairs two steps at a time and woke his daughter
with a kiss.

"Will she, Papa?"

"Yes, dear," he answered. "She has been good enough to say 'yes.' We'll
make her happy, won't we, Patty?"

"We shall," replied the girl. "And how young you seem to have grown!"
she gasped. "I never noticed it before. I'm glad for you and I'm glad
for her. She's a dear. I've always loved her and she's such a stunning
looking woman, too. I tell you, we'll be proud of her, Papa."

They talked for half an hour over the virtues of Miss Kate, and each went
to sleep thinking of how lovely she was.

When Kate and Patty met they said not a word, but from the quiet, sincere
embrace each knew that the other would try and make her happy.

Congratulations poured in from all sides. Archie and his wife with Aunt
Susan, Grandmother and Tom, motored all the way over to Columbus to offer
theirs. Ethel was wild with joy.

"Why," she exclaimed, "everything is getting better! People are doing
such sensible things lately, just as they should do. Isn't it wonderful?
But, Tom, I always thought that you cared for Cousin Kate."

"So I have all along, but just as I was considering, in walked the Judge
and took her off under my very nose. While I was a poor lawyer I felt
that she might refuse me and I took no chances, but I never imagined
she'd look at a man of his age. She's certainly met the one for her. What
a splendid couple they'll make."

"You always were slow, Tom; that's your fault," laughed Ethel, "and
you'll always get left. It serves you right."

"Yes, that's going to be my fate, I fear. Before I can muster up courage
to propose, these girls will be snatched up--every one of them."

Judge Sands and Kate were to be married in November. They were to go to
New York, Washington, etc., on a wedding trip, after which they were to
meet Patty and sail for Egypt to be gone indefinitely.

"Oh, dear! who can take your place at Camp?" said the girls. "We'll never
find another Guardian like you."

"I'll ask Louise Morehouse," said Miss Kate. "She's lovely, and very much
interested in this Camp Fire movement. She'll be one of you just as I
have been."

"Yes, and then she'll meet someone and go off and marry," said Mollie
Long. "There should be a law against it. A Guardian should be obliged to
serve for five years unmarried--it isn't fair," and the girls voted that
Mollie was correct.




CHAPTER XII

MATTIE MAKES GOOD


After Camp had broken up, Mattie Hastings, who was now associated with a
Woman's Exchange in Columbus, started one afternoon to call for Patty
Sands. It was Saturday and the Exchange closed early. Mattie was doing
well. She received a good salary and her heart was light. Her sister was
beginning to walk. The doctors considered that next year she could
discard her brace. The child was not only attending school but she was
learning many useful things and Mattie was happy. Her mother had entirely
given up the drug habit; her father was with Judge Sands and everything
seemed as though it had come straight like a fairy story.

This lovely autumn afternoon they were going to Sallie Davis's to look at
a wonderful centerpiece done by her mother. Mattie, whose fingers were
extremely clever, had offered to do the work of copying it, while Patty
was to pay for the silks, linen, etc. Then, jointly, they were to give it
to Miss Kate for an engagement present. In case the servant should be out
Sallie had given Patty her latch key.

"This is Sophronia's day out, and mother is going to a bridge party.
I have an engagement, so here's the key. When you leave the flat, put
it on the hall stand. Sophronia and mother will be back before I am,
and they will let me in. I'll leave the centerpiece on the piano."

The apartment was on the seventh story and commanded a wonderful view
of the city. After looking at the centerpiece and studying the different
stitches the girls went to a window and looked out.

"Have you put the key on the hall stand?" asked Mattie.

"Yes," replied Patty. "I put it there when I first came in."

Suddenly Mattie exclaimed:

"I smell smoke."

They looked around. The odor was plainly perceptible.

"Let's go into the kitchen," said Patty.

Together they ran through the pantry and opened the kitchen door. The
smoke was very thick.

"Why, Mattie, the house is afire!" said Patty Sands. "Let's get out
quickly."

They opened the hall door, closing it tightly after them. They had
far better have stayed in the apartment and have descended by the
fire escape, but they thought of it too late. The hall door had locked
behind them. The outer halls were black with smoke. People were rushing
wildly up and down. The entrance leading to the roof was locked. The
elevator boy called "last trip," and opened the iron doors. Frightened
women and little children crowded in with servants and elderly people.

"Room for one more," yelled the boy, "quick, for God's sake!"

"You go, Mattie," said Patty.

"You go." Then Mattie Hastings lifted Patty Sands up bodily and fairly
threw her into the crowded elevator.

"If the cable holds I'll come back, Miss," cried the boy half choked with
smoke.

Through the smoke Mattie peered at the cable. Through the shaft she saw
the angry flames shooting upward. The sparks were flying. The elevator
had made its last trip and she realized it. She turned to the hall window
and looked down upon the crowd. A ladder was raised. Someone had seen
her.

"Thank God!" she said, "I may yet be saved."

The smoke was now black and the flames came nearer and nearer to the
brave girl, who so unselfishly had given her place to her friend. She
leaned out of the window. She watched the fireman ascending. Then she
knew no more but fell back into the flames unconscious.

"I've got her," said the fireman, "but I guess she's gone. No one could
live in the smoke up there. She's badly burned, too, poor girl--her back
and arms. Lift her carefully, boys."

Patty rushed forward. "She has given her life for me," she shrieked.
"Mattie, Mattie dear! don't you hear me? Speak--oh! speak to Patty."

The dying girl opened her eyes and half smiled. Patty knelt beside her
and put her ear close to Mattie's mouth.

"Patty," she whispered, "tell Ethel that I made good."

Then she closed them wearily and the brave soul of Mattie Hastings passed
on.

It took Patty Sands many years to recover from the shock of her friend's
death. She was too ill to even know when the funeral took place. She had
told her father and Kate of Mattie's last words. Ethel Hollister sent a
telegram requesting that Mattie's funeral might be postponed until she
arrived. The Camp Fire girls were the pallbearers.

Fortunately the cruel flames had left Mattie's face untouched and she
looked lovely. The church was crowded to overflowing, as well as the
street. The text of the sermon was:

"Greater love hath no man than he who lays down his life for a friend."

Mattie had "given service" as well as laying down her life for a friend,
and the whole town marvelled at her bravery.




CHAPTER XIII

JUDGE SANDS AND KATE MARRY


In November Kate was married. The wedding was quiet, as Patty was still
an invalid. They took her with them and left her at Mrs. Hollister's
while they went on their trip. Nora had arrived for the winter two weeks
before. Mrs. Hollister had entered her in Madam La Rue's school. Ethel
had insisted upon giving Nora her room and had moved up stairs.

The three girls were sad. They talked of Mattie and Patty cried
constantly. So after a while they avoided speaking of her in her
presence.

Nora looked like one to the manner born. Mrs. Hollister, having carte
blanche to buy for her anything she saw fit, purchased the loveliest
second mourning costumes imaginable, and Nora wore them remarkably
well. She had grown more quiet since Mattie's death. A great change
seemed to have come over her. She was one of Madam's brightest pupils and
very popular. Mrs. Hollister was genuinely fond of her and they went
everywhere together.

When Mr. Casey came to New York he was surprised at the change. He'd say
to Mrs. Hollister:

"Faith, ma'am, it's a perfect lady you're afther makin' of my girl. Her
mother would bless you were she here," and Mrs. Hollister would reply:

"She is naturally a perfect lady, Mr. Casey, so it's not hard work. I
consider Nora a very superior girl and I'm very fond of her," at which
the father's eyes would grow half tearful, and he'd seem proud to hear
it.

Nannie Bigelow and Nora became very intimate and she was made much of
by Dorothy Kip and Sara Judson. Nora took an active interest in the Day
Nursery and donated generously for its maintenance. Twice a week she'd
go and read to the elder children and get on the floor and play with
the younger ones, for she adored babies. She was especially sweet and
generous to Grandmother, spending hours with her lest she should become
lonely. It was like a mother and daughter, instead of a girl and
chaperon, to see Mrs. Hollister and Nora go about together.

"I wish I had a son, Nora," said that lady one day. "Then I should never
have to see you leave me."

Nora blushed rosy red, saying:

"I wish you had, Mrs. Hollister. I dislike to think of our separation."

Mr. Casey sent the most wonderful barrels of apples and potatoes from
his own place to the Hollisters, and when he came to New York he'd order
fruit from the most expensive fruiterers to be sent three times a week,
say nothing of boxes of flowers which came regularly throughout the
entire winter.




CHAPTER XIV

A BIRTHDAY PRESENT


On one of Mr. Casey's flying trips to the city it happened to be Mrs.
Hollister's birthday. Nora told him of the fact and after school together
they whisked away in a taxi to shop. Upon their return he presented Mrs.
Hollister with a large box, and in the most delicate manner begged her to
accept it as a slight token of his gratitude for her interest in and
kindness to Nora.

"Ye've been a mother to my girl and she loves ye well. Her own
mother--God rest her soul--as I've often told ye, would be proud of
her, and she'd know better what to give a lady, but if ye'll accept
these, ma'am, Nora and I will be pleased."

Mrs. Hollister was visibly affected. She actually wiped her eyes.

"I will accept them with pleasure, Mr. Casey," she said, "but don't
forget Nora is a great comfort to all of us. We have grown to love her
as our own," and she opened the box thinking it might contain a pretty
waist or something of that sort when to her surprise there she beheld a
most magnificent set of sables. She couldn't speak. The poor woman had
never dared to dream of owning such a thing. Her heart stood still and
she turned and took Nora in her arms, kissing her fondly. Then she shook
Mr. Casey's hand as though she would never stop.

"Mr. Casey, you are too generous. I have always loved sables, but I never
expected to own a set. I don't know how to thank you for your kindness."

"Say nothing about it," replied the man. "Nora and I consider it a
privilege if ye'll wear our gifts, don't we, Nora?"

"Indeed we do," replied the girl. "There are so many things that you do
for me, Mrs. Hollister, that money can not compensate."

Ethel was now eighteen. One evening Harvey Bigelow invited her to the
theatre. On their way home he asked her if she ever could care for him
enough to become his wife.

"Oh, Harvey!" gasped Ethel, "I am so sorry. Why did you spoil our
lovely friendship? I'll have to answer 'no,' and I dislike to hurt
your feelings."

"That's all right, little girl," said Harvey, swallowing hard. "I was an
ass to even imagine that you could care for me, but you see I'm coming on
so well that I shall soon put out my sign, and I felt that you might be
such a help to me; that is, if you could care for me a little bit."

"And there are so many nice girls," she said, "waiting for just such a
good man as yourself."

"But, Ethel, I don't want any girl. I want one. If I can't have her I
guess I'll stay single. Anyway, I suppose a man needs to practice a lot
before he marries. There's a couple of years in the Hospital. But I'm
glad I know the truth, Ethel. By Jove! it's off my chest. I've tried to
speak of it before but I couldn't."

"I wish I could say 'yes,' Harvey; but can't we still remain the good
pals that we are?"

"Why, sure," replied the man, and he took her hand. "A man needs a woman
friend, don't you think?"

"Yes," replied Ethel, "and I hope to prove my friendship for you."

Ethel never spoke of her proposal, nor did Harvey; but there was a firmer
bond between them than formerly.

Patty wrote often. "You never saw two people so in love as Papa and
Kate. It is wonderful and remarkably right. I only feel sorry to think
that through all of these years they might have been so happy, and I'm
sure papa kept single for me. How selfish daughters are, Ethel; and at
the same time how little they realize that they are selfish."

Ethel folded the letter and said:

"What she writes is true. You and Papa might have had all of the years
of my youth to be happy in, but you sacrificed them for me, and they'll
never, never come back."

"That's all right," said her mother, kissing her. "My happiness since you
entered college has compensated for it, believe me, my dear little girl,"
and she kissed her tenderly.




CHAPTER XV

MRS. HOLLISTER ENTERTAINS


That winter Mrs. Hollister again had her teas and bridge parties, but
there was no more worry about where the money was coming from; in fact,
thanks to Mr. Casey's generosity she was able to pay all of her bills
and put some away for a rainy day. Her little functions were delightful
as usual, and the young people came in throngs to the house.

Ethel was happy in seeing her mother so contented, and in knowing that
her father had no more worries. Grandmother had grown younger, and better
than all, after Christmas Tom was coming to bring Aunt Susan. He had
business East and he was to leave her for three weeks, after which he
was to return for her.

Nora seemed less sad. She had developed into a very stylish up-to-date
young woman and everyone admired and liked her.

Mrs. Hollister was in her glory. Things for her were now so comfortable
and easy that she couldn't believe but what it was a dream from which
she might awaken and find everything the same old way.

Mrs. Bigelow made much of Nora, taking her around and introducing her
to her friends. Harvey called regularly and invited her twice a week
to the theatre. He was now a young surgeon in Roosevelt Hospital on the
ambulance, with a fine career open before him, and what's more he worked
very hard--often until late at night. People prophesied a great future
for Harvey and his parents were delighted, but none more so than Ethel,
whose encouragement was genuine and like the encouragement of a sister.

Teddy Kip kept up a great correspondence with Patty, who sent him postals
from every place.

"By George!" he said to the Hollisters, "do you know I correspond
with three girls who are abroad and they never write letters--only
postals--and if you believe it, I've got nearly a hamper filled with
them--'pon my word I have. If only Miss Patty would write a fellow a
real letter once in a while I'd be grateful."

Nora received a letter from Edna Whitely.

"I have some news for all of your girls. Mollie Long and Sallie Davis are
going to marry clergymen. They are brothers. Sallie's husband is going to
be a missionary to China."

"Isn't that awful?" said Mrs. Hollister. "Sallie will be massacred as
sure as fate--that's the end of missionaries. I had a second cousin who
went and both she and her husband were victims. I wouldn't allow a child
of mine to marry one. Let him stay in his own country, but to drag a
young girl out into those heathen places--it's an outrage."

"Well, our Ohio Camp Fire will resolve itself into only half, I fear,"
said Nora. "There's poor Mattie, Miss Kate, Sallie and Mollie from right
there. I wonder who's going to take their places."

"Perhaps," said Ethel, "little Mollie Hastings if she's pronounced cured.
It may be of great benefit to her. Let's see what can be done."

"Dorothy Kip might become an Ohio girl and spend her summers up there
with us too," suggested Nora. "And if Dr. Bigelow goes with the Scouts
Nannie can join."

"We'll see," replied Ethel. "It's quite a few months before next summer.
'Sufficient unto the day, etc.'"

Ethel was getting along famously at Barnard.

"What profession shall you follow--the law or ministry?" Harvey would ask
jokingly.

"Something that shall enable me to become self supporting," Ethel would
reply seriously.

"There's where you make a mistake," said Harvey. "A woman was made to be
supported by a man--not to support herself."

"Why not?" asked Ethel. "How many wives today support their husbands?
Have you any idea of the number?"

"Oh, well, then it's because the men are lazy or sick. No decent,
self-respecting man would allow it."

"Supposing a woman can not marry. She can't propose to a man. What can
she do in that case--starve? No, Dr. Bigelow, you can't even argue. Every
woman should have in her hand, say, a weapon or trade with which to take
care of herself. Then when the time comes she's ready to start in the
battle of life, and not sit around helpless while others do for her, or
become dependent upon charity, or worse. The day of Elsie Dinsmores has
gone. In her place we have strong, capable, broad-minded women. Seldom do
we hear of a woman fainting today, yet look back sixty years and recall
the Lydia Languish females with long ringlets and wasp waists, who
invariably carried smelling salts. I'm proud to belong to the women of
today--healthy, strong, athletic, and brave--women who _do_ and are not
ashamed of it. Look at Aunt Susan. There's a woman who is an example. I
hope I may amount to as much as she before I die."

"Ethel, I fear you are strong-minded," laughed Harvey.

"Don't fear, but know it. I try to be strong in mind and body. I believe
in a woman getting all that's coming to her and working for that end."

Harvey laughed.

"Well, I shan't argue with you."

"Because you agree with me, and you know it," said Ethel quietly. "You
have made yourself amount to something. Look where you were three years
ago. What were your views of life then? A rich marriage. Behold the
change! Now you are a man."

"Thanks," said Harvey, rising and making a low bow.




CHAPTER XVI

CHRISTMAS EVE


Christmas was near. The Hollisters wrote and invited Mr. Casey to spend
the Christmas holidays with them. They also wrote Tom Harper to see if it
were possible to bring Aunt Susan to be with them during the holidays.
Tom replied he would make it possible. So they were to have a house full.

Nora and Ethel vied in dressing up the rooms tastefully with holly and
mistletoe. Every chandelier and door had a piece of mistletoe fastened
above it.

"What a grand kissing time there'll be," said Archibald. "When do we
begin--on Christmas morning?"

"Now, Papa, don't you get gay," laughed Ethel. "You've led an exemplary
life for fifty years. Please keep on and don't let this mistletoe make of
you a different man."

Well--first came Mr. Casey. Every day he and Nora boarded a taxi and went
shopping, returning with huge boxes and parcels which gradually filled
Nora's closets as well as under her bed.

Then came Tom and Aunt Susan, even looking younger than before.

"Really it's ridiculous, Aunt Susan," said Ethel, "for you to keep
growing so much younger and more stylish. You've got to stop."

And the bell rang so often that Mrs. Hollister was obliged to hire an
extra maid for Christmas week. Everyone was so perfectly happy that it
was a joy to enter the house. Harvey was there as often as his hospital
practice would admit of, and he was the first to kiss Aunt Susan under
the mistletoe; and Aunt Susan, if you please, now appeared in the
daintiest of gowns--up-to-date and rather youthful. Ethel and Grandmother
laughed over it.

"Why, Grandmother, how old is Aunt Susan?"

"She's about sixty-one," said her sister--"why?"

"Nothing, but I've been thinking wouldn't it be funny if she should marry
again? She's mighty attractive in her up-to-date gowns."

"I don't see whom she could marry," said Grandmother with some asperity,
"unless Mr. Casey or Dr. Bigelow." Ethel laughed.

Christmas eve arrived. They had a large tree and distributed the gifts.
Everyone received exactly what he or she desired. Mr. Casey's generosity
was boundless. He gave Mrs. Hollister a small limousine with the
understanding that all bills should be sent to him.

"Madam," he said, "you and Nora have a great deal of shopping and social
duties to perform. Nora tells me that you go by the cars and rarely in a
taxi, and that you seldom allow her to pay her fare. Now this will set
everything right, and Grandmother--God bless her--must have her ride
daily. It is money well invested, for you and Nora can take comfort. I
have engaged a good chauffeur and have made arrangements with a garage
near by. All bills are to be sent to me. Nora will attend to the sending
of them."

Mrs. Hollister couldn't speak. They stood under the mistletoe. She just
raised herself up and gave Mr. Casey two hearty smacks, at which there
arose a shout.

"I shan't try to thank you," she said, "for I can not."

Then another surprise came in shape of a wonderful diamond la valliere or
pendant, and poor Mrs. Hollister was most embarrassed.

"Mr. Casey," she said, "you are going to get me in wrong. People may
criticise me."

Then Tom's present came--a lovely grey silk evening wrap trimmed with
chinchilla, and verily Mrs. Hollister was nearly off her head.

Grandmother received a long silk coat lined with fur and trimmed with a
large lynx collar and cuffs--from Mr. Casey also.

"Don't think that I bought out a furrier," he said, "but I know people
always need them."

Ethel received a lovely pendant from Mr. Casey and one from Tom, while
Nora presented her with a beautiful diamond ring.

Everyone was happy this Christmas eve and strange to say Mr. Casey took
Aunt Susan right under the mistletoe and kissed her, which made
Grandmother laugh immoderately.

During one of the moments when people were rather quiet, Harvey Bigelow
took Nora by the hand and walked up to Mr. Casey who was standing under
the mistletoe; in fact, he had stood nowhere else during the evening.

"Mr. Casey," he said, "I ask of you the most valuable gift that a father
can give. I ask the hand of this dear girl," and he kissed Nora gently.

Mr. Casey, who had imbibed somewhat plentifully of punch, and who was
quite warm, looked at the two for a moment.

"An' is it this that ye two have been up to?" he said. "Nora, me child,
do ye wish it to be?"

"Yes, Papa," faltered the girl, "I love Harvey."

"An' suppose I withhold my consent--what then?"

"Then I shall still love him, but I shall never marry without it."

"Hear that now. Nora, my good girl," and taking her hand he placed it in
Harvey's, "I give her to ye. All I ask is that ye shall make her happy.
Let her niver regret this day--that's all," and he wiped his eyes.

Nora flung her arms around him while Harvey wrung his hand.

"You'll never have cause to regret, nor shall she," he said. "I'll love
and cherish her until death parts us, and I'll work for her so that
she'll be proud of me."

Ethel kissed them both; in fact, so did everyone. Aunt Susan and Tom were
delighted.

"I always liked him," she said. "Anyone who looks me square in the eye,
Mr. Casey, I'll bank on every time."

It was long after midnight when the Xmas party broke up. The young man
who had always played at Mrs. Hollister's teas for the sum of three
dollars played the Virginia Reel, and everyone danced,--even Grandmother.
Mr. Casey took so many funny fancy steps that it was hard to get him
through with the figures, after which Nora and Ethel showed the elderly
people how to dance the turkey trot, which of course was shocking. When
the young musician left he was richer by fifty dollars--gifts of Mr.
Casey, Tom Harper, and Mrs. Hollister, for she told of how lovely his
mother was and how she had been her bridesmaid.

"And here's a gift for her," said Mr. Casey. "Take it and buy her a
fur-lined coat," at which everyone shouted, for poor Mr. Casey's gifts
had all been so comfortable and warm.

"Niver mind," he laughed, "I bet she'll like one. And give her me
compliments and a Merry Christmas. And let me have your address, sir."




CHAPTER XVII

CHRISTMAS DAY


It was a typical Christmas day. There was even snow on the ground. The
pretty limousine stood before the Hollisters' door and a well-groomed
good-looking chauffeur was taken in and presented to Mrs. Hollister,
his future mistress. Grandmother, in her handsome new cloak, and Aunt
Susan with Mr. Casey, took the first ride. Mr. Casey was in high spirits
over Nora's choice.

"Shure they till me that he has a great future."

"Of course he has," said Grandmother. "Why, he's advanced to the
operating room and he is in line to be second assisting surgeon. Think,
Mr. Casey, of the lives he may save. I think Nora has made a wise choice,
and he cared for her for herself--not for her money--for he's always said
that his wife's money should be settled on herself--that only the husband
should pay the bills. And Nora, dear child, has improved so. She's grown
so handsome and has a face full of character."

"That's so, ma'am. I would that her poor mother--God rest her soul--could
but see her."

"She does," said Aunt Susan. "I firmly believe that our loved ones see
us and are near us constantly. Wait a bit; I have to stop," and Mr. Casey
got out at a market.

"Now what is he up to?" said Grandmother. "Susan, he's the
kindest-hearted and most generous man that I ever knew."

They could catch a glimpse of him now and then. Presently he emerged with
an immense basket containing a large turkey, a pair of ducks, and paper
bags of vegetables, and in one corner a smaller basket of delicious
fruit and a couple of wreaths. From a card he read an address to the
chauffeur, who placed the Christmas basket beside him.

"Now where is he going, I wonder?" said Aunt Susan. "Perhaps some of his
poor relations."

The chauffeur drove up before a cheap flat, alighted, and left the
basket. Returning he nodded "yes" to Mr. Casey.

Mr. Casey said in a hesitating manner:

"The young piano player,--I thought I'd surprise him and his mother. Mrs.
Hollister speaks highly of the mother and I need just such a young man
with me in Columbus. I think I can find an opening for him in my office;
if not, in the office of some of my friends. There are too many young men
in New York; there are not enough places for them all. Now wid me they
have a chance to advance, and when I'm gone they'll take my place. I've
no son."

"Yes," said Grandmother, "this young musician supports his mother. My
daughter-in-law says that the mother comes from a good old family. She
and Mrs. Hollister were at school together in Elmira, New York state.
Then when my son married Bella this lady was her bridesmaid. Bella said
she was a raving beauty, but she married a man who drank himself to
death, leaving her with her child alone in the world and without a penny.
The boy was musical and someone taught him how to play. He used to go to
school through the day and practice at night. Then he graduated and
obtained a position as clerk, receiving a very moderate salary. Bella
met them one night in the cars and had them come up to the house. She
did all that she could for them, and employed him every time she had a
tea or needed music. He played well and was glad to get his little three
dollars. I know that Bella always sent home a box of refreshments to the
mother."

"Well, I shall persuade them to go back wid me, and they'll have enough
then, I'm thinkin'."

"Mr. Casey, you are a good man," said Aunt Susan. "The world would be
better if we had more like you."

"But, Mrs. Carpenter, I think this way. The Lord has been good to me. He
has caused me to prosper. Why should I consider it all me own? No, I
think whenever I can help a fellow man He expects me to do so--that's
all--and I try to make good."

The elderly women made no reply. He was a rough self-made man--a Roman
Catholic, although not a churchman, who could give them points on charity
and who did his good deeds quietly and without boasting. Mr. Casey was a
Scout, although not a young one, for that was the way they were taught to
do their good deeds.

Upon their arrival home he directed the chauffeur to get his dinner or
luncheon and return, and after the Hollister luncheon, Nora, Harvey,
Ethel and Tom went to Van Courtlandt Park, where there was skating,
returning in time for six o'clock dinner.

"I think, ma'am," said Mr. Casey, "we have monopolized your car pretty
well, and you never have been inside of it."

"But I'm too busy, Mr. Casey. Today is Christmas and I love to view it
from the window. Just to think that it belongs to me! I can't realize it.
Mr. Casey, you are my fairy Godfather and nothing else. How can I ever
repay you?"

"By always being a mother to my girl, ma'am, as ye have been since she
met ye. Why, ye deserve a whole garage of automobiles for the kindness
ye've shown her, and see the good man she now has through ye. Don't thank
me, ma'am. It's ourselves who can't thank ye enough."




CHAPTER XVIII

ANOTHER SURPRISE


After a delicious Christmas dinner the Bigelows came over. They welcomed
and embraced Nora. Mrs. Bigelow really seemed sincere on this occasion.
Mr. Casey liked them at once, especially Mr. Bigelow and Nannie.

"They'll make her happy all right. My girl has chosen wisely," he
thought.

Tom and Ethel went out together during Christmas week. They skated and
visited all the art galleries, enjoying every moment. They had many
serious talks, and Ethel took Tom to call on several of her friends.
The girls voted him delightful and Ethel was proud of him. They spoke of
Mattie Hastings.

"Tom, Patty will never get over it," she said, "of that I'm sure."

"Ethel, don't you see, Patty witnessed it, and the shock is indelibly
stamped on her memory. Time will help remove it--nothing else."

"But what a brave act, wasn't it?" continued Ethel. "Patty sends orders
for flowers once a week for her grave, and they say it looks very lovely.
And I even disliked her once. I said her eyes were too close together and
I misjudged her. Then I fairly hated Nora--think!--she who saved my life.
Each one has done something. What have I done? Whom have I benefited?
Who is better for having had me for a friend?"

They were sitting on a bench in the picture gallery of the Metropolitan
Museum Ethel looked very lovely. She wore a bunch of Tom's orchids and a
grey velvet suit. Her eyes were bright and her cheeks were burning red.
She was visibly excited. Tom saw that she felt her life had been a
failure.

"Ethel," he said, taking her hand, "think of the joy you have brought
to Aunt Susan. Can't you see how much happier she is today than when
you first knew her? Look at Nora. Through you she has changed from an
awkward girl into a cultivated and charming woman, engaged to a fine
young physician belonging to one of New York's oldest families.
Indirectly you are responsible for it all. Look at little Mary Hastings.
Through you she has been, or will be completely cured of her spine
trouble. And lastly, look at me, Ethel, you have brought sunshine and
happiness into my life. It is not always the big things that go to make
happiness. It is the small things as well; and in your sweet, quiet way
you have scattered light and joy in many paths. I had not intended, my
dear, to speak to you of my love. I wished to wait until I had more of
a name for you, and until you had come out and had a chance to choose
from many men more worthy perhaps than I, but I can not keep my secret.
I love you, dear, and I would have you for my wife. Can I hope? Do you
care for me a little?"

Ethel's eyes shone like stars. She looked up into his face and said:

"I care for you a great deal,--until you spoke I never knew how much. If
you wish I will be your wife."

Then Tom lifted her hand to his lips.

"I will make you as happy as I know how," he said. "I had a feeling that
I couldn't keep my secret back after today. Come, dear, let us go and
tell them all; and never under-rate yourself again."

People stared at the handsome couple and at their beaming faces. Joy was
stamped on their countenances and happiness shone from their eyes.

When they arrived home, Tom walked up to Mrs. Hollister, and kissing her
he said:

"I have asked Ethel to be my wife. Will you and Mr. Hollister give her to
me?"

Mrs. Hollister gasped.

"Why Tom! Ethel! Is it true?"

Ethel put her arm around her mother.

"Yes, Mamma, Tom has asked me to marry him and I said 'yes,' for I know
that you and Papa like him. Now you say 'yes'--do dear."

"Yes, I will say it gladly. Tom, I have always liked you and I'm sure
you and Ethel will be happy. I give my consent with all my heart," and
Tom took her in his arms and kissed her tenderly.

"Thank you," he said, "you have given me a precious gift. You shall never
regret it."

Then they sought Mr. Hollister and were closeted with him for a long
time, after which Grandmother and Aunt Susan had to be told, and lastly
Nora.

So that Christmas brought two engagements in the Hollister circle.

Ethel decided to finish college before marrying, and Nora her school. The
men had to be content.

"We'll have one more year at Camp anyway," said Nora. "I shall be glad to
spend my last single summer there."

"And Tom and Harvey will practically be with us," said Ethel. "Nora, are
you not a happy girl?"

"I am," said Nora.

"So am I," rejoined Ethel.




CHAPTER XIX

MR. CASEY BUYS A HOUSE


Aunt Susan at once began to make plans. In the meanwhile Mr. Casey asked
Mr. Hollister and his mother to give him a few moments conversation on
business.

"I understand that ye own this house, ma'am," he began. "What would ye
sell it for?"

Mrs. Hollister looked at her son.

"Why?" she asked.

"Because I'm about to buy a house for Nora and the Doctor, and I want to
buy one in this neighborhood. I also have a proposition to make to ye,
Mr. Hollister. Frankly, what might be yere salary?"

Mr. Hollister reddened.

"I mean no disrespect or pryin', sir. It is a business proposition I have
to make to ye, before I do to anyone else."

"My salary is three thousand a year, Mr. Casey," said Archibald
Hollister. "I'm with an old and respected firm and have been with them
for thirty years."

"Thin they don't value your services as they should,--pardon my sayin'.
This minnit they ought to give ye more. Now I need a man like yourself
to be me representative in New York. I give you the first option. Will
ye come and accept the position for six thousand a year?"

Mr. Hollister acted dazed. Grandmother spoke up:

"Answer, Archibald,"

But still Archibald kept quiet.

"Is it because ye think it not honorable to leave them? Thin tell thim
that I have offered ye more and see if they will do the same. I'll give
you a week to see."

"And now, ma'am, I have heard that ye wished to sell. Yere Granddaughter
will marry and this house will be too big for the three of yees. A pretty
apartment on the Park will be far better for ye. What is yere price for
the house?"

"We refused thirty thousand for it in 1900," replied Mrs. Hollister, "and
real estate has increased in value since that."

"Very well," said Mr. Casey, "I know what ye say is true, and I will pay
a fair price. I will give ye fifty thousand for this house, ma'am, and I
will have it remodeled for my girl."

"I will accept," said Mrs. Hollister, in a prompt businesslike way.
"There is no mortgage on the house," she added.

"Yere more of a business woman than yere son. Faith, he's worryin' over
hurtin' feelings of his employers I do be thinkin'," and Mr. Casey laid
back and laughed.

But Archibald felt as though the earth was slowly slipping from under his
feet. His luck was changing too rapidly. It was coming upon him too late
in life, and Mr. Casey! Well, he was indeed the fairy Godfather. He and
his wife had so longed for an apartment overlooking the Park, but
Grandmother would never hear of selling.

"When I die will be time enough," she would say, and now she had actually
seemed glad. And to think she would have fifty thousand dollars to live
on for the rest of her life. Then this new offer from Mr. Casey, double
the salary he was now receiving--it was like a dream. And his girl
engaged to one of the finest men in the West. God was too good to him--he
didn't deserve it.

His wife was overjoyed.

"Oh, Archie," she said "how wonderful it all is. It seems to have
happened since Ethel joined the Camp Fire girls. I'm sure they have
brought her luck. They have brought Nora to us and her dear father,
who has been so generous, and but for the Camp Fire she never would
have met Nora. Isn't it strange?"

Archibald Hollister laid the case before the Company by which he had been
employed for thirty years, not telling how much his new salary was to
be.

"Mr. Hollister," they said, "we can not afford to increase your salary.
To be sure you have served us faithfully, but you are no longer young,
and you know we need young blood in business. There are plenty waiting
for your place."

That was a terrible blow to Archibald. He had not expected to get
three thousand extra, but he had looked for an increase of a thousand
rather than they should let him go, and to hear them calmly sit and
tell him that they needed young blood was too much. He left the office,
and the next morning in place of Archibald Hollister there arrived his
resignation. So thirty years of faithfulness to their interests and
strict attention to business didn't count with them, and there he had
been so loyal to the concern!

"Ah!" said Mr. Casey, "what did I tell ye? Do ye think these corporations
care for the man? No. It's for what they can get out of him--for the
amount of work he can do, and for how small a salary. Let them hire their
young blood and you come along with me, and we'll see how much better off
they'll be!"




CHAPTER XX

ARCHIBALD'S CHANGE FOR THE BETTER


So Archibald Hollister found himself the New York manager of a large
Ohio Realty Company, with four clerks under him and a couple of handsome
offices; and Mr. Casey was proud of his personal appearance, for
Archibald was a handsome man. One of the clerks was the young fellow
who on Christmas eve had played Money Musk for them to dance the
Virginia Reel, and whose mother received on the following morning the
Christmas basket from Mr. Casey.

"Now yere where ye belong," said the kind-hearted man. "I tell ye, Mr.
Hollister, an honest employee should have been appreciated, and ye were
not."

The family moved from the house and took a pretty apartment overlooking
the Park. They were delighted with the change and every day Ethel took
long walks around the reservoir.

Mr. Casey began to renovate the interior of the house and modernize the
outside.

The family lived in the limousine, and everyone seemed happy. Aunt Susan
did not go home with Tom but stayed on until the family were settled in
their new house. Then Tom who only wished for an excuse came on East for
her. It was nearly Easter. They persuaded him to stay over, which he
did.

And so here we shall leave them. After one more year there will be a
double wedding, and Ethel and Nora will marry. We see Harvey making rapid
strides in his profession, and Tom building a pretty home for his Ethel,
while Aunt Susan will be busy embroidering towels, napkins, etc., for
their linen chest; and not only for them, but for Nora as well, for was
it not through Nora and Mr. Casey that much of their happiness came?






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ethel Hollister's Second Summer as a
Campfire Girl, by Irene Elliott Benson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAMPFIRE GIRL ***

***** This file should be named 14169.txt or 14169.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/1/6/14169/

Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Mary Meehan, and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
