The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Song of Sixpence, by Walter Crane

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Song of Sixpence
       Picture Book

Author: Walter Crane

Release Date: May 8, 2006 [EBook #18344]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SONG OF SIXPENCE ***




Produced by Eileen Gormly, Jason Isbell, Christine D. and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










  THE SONG OF SIXPENCE
  PICTURE  BOOK

  [Illustration: CONTAINING
  SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE
  PRINCESS BELLE ETOILE
  ALPHABET OF OLD FRIENDS]


  WALTER
  CRANE'S
  PICTURE
  BOOKS

  LONDON & NEW YORK: JOHN LANE

  [Illustration]
  [Illustration]




  THE SONG OF SIXPENCE
  PICTURE BOOK

  CONTAINING SING A
  SONG OF SIXPENCE; PRINCESS
  BELLE ETOILE; AN ALPHABET OF
  OLD FRIENDS: WITH THE ORIGINAL
  COLOURED DESIGNS BY
  WALTER CRANE

  INCLUDING A PREFACE AND
  OTHER EMBELLISHMENTS

[Illustration]

  LONDON & NEW YORK JOHN LANE
  THE BODLEY HEAD




PREFACE


Whether the Poet undertook to write and SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE for that
popular price is not stated in his simple rhyme, but, at all events, we
learn that he started with "a pocket full," and proceeded to draw on his
imagination for all it was worth. What that famous blackbird-pie really
cost--except in black-birds--is not disclosed, though the King seemed to
show some anxiety about the state of his treasury, as he was discovered
"in his counting house" imediately after the feast. But while the Queen,
regardless of expense, regales herself on "bread and honey" in "the
parlour", and her Maid-of-honour, or perhaps of-all-work, is engaged at
the clothes-line, nothing is said about a princess.

No doubt there was a princess, and that Princess might have been
PRINCESS BELLE-ETOILE? Anyway here she is in the same boat--I mean
book--and certainly her adventures are romantic enough to prevent any
surprise at the company in which Her Highness now finds herself.

Even princesses cannot do without Alphabets, and so in her train comes
AN ALPHABET in which will be discovered many OLD and tried FRIENDS of
the Nursery.

Thus we launch another volume of our series, like a fairy ship with a
rather mixed cargo, in the hope that--to change the metaphor--like the
blackbird-pie, it may prove, when opened, to be "a pretty dish to set
before--" their Babyships.

Walter Crane

[Illustration]

Kensington. Sept: 1909

[Illustration] [Illustration]




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE

[Illustrations, with each couplet]

  Sing a song of sixpence,
  A pocket full of rye,

  Four and twenty black-birds,
  Baked in a pie

  When the pie was open'd
  The birds began to sing

  Was'nt that a dainty dish
  To set before the King?

  The King was in his counting-house,
  Counting out his money.

  The Queen was in the parlour,
  Eating bread and honey.

  The maid was in the garden,
  Hanging out the clothes;

  There came a little blackbird,
  And nipp'd off her nose.


[Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration]




PRINCESS BELLE-ETOILE.


Once upon a time there were three Princesses, named Roussette, Brunette,
and Blondine, who lived in retirement with their mother, a Princess who
had lost all her former grandeur. One day an old woman called and asked
for a dinner, as this Princess was an excellent cook. After the meal was
over, the old woman, who was a fairy, promised that their kindness
should be rewarded, and immediately disappeared.

Shortly after, the King came that way, with his brother and the Lord
Admiral. They were all so struck with the beauty of the three
Princesses, that the King married the youngest, Blondine, his brother
married Brunette, and the Lord Admiral married Roussette.

The good Fairy, who had brought all this about, also caused the young
Queen Blondine to have three lovely children, two boys and a girl, out
of whose hair fell fine jewels. Each had a brilliant star on the
forehead, and a rich chain of gold around the neck. At the same time
Brunette, her sister, gave birth to a handsome boy. Now the young Queen
and Brunette were much attached to each other, but Roussette was jealous
of both, and the old Queen, the King's mother, hated them. Brunette died
soon after the birth of her son, and the King was absent on a warlike
expedition, so Roussette joined the wicked old Queen in forming plans to
injure Blondine. They ordered Feintise, the old Queen's waiting-woman,
to strangle the Queen's three children and the son of Princess Brunette,
and bury them secretly. But as she was about to execute this wicked
order, she was so struck by their beauty, and the appearance of the
sparkling stars on their foreheads, that she shrank from the deed.

[Illustration]

So she had a boat brought round to the beach, and put the four babes,
with some strings of jewels, into a cradle, which she placed in the
boat, and then set it adrift. The boat was soon far out at sea. The
waves rose, the rain poured in torrents, and the thunder roared.
Feintise could not doubt that the boat would be swamped, and felt
relieved by the thought that the poor little innocents would perish, for
she would otherwise always be haunted by the fear that something would
occur to betray the share she had had in their preservation.

But the good Fairy protected them, and after floating at sea for seven
days they were picked up by a Corsair. He was so struck by their beauty
that he altered his course, and took them home to his wife, who had no
children. She was transported with joy when he placed them in her hands.
They admired together the wonderful stars, the chains of gold that could
not be taken off their necks, and their long ringlets. Much greater was
the woman's astonishment when she combed them, for at every instant
there rolled out of their hair pearls, rubies, diamonds, and emeralds.
She told her husband of it, who was not less surprised than herself.

"I am very tired," said he, "of a Corsair's life, and if the locks of
those little children continue to supply us with such treasures, I will
give up roaming the seas." The Corsair's wife, whose name was Corsine,
was enchanted at this, and loved the four infants so much the more for
it. She named the Princess, Belle-Etoile, her eldest brother,
Petit-Soleil, the second, Heureux, and the son of Brunette, Cheri.

As they grew older, the Corsair applied himself seriously to their
education, as he felt convinced there was some great mystery attached to
their birth.

The Corsair and his wife had never told the story of the four children,
who passed for their own. They were exceedingly united, but Prince Cheri
entertained for Princess Belle-Etoile a greater affection than the other
two. The moment she expressed a wish for anything, he would attempt even
impossibilities to gratify her.

One day Belle-Etoile overheard the Corsair and his wife talking. "When I
fell in with them," said the Corsair, "I saw nothing that could give me
any idea of their birth." "I suspect," said Corsine, "that Cheri is not
their brother, he has neither star nor neck-chain." Belle-Etoile
immediately ran and told this to the three Princes, who resolved to
speak to the Corsair and his wife, and ask them to let them set out to
discover the secret of their birth. After some remonstrance they gained
their consent. A beautiful vessel was prepared, and the young Princess
and the three Princes set out. They determined to sail to the very spot
where the Corsair had found them, and made preparations for a grand
sacrifice to the fairies, for their protection and guidance. They were
about to immolate a turtle-dove, but the Princess saved its life, and
let it fly. At this moment a syren issued from the water, and said,
"Cease your anxiety, let your vessel go where it will; land where it
stops." The vessel now sailed more quickly. Suddenly they came in sight
of a city so beautiful that they were anxious their vessel should enter
the port. Their wishes were accomplished; they landed, and the shore in
a moment was crowded with people, who had observed the magnificence of
their ship. They ran and told the King the news, and as the grand
terrace of the Palace looked out upon the sea-shore, he speedily
repaired thither. The Princes, hearing the people say, "There is the
King," looked up, and made a profound obeisance. He looked earnestly at
them, and was as much charmed by the Princess's beauty, as by the
handsome mien of the young Princes. He ordered his equerry to offer them
his protection, and everything that they might require.

The King was so interested about these four children, that he went into
the chamber of the Queen, his mother, to tell her of the wonderful stars
which shone upon their foreheads, and everything that he admired in
them. She was thunderstruck at it, and was terribly afraid that Feintise
had betrayed her, and sent her secretary to enquire about them. What he
told her of their ages confirmed her suspicions. She sent for Feintise,
and threatened to kill her. Feintise, half dead with terror, confessed
all; but promised, if she spared her, that she would still find means to
do away with them. The Queen was appeased; and, indeed, old Feintise did
all she could for her own sake. Taking a guitar, she went and sat down
opposite the Princess's window, and sang a song which Belle-Etoile
thought so pretty that she invited her into her chamber. "My fair
child," said Feintise, "Heaven has made you very lovely, but you yet
want one thing--the dancing-water. If I had possessed it, you would not
have seen a white hair upon my head, nor a wrinkle on my face. Alas! I
knew this secret too late; my charms had already faded." "But where
shall I find this dancing-water?" asked Belle-Etoile. "It is in the
luminous forest," said Feintise. "You have three brothers; does not any
one of them love you sufficiently to go and fetch some?" "My brothers
all love me," said the Princess, "but there is one of them who would not
refuse me anything." The perfidious old woman retired, delighted at
having been so successful. The Princes, returning from the chase, found
Belle-Etoile engrossed by the advice of Feintise. Her anxiety about it
was so apparent, that Cheri, who thought of nothing but pleasing her,
soon found out the cause of it, and, in spite of her entreaties, he
mounted his white horse, and set out in search of the dancing-water.
When supper-time arrived, and the Princess did not see her brother
Cheri, she could neither eat nor drink; and desired he might be sought
for everywhere, and sent messengers to find him and bring him back.

[Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration]

The wicked Feintise was very anxious to know the result of her advice;
and when she heard that Cheri had already set out, she was delighted,
and reported to the Queen-Mother all that had passed. "I admit, Madam,"
said she, "that I can no longer doubt that they are the same four
children: but one of the Princes is already gone to seek the
dancing-water, and will no doubt perish in the attempt, and I shall find
similar means to do away with all of them."

The plan she had adopted with regard to Prince Cheri was one of the most
certain, for the dancing-water was not easily to be obtained; it was so
notorious from the misfortunes which occurred to all who sought it, that
every one knew the road to it. He was eight days without taking any
repose but in the woods. At the end of this period he began to suffer
very much from the heat; but it was not the heat of the sun, and he did
not know the cause of it, until from the top of a mountain he perceived
the luminous forest; all the trees were burning without being consumed,
and casting out flames to such a distance that the country around was a
dry desert.

At this terrible scene he descended, and more than once gave himself up
for lost. As he approached this great fire he was ready to die with
thirst; and perceiving a spring falling into a marble basin, he alighted
from his horse, approached it, and stooped to take up some water in the
little golden vase which he had brought with him, when he saw a
turtle-dove drowning in the fountain. Cheri took pity on it, and saved
it. "My Lord Cheri," she said, "I am not ungrateful; I can guide you to
the dancing-water, which, without me, you could never obtain, as it
rises in the middle of the forest, and can only be reached by going
underground." The Dove then flew away, and summoned a number of foxes,
badgers, moles, snails, ants, and all sorts of creatures that burrow in
the earth. Cheri got off his horse at the entrance of the subterranean
passage they made for him, and groped his way after the kind Dove, which
safely conducted him to the fountain. The Prince filled his golden vase;
and returned the same way he came.

He found Belle-Etoile sorrowfully seated under some trees, but when she
saw him she was so pleased that she scarcely knew how to welcome him.

Old Feintise learned from her spies that Cheri had returned, and that
the Princess, having washed her face with the dancing-water, had become
more lovely than ever. Finding this, she lost no time in artfully making
the Princess sigh for the wonderful singing-apple. Prince Cheri again
found her unhappy, and again found out the cause, and once more set out
on his white horse, leaving a letter for Belle-Etoile.

In the meanwhile, the King did not forget the lovely children, and
reproached them for never going to the Palace. They excused themselves
by saying that their brother's absence prevented them.

Prince Cheri at break of day perceived a handsome young man, from whom
he learned where the singing-apple was to be found: but after travelling
some time without seeing any sign of it, he saw a poor turtle-dove fall
at his feet almost dead. He took pity on it, and restored it, when it
said, "Good-day, handsome Cheri, you are destined to save my life, and I
to do you signal service. You are come to seek for the singing-apple: it
is guarded by a terrible dragon." The Dove then led him to a place where
he found a suit of armour, all of glass: and by her advice he put it on,
and boldly went to meet the dragon. The two-headed monster came bounding
along, fire issuing from his throat; but when he saw his alarming figure
multiplied in the Prince's mirrors he was frightened in his turn. He
stopped, and looking fiercely at the Prince, apparently laden with
dragons, he took flight and threw himself into a deep chasm. The Prince
then found the tree, which was surrounded with human bones, and breaking
off an apple, prepared to return to the Princess. She had never slept
during his absence, and ran to meet him eagerly.

When the wicked Feintise heard the sweet singing of the apple, her grief
was excessive, for instead of doing harm to these lovely children, she
only did them good by her perfidious counsels. She allowed some days to
pass by without showing herself; and then once more made the Princess
unhappy by saying that the dancing-water and the singing-apple were
useless without the little green bird that tells everything.

Cheri again set out, and after some trouble learnt that this bird was to
be found on the top of a frightful rock, in a frozen climate. At length,
at dawn of day, he perceived the rock, which was very high and very
steep, and upon the summit of it was the bird, speaking like an oracle,
telling wonderful things. He thought that with a little dexterity it
would be easy to catch it, for it seemed very tame. He got off his
horse, and climbed up very quietly. He was so close to the green bird
that he thought he could lay hands on it, when suddenly the rock opened
and he fell into a spacious hall, and became as motionless as a statue;
he could neither stir, nor utter a complaint at his deplorable
situation. Three hundred knights, who had made the same attempt, were in
the same state. To look at each other was the only thing permitted them.

[Illustration]

The time seemed so long to Belle-Etoile, and still no signs of her
beloved Cheri, that she fell dangerously ill; and in the hopes of
curing her, Petit-Soleil resolved to seek him.

But he too was swallowed up by the rock and fell into the great hall.
The first person he saw was Cheri, but he could not speak to him; and
Prince Heureux, following soon after, met with the same fate as the
other two.

When Feintise was aware that the third Prince was gone, she was
exceedingly delighted at the success of her plan; and when Belle-Etoile,
inconsolable at finding not one of her brothers return, reproached
herself for their loss, and resolved to follow them, she was quite
overjoyed.

The Princess was disguised as a cavalier, but had no other armour than
her helmet. She was dreadfully cold as she drew near the rock, but
seeing a turtle-dove lying on the snow, she took it up, warmed it, and
restored it to life: and the dove reviving, gaily said, "I know you, in
spite of your disguise; follow my advice: when you arrive at the rock,
remain at the bottom and begin to sing the sweetest song you know; the
green bird will listen to you; you must then pretend to go to sleep;
when it sees me, it will come down to peck me, and at that moment you
will be able to seize it."

All this fell out as the Dove foretold. The green bird begged for
liberty. "First," said Belle-Etoile, "I wish that thou wouldst restore
my three brothers to me."

"Under my left wing there is a red feather," said the bird: "pull it
out, and touch the rock with it."

The Princess hastened to do as she was instructed; the rock split from
the top to the bottom: she entered with a victorious air the hall in
which stood the three Princes with many others; she ran towards Cheri,
who did not know her in her helmet and male attire, and could neither
speak nor move. The green bird then told the Princess she must rub the
eyes and mouth of all those she wished to disenchant with the red
feather, which good office she did to all.

The three Princes and Belle-Etoile hastened to present themselves to the
King; and when Belle-Etoile showed her treasures, the little green bird
told him that the Princes Petit-Soleil and Heureux and the Princess
Belle-Etoile were his children, and that Prince Cheri was his nephew.
Queen Blondine, who had mourned for them all these years, embraced them,
and the wicked Queen-Mother and old Feintise were justly punished. And
the King, who thought his nephew Cheri the handsomest man at Court,
consented to his marriage with Belle-Etoile. And lastly, to make
everyone happy, the King sent for the Corsair and his wife, who gladly
came.

[Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration]




AN ALPHABET OF OLD FRIENDS.


A

  A carrion crow sat on an oak,
  Watching a tailor shape his cloak.
  "Wife, bring me my old bent bow,
  That I may shoot yon carrion crow."
  The tailor he shot and missed his mark,
  And shot his own sow quite through the heart.
  "Wife, wife, bring brandy in a spoon,
  For our old sow is in a swoon."

B

  Ba, ba, black sheep,
    Have you any wool?
  Yes, marry, have I,
    Three bags full.

  One for my master,
    One for my dame,
  But none for the little boy
    That cries in the lane.

C

  _Hen._  Cock, cock, I have la-a-ayed!
  _Cock._ Hen, hen, that's well sa-a-ayed!
  _Hen._  Although I have to go bare-footed every day-a-ay!
  _Cock._ (_Con spirito._) Sell your eggs and buy shoes!
                           Sell your eggs and buy shoes!

D

  Dickery, dickery, dock,
  The mouse ran up the clock.
    The clock struck one,
    Down the mouse ran,
  Dickery, dickery, dock.

[Illustration: ABCD]

[Illustration: EFGH]

E

  Elizabeth, Elspeth, Betsy, and Bess,
  They all went together to seek a bird's nest
  They found a bird's nest with five eggs in;
  They all took one, and left four in.

F

  Father, father, I've come to confess.
  O, yes, dear daughter, what have you done?

G

  Gang and hear the owl yell,
  Sit and see the swallow flee,
  See the foal before its mither's e'e,
  'Twill be a thriving year wi' thee.

H

  Hush-a-bye, baby, on the tree-top;
  When the wind blows the cradle will rock;
  When the wind ceases the cradle will fall,
  And down will come baby and cradle and all.

I

  I had a little husband
    No bigger than my thumb;
  I put him in a pint pot,
    And there I bade him drum.
  I bought a little horse
    That galloped up and down;
  I bridled him, and saddled him,
    And sent him out of town.
  I gave him a pair of garters,
    To tie up his little hose,
  And a little silk handkerchief,
    To wipe his little nose.

J

  Jack Sprat would eat no fat,
  His wife would eat no lean;
  Was not that a pretty trick
  To make the platter clean?

K

  King Cole was a merry old soul,
    And a merry old soul was he.
  He called for his pipe, and he called for his bowl,
    And he called for his fiddlers three
    Every fiddler had a fiddle,
    And a very fine fiddle had he:
  Twee, tweedle dee, tweedle dee, went the fiddlers.
    Oh, there's none so rare
    As can compare
  With King Cole and his fiddlers three!

L

  Little Bo-peep has lost her sheep,
    And can't tell where to find them.
  Let them alone and they'll come home,
    And bring their tails behind them, &c.

M

    Mistress Mary,
    Quite contrary,
  How does your garden grow?
    With silver bells,
    And cockle shells.
  And cowslips all of a-row.

N

  Needles and pins, needles and pins,
  When a man marries his trouble begins.

[Illustration: IJKLM]

[Illustration: NOPQR]

O

  Once I saw a little bird,
    Come hop, hop, hop;
  So I cried, "Little bird,
    Will you stop, stop, stop?"

  And was going to the window,
    To say, "How do you do?"
  When he shook his little tail,
    And far away he flew.

P

  Pease-pudding hot, pease-pudding cold;
  Pease-pudding in the pot, nine days old.

Q

  Queen was in the parlour, eating bread and honey.

R

  Ride a-cock horse to Banbury Cross,
  To see an old woman get up on her horse;
  Rings on her fingers and bells at her toes,
  And so she makes music wherever she goes.

S

  Simple Simon met a pieman,
    Going to the fair;
  Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
    "Let me taste your ware!"

T

  Taffy was a Welshman,
    Taffy was a thief,
  Taffy came to my house,
    And stole a leg of beef.

  I went to Taffy's house,
    Taffy was not at home;
  Taffy came to my house
    And stole a marrow-bone.

  I went to Taffy's house,
    Taffy was in bed;
  I took the marrow-bone,
    And broke Taffy's head.

U

  Up hill and down dale,
  Butter is made in every vale;
  And if Nancy Cock
  Is a good girl,
  She shall have a spouse.
  And make butter anon,
  Before her old grandmother
  Grows a young man.

V

  Valentine, Oh, Valentine,
    Curl your locks as I do mine:
  Two before and two behind;
    Good-morrow to you, Valentine.

W

  "Where are you going, my pretty maid?"
  "I'm going a milking, sir," she said.
  "May I go with you, my pretty maid?"
  "You're kindly welcome, sir," she said.
  "What is your father, my pretty maid?"
  "My father's a farmer, sir," she said.
  "Say will you marry me, my pretty maid?"
  "Yes, if you please, kind sir," she said.
  "What is your fortune, my pretty maid?"
  "My face is my fortune, sir," she said.
  "Then, I won't marry you, my pretty maid!"
  "Nobody asked you, sir," she said.

[Illustration: STUV]

[Illustration: WXYZ]

X

    Cross X patch,
    Draw the latch,
  Sit by the fire and spin:
    Take a cup
    And drink it up,
  Then call the neighbours in.

Y

  You know that Monday is Sunday's brother;
  Tuesday is such another;
  Wednesday you must go to church and pray;
  Thursday is half-holiday;
  On Friday it is too late to begin to spin,
  And Saturday is half-holiday again.

Z

ZODIAC FOR THE NURSERY.

  The ram, the bull, the heavenly twins.
  And next the crab, the lion shines,
    The virgin and the scales,
  The scorpion, archer, and the goat,
  The man who holds the watering-pot,
    And fish with glittering scales.

[Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration]
[Illustration] [Illustration] [Illustration]



WALTER CRANE'S PICTURE BOOKS





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Song of Sixpence, by Walter Crane

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SONG OF SIXPENCE ***

***** This file should be named 18344.txt or 18344.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/3/4/18344/

Produced by Eileen Gormly, Jason Isbell, Christine D. and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
