The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Queen of the Pirate Isle, by Bret Harte

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Queen of the Pirate Isle

Author: Bret Harte

Illustrator: Kate Greenaway

Release Date: November 27, 2005 [EBook #17168]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE QUEEN OF THE PIRATE ISLE ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Cori Samuel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





THE QUEEN

OF THE

PIRATE ISLE


BY

BRET HARTE


ILLUSTRATED BY

KATE GREENAWAY


A FACSIMILE FROM THE ORIGINAL PUBLICATION OF 1885

[Illustration]

UNIVERSAL BOOKS LTD, LONDON, ENGLAND

Harte, Bret, 1836-1902.

ISBN 0 86441 018 2.


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
                         PAGE

MRS SMITH                  7

POLLY                     10

BEGGAR CHILD              12

SCHOOL MISTRESS           12

INDIAN MAIDEN             13

PROUD LADY                14

CHINESE JUNK              15

SWIMMING FOR HIS LIFE     16

A TENT                    17

CAPTURE OF MERCHANTMAN    18

AT SUPPER                 20

POLLY IN THE BRANCHES     23

PATSEY                    25

SLUMGULLION               28

EACH OTHER'S HANDS        30

EDGE OF CLIFF             31

SLIDING DOWN HILL         32

PIG TAIL ROPE             34

FIREWORKS IN CAVE         37

LADY MARY'S HAIR GONE     39

INVISIBLE MEDICINE        42

CLAD IN DEEPEST MOURNING  44

BROTHER STEP-AND-FETCH-IT 48

WAN LEE                   54

NOT ALWAYS PIRATES        56

POLLY BROUGHT HOME        58

ASLEEP WITH DOLL          60


[Illustration]




THE QUEEN OF THE PIRATE ISLE.


I first knew her as the Queen of the Pirate Isle. To the best of my
recollection she had no reasonable right to that title. She was only
nine years old, inclined to plumpness and good humour, deprecated
violence and had never been to sea. Need it be added that she did
_not_ live in an island and that her name was "Polly."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Perhaps I ought to explain that she had already known other
experiences of a purely imaginative character. Part of her existence
had been passed as a Beggar Child--solely indicated by a shawl
tightly folded round her shoulders and chills,--as a Schoolmistress,
unnecessarily severe; as a Preacher, singularly personal in his
remarks, and once, after reading one of Cooper's novels, as an
Indian Maiden. This was, I believe, the only instance when she had
borrowed from another's fiction. Most of the characters that she
assumed for days and sometimes weeks at a time were purely original
in conception; some so much so as to be vague to the general
understanding. I remember that her personation of a certain Mrs.
Smith, whose individuality was supposed to be sufficiently
represented by a sun-bonnet worn wrong side before and a weekly
addition to her family, was never perfectly appreciated by her own
circle although she lived the character for a month. Another
creation known as "The Proud Lady"--a being whose excessive and
unreasonable haughtiness was so pronounced as to give her features
the expression of extreme nausea, caused her mother so much alarm
that it had to be abandoned. This was easily effected. The Proud
Lady was understood to have died. Indeed, most of Polly's
impersonations were got rid of in this way, although it by no means
prevented their subsequent reappearance. "I thought Mrs. Smith was
dead," remonstrated her mother at the posthumous appearance of that
lady with a new infant. "She was buried alive and kem to!" said
Polly with a melancholy air. Fortunately, the representation of a
resuscitated person required such extraordinary acting, and was,
through some uncertainty of conception, so closely allied in facial
expression to the Proud Lady, that Mrs. Smith was resuscitated only
for a day.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The origin of the title of the Queen of the Pirate Isle, may be
briefly stated as follows:--

An hour after luncheon, one day, Polly, Hickory Hunt, her cousin,
and Wan Lee, a Chinese page, were crossing the nursery floor in a
Chinese junk. The sea was calm and the sky cloudless. Any change in
the weather was as unexpected as it is in books. Suddenly a West
Indian Hurricane, purely local in character and unfelt anywhere
else, struck Master Hickory and threw him overboard, whence, wildly
swimming for his life and carrying Polly on his back, he eventually
reached a Desert Island in the closet. Here the rescued party put up
a tent made of a table cloth providentially snatched from the raging
billows, and from two o'clock until four, passed six weeks on the
island supported only by a piece of candle, a box of matches, and
two peppermint lozenges. It was at this time that it became
necessary to account for Polly's existence among them, and this was
only effected by an alarming sacrifice of their morality; Hickory
and Wan Lee instantly became _Pirates_, and at once elected Polly as
their Queen. The royal duties, which seemed to be purely maternal,
consisted in putting the Pirates to bed after a day of rapine and
bloodshed, and in feeding them with liquorice water through a quill
in a small bottle. Limited as her functions were, Polly performed
them with inimitable gravity and unquestioned sincerity. Even when
her companions sometimes hesitated from actual hunger or fatigue and
forgot their guilty part, she never faltered. It was her _real_
existence--her other life of being washed, dressed, and put to bed
at certain hours by her mother was the _illusion_.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Doubt and scepticism came at last,--and came from Wan Lee! Wan Lee
of all creatures! Wan Lee, whose silent, stolid, mechanical
performance of a Pirate's duties--a perfect imitation like all his
household work--had been their one delight and fascination!

It was just after the exciting capture of a merchantman with the
indiscriminate slaughter of all on board--a spectacle on which the
round blue eyes of the plump Polly had gazed with royal and maternal
tolerance, and they were burying the booty--two table spoons and a
thimble in the corner of the closet, when Wan Lee stolidly rose.

[Illustration]

"Melican boy pleenty foolee! Melican boy no Pilat!" said the little
Chinaman, substituting "l's" for "r's" after his usual fashion.

"Wotcher say?" said Hickory, reddening with sudden confusion.

"Melican boy's papa heap lickee him--spose him leal Pilat,"
continued Wan Lee, doggedly. "Melican boy Pilat _inside_ housee;
Chinee boy Pilat _outside_ housee. First chop Pilat."

Staggered by this humiliating statement, Hickory recovered himself
in character. "Ah! Ho!" he shrieked, dancing wildly on one leg,
"Mutiny and Splordinashun! Way with him to the yard arm."

"Yald alm--heap foolee! Allee same clothes hoss for washee washee."

It was here necessary for the Pirate Queen to assert her authority,
which, as I have before stated was somewhat confusingly maternal.
"Go to bed instantly without your supper," she said, seriously.
"Really, I never saw such bad pirates. Say your prayers, and see
that you're up early to church to-morrow." It should be explained
that in deference to Polly's proficiency as a preacher, and probably
as a relief to their uneasy consciences, Divine Service had always
been held on the Island. But Wan Lee continued:--

"Me no shabbee Pilat _inside_ housee; me shabbee Pilat _outside_
housee. Spose you lun away longside Chinee boy--Chinee boy makee you
Pilat."

[Illustration]

Hickory softly scratched his leg while a broad, bashful smile,
almost closed his small eyes. "Wot!" he asked.

"Mebbee you too frightened to lun away. Melican boy's papa heap
lickee."

This last infamous suggestion fired the corsair's blood. "Dy'ar
think we daresent," said Hickory, desperately, but with an uneasy
glance at Polly. "I'll show yer to-morrow."

The entrance of Polly's mother at this moment put an end to Polly's
authority and dispersed the pirate band, but left Wan Lee's proposal
and Hickory's rash acceptance ringing in the ears of the Pirate
Queen. That evening she was unusually silent. She would have taken
Bridget, her nurse, into her confidence, but this would have
involved a long explanation of her own feelings, from which, like
all imaginative children, she shrank. She, however, made preparation
for the proposed flight by settling in her mind which of her two
dolls she would take. A wooden creature with easy going knees and
moveable hair seemed to be more fit for hard service and any
indiscriminate scalping that might turn up hereafter. At supper, she
timidly asked a question of Bridget. "Did ye ever hear the loikes uv
that, Ma'am," said the Irish handmaid with affectionate pride,
"Shure the darlint's head is filled noight and day with ancient
history. She's after asking me now if Queen's ever run away!" To
Polly's remorseful confusion here her good father equally proud of
her precocious interest and his own knowledge, at once interfered
with an unintelligible account of the abdication of various Queens
in history until Polly's head ached again. Well meant as it was, it
only settled in the child's mind that she must keep the awful secret
to herself and that no one could understand her.

[Illustration]

The eventful day dawned without any unusual sign of importance. It
was one of the cloudless summer days of the Californian foot hills,
bright, dry, and as the morning advanced, hot in the white sunshine.
The actual, prosaic house in which the Pirates apparently lived, was
a mile from a mining settlement on a beautiful ridge of pine woods
sloping gently towards a valley on the one side, and on the other
falling abruptly into a dark deep olive gulf of pine trees, rocks,
and patches of red soil. Beautiful as the slope was, looking over to
the distant snow peaks which seemed to be in another world than
theirs, the children found a greater attraction in the fascinating
depths of a mysterious gulf, or "cañon," as it was called, whose
very name filled their ears with a weird music. To creep to the edge
of the cliff, to sit upon the brown branches of some fallen pine,
and putting aside the dried tassels to look down upon the backs of
wheeling hawks that seemed to hang in mid-air was a never failing
delight. Here Polly would try to trace the winding red ribbon of
road that was continually losing itself among the dense pines of the
opposite mountains; here she would listen to the far off strokes of
a woodman's axe, or the rattle of some heavy waggon, miles away,
crossing the pebbles of a dried up water course. Here, too, the
prevailing colours of the mountains, red and white and green, most
showed themselves. There were no frowning rocks to depress the
children's fancy, but everywhere along the ridge pure white quartz
bared itself through the red earth like smiling teeth, the very
pebbles they played with were streaked with shining mica like bits
of looking-glass. The distance was always green and summer-like, but
the colour they most loved, and which was most familiar to them, was
the dark red of the ground beneath their feet everywhere. It showed
itself in the roadside bushes; its red dust pervaded the leaves of
the overhanging laurel, it coloured their shoes and pinafores; I am
afraid it was often seen in Indian like patches on their faces and
hands. That it may have often given a sanguinary tone to their
fancies, I have every reason to believe.

[Illustration]

It was on this ridge that the three children gathered at ten o'clock
that morning. An earlier flight had been impossible on account of
Wan Lee being obliged to perform his regular duty of blacking the
shoes of Polly and Hickory before breakfast,--a menial act which in
the pure Republic of childhood was never thought inconsistent with
the loftiest piratical ambition. On the ridge they met one "Patsey,"
the son of a neighbour, sun burned, broad-brimmed hatted, red
handed, like themselves. As there were afterwards some doubts
expressed whether he joined the Pirates of his own free will, or
was captured by them, I endeavour to give the colloquy exactly as it
occurred:--

_Patsey._ "Hallo, fellers."

_The Pirates._ "Hello!"

_Patsey._ "Goin' to hunt bars? Dad seed a lot o' tracks at sun up."

_The Pirates_ (hesitating). "No--o--"

_Patsey._ "I am; know where I kin get a six-shooter."

_The Pirates_ (almost ready to abandon piracy for bear hunting, but
preserving their dignity). "Can't! We've runn'd away for real
pirates."

_Patsey._ "Not for good!"

_The Queen_ (interposing with sad dignity and real tears in her
round blue eyes). "Yes!" (slowly and shaking her head). "Can't go
back again. Never! Never! Never! The--the--eye is cast!"

_Patsey_ (bursting with excitement). "No'o! Sho'o! Wanter know."

_The Pirates_ (a little frightened themselves, but tremulous with
gratified vanity). "The Perleese is on our track!"

_Patsey._ "Lemme go with yer!"

_Hickory._ "Wot'll yer giv?"

_Patsey._ "Pistol and er bananer."

_Hickory_ (with judicious prudence). "Let's see 'em."

Patsey was off like a shot; his bare little red feet trembling under
him. In a few minutes he returned with an old fashioned revolver
known as one of "Allen's pepper boxes" and a large banana. He was at
once enrolled and the banana eaten.

As yet they had resolved on no definite nefarious plan. Hickory
looking down at Patsey's bare feet instantly took off his own shoes.
The bold act sent a thrill through his companions. Wan Lee took off
his cloth leggings, Polly removed her shoes and stockings, but with
royal foresight, tied them up in her handkerchief. The last link
between them and civilization was broken.

"Let's go to the Slumgullion."

[Illustration]

"Slumgullion" was the name given by the miners to a certain soft,
half-liquid mud, formed of the water and finely powdered earth that
was carried off by the sluice boxes during gold washing, and
eventually collected in a broad pool or lagoon before the outlet.
There was a pool of this kind a quarter of a mile away, where there
were "diggings" worked by Patsey's father, and thither they
proceeded along the ridge in single file. When it was reached they
solemnly began to wade in its viscid paint-like shallows. Possibly
its unctuousness was pleasant to the touch; possibly there was a
fascination in the fact that their parents had forbidden them to go
near it, but probably the principal object of this performance was
to produce a thick coating of mud on the feet and ankles, which,
when dried in the sun, was supposed to harden the skin and render
their shoes superfluous. It was also felt to be the first real step
towards independence; they looked down at their ensanguined
extremities and recognized the impossibility of their ever again
crossing (unwashed) the family threshold.

Then they again hesitated. There was a manifest need of some well
defined piratical purpose. The last act was reckless and
irretrievable, but it was vague. They gazed at each other. There was
a stolid look of resigned and superior tolerance in Wan Lee's eyes.
Polly's glance wandered down the side of the slope to the distant
little tunnels or openings made by the miners who were at work in
the bowels of the mountain. "I'd like to go into one of them funny
holes," she said to herself, half aloud.

Wan Lee suddenly began to blink his eyes with unwonted excitement.
"Catchee tunnel--heap gold," he said, quickly. "When manee come
outside to catchee dinner--Pilats go inside catchee tunnel! Shabbee!
Pilats catchee gold allee samee Melican man!"

[Illustration]

"And take perseshiun," said Hickory.

"And hoist the Pirate flag," said Patsey.

"And build a fire, and cook, and have a family," said Polly.

The idea was fascinating to the point of being irresistible. The
eyes of the four children became rounder and rounder. They seized
each other's hands and swung them backwards and forwards,
occasionally lifting their legs in a solemn rhythmic movement known
only to childhood.

"Its orful far off!" said Patsey, with a sudden look of dark
importance. "Pap sez its free miles on the road. Take all day ter
get there."

The bright faces were overcast.

"Less go down er slide!" said Hickory, boldly.

[Illustration]

They approached the edge of the cliff. The "slide" was simply a
sharp incline zigzagging down the side of the mountain used for
sliding goods and provisions from the summit to the tunnel men at
the different openings below. The continual traffic had gradually
worn a shallow gulley half filled with earth and gravel into the
face of the mountain which checked the momentum of the goods in
their downward passage, but afforded no foothold for a pedestrian.
No one had ever been known to descend a slide. That feat was
evidently reserved for the Pirate band. They approached the edge of
the slide hand in hand, hesitated--and the next moment disappeared!

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Five minutes later the tunnel men of the Excelsior mine, a mile
below, taking their luncheon on the rude platform of _débris_ before
their tunnel, were suddenly driven to shelter in the tunnel from an
apparent rain of stones, and rocks, and pebbles, from the cliffs
above. Looking up, they were startled at seeing four round objects
revolving and bounding in the dust of the slide, which eventually
resolved themselves into three boys and a girl. For a moment the
good men held their breath in helpless terror. Twice, one of the
children, had struck the outer edge of the bank and displaced stones
that shot a thousand feet down into the dizzy depths of the valley!
and now, one of them, the girl, had actually rolled out of the slide
and was hanging over the chasm supported only by a clump of chimasal
to which she clung!

"Hang on by your eyelids, Sis! but don't stir for Heaven's sake!"
shouted one of the men, as two others started on a hopeless ascent
of the cliff above them.

[Illustration]

But a light childish laugh from the clinging little figure seemed to
mock them! Then two small heads appeared at the edge of the slide;
then a diminutive figure whose feet were apparently held by some
invisible companion, was shoved over the brink and stretched its
tiny arms towards the girl. But in vain, the distance was too great.
Another laugh of intense youthful enjoyment followed the failure,
and a new insecurity was added to the situation by the unsteady
hands and shoulders of the relieving party who were apparently
shaking with laughter. Then the extended figure was seen to detach
what looked like a small black rope from its shoulders and throw it
to the girl. There was another little giggle. The faces of the men
below paled in terror. Then Polly--for it was she--hanging to the
long pig-tail of Wan Lee, was drawn with fits of laughter back in
safety to the slide. Their childish treble of appreciation was
answered by a ringing cheer from below.

"Darned ef I ever want to cut off a Chinaman's pig-tail again,
boys," said one of the tunnel men as he went back to dinner.

Meantime the children had reached the goal and stood before the
opening of one of the tunnels. Then these four heroes who had looked
with cheerful levity on the deadly peril of their descent became
suddenly frightened at the mysterious darkness of the cavern and
turned pale at its threshold.

"Mebbee a wicked Joss backside holee, He catchee Pilats," said Wan
Lee, gravely.

Hickory began to whimper, Patsey drew back, Polly alone stood her
ground, albeit with a trembling lip.

"Let's say our prayers and frighten it away," she said, stoutly.

"No! No!" said Wan Lee, with sudden alarm. "No frighten Spillits!
You waitee! Chinee boy he talkee Spillit not to frighten you."[A]

[Footnote A: The Chinese pray devoutly to the Evil Spirits _not_ to
injure them.]

Tucking his hands under his blue blouse, Wan Lee suddenly produced
from some mysterious recess of his clothing a quantity of red paper
slips which he scattered at the entrance of the cavern. Then drawing
from the same inexhaustible receptacle certain squibs or fireworks,
he let them off and threw them into the opening. There they went off
with a slight fizz and splutter, a momentary glittering of small
points in the darkness and a strong smell of gunpowder. Polly gazed
at the spectacle with undisguised awe and fascination. Hickory and
Patsey breathed hard with satisfaction; it was beyond their wildest
dreams of mystery and romance. Even Wan Lee appeared transfigured
into a superior being by the potency of his own spells. But an
unaccountable disturbance of some kind in the dim interior of the
tunnel quickly drew the blood from their blanched cheeks again. It
was a sound like coughing followed by something like an oath.

"He's made the Evil Spirit orful sick," said Hickory, in a loud
whisper.

A slight laugh that to the children seemed demoniacal, followed.

"See," said Wan Lee, "Evil Spillet be likee Chinee, try talkee him."

[Illustration]

The Pirates looked at Wan Lee not without a certain envy of this
manifest favouritism. A fearful desire to continue their awful
experiments, instead of pursuing their piratical avocations, was
taking possession of them; but Polly, with one of the swift
transitions of childhood, immediately began to extemporise a house
for the party at the mouth of the tunnel, and, with parental
foresight, gathered the fragments of the squibs to build a fire for
supper. That frugal meal consisting of half a ginger biscuit,
divided into five small portions each served on a chip of wood, and
having a deliciously mysterious flavour of gunpowder and smoke, was
soon over. It was necessary after this, that the Pirates should at
once seek repose after a day of adventure, which they did for the
space of forty seconds in singularly impossible attitudes and far
too aggressive snoring. Indeed, Master Hickory's almost upright
_pose_, with tightly folded arms, and darkly frowning brows was felt
to be dramatic, but impossible for a longer period. The brief
interval enabled Polly to collect herself and to look around her in
her usual motherly fashion. Suddenly she started and uttered a cry.
In the excitement of the descent she had quite overlooked her doll,
and was now regarding it with round-eyed horror!

"Lady Mary's hair's gone!" she cried, convulsively grasping the
Pirate Hickory's legs.

[Illustration]

Hickory at once recognised the battered doll under the aristocratic
title which Polly had long ago bestowed upon it. He stared at the
bald and battered head.

"Ha! ha!" he said, hoarsely; "skelped by Injins!"

For an instant the delicious suggestion soothed the imaginative
Polly. But it was quickly dispelled by Wan Lee.

"Lady Maley's pig-tail hangee top side hillee. Catchee on big quartz
stone allee same Polly, me go fetchee."

"No!" quickly shrieked the others. The prospect of being left in the
proximity of Wan Lee's evil spirit, without Wan Lee's exorcising
power, was anything but reassuring. "No, don't go!" Even Polly
(dropping a maternal tear on the bald head of Lady Mary) protested
against this breaking up of the little circle. "Go to bed," she
said, authoritatively, "and sleep until morning."

Thus admonished, the pirates again retired. This time effectively,
for worn by actual fatigue or soothed by the delicious coolness of
the cave, they gradually, one by one, succumbed to real slumber.
Polly withheld from joining them, by official and maternal
responsibility sat and blinked at them affectionately.

[Illustration]

Gradually she, too, felt herself yielding to the fascination and
mystery of the place and the solitude that encompassed her. Beyond
the pleasant shadows where she sat, she saw the great world of
mountain and valley through a dreamy haze that seemed to rise from
the depths below and occasionally hang before the cavern like a
veil. Long waves of spicy heat rolling up the mountain from the
valley brought her the smell of pine trees and bay and made the
landscape swim before her eyes. She could hear the far off cry of
teamsters on some unseen road; she could see the far off cloud of
dust following the mountain stage coach, whose rattling wheels she
could not hear. She felt very lonely, but was not quite afraid; she
felt very melancholy, but was not entirely sad. And she could have
easily awakened her sleeping companions if she wished.

[Illustration]

No! She was a lone widow with nine children, six of whom were
already in the lone churchyard on the hill, and the others lying ill
with measles and scarlet fever beside her. She had just walked many
weary miles that day, and had often begged from door to door for a
slice of bread for the starving little ones. It was of no use
now--they would die! They would never see their dear mother again.
This was a favourite imaginative situation of Polly's, but only
indulged when her companions were asleep, partly because she could
not trust confederates with her more serious fancies, and partly
because they were at such times passive in her hands. She glanced
timidly round; satisfied that no one could observe her, she softly
visited the bedside of each of her companions, and administered from
a purely fictitious bottle spoonfuls of invisible medicine. Physical
correction in the form of slight taps, which they always required,
and in which Polly was strong, was only withheld now from a sense of
their weak condition. But in vain, they succumbed to the fell
disease--(they always died at this juncture)--and Polly was left
alone. She thought of the little church where she had once seen a
funeral, and remembered the nice smell of the flowers; she dwelt
with melancholy satisfaction on the nine little tombstones in the
graveyard, each with an inscription, and looked forward with gentle
anticipation to the long summer days when, with Lady Mary in her
lap, she would sit on those graves clad in the deepest mourning.
The fact that the unhappy victims at times moved as it were uneasily
in their graves or snored, did not affect Polly's imaginative
contemplation, nor withhold the tears that gathered in her round
eyes.

[Illustration]

Presently the lids of the round eyes began to droop, the landscape
beyond began to grow more confused, and sometimes to disappear
entirely and reappear again with startling distinctness. Then a
sound of rippling water from the little stream that flowed from the
mouth of the tunnel soothed her and seemed to carry her away with
it, and then everything was dark.

The next thing she remembered was that she was apparently being
carried along on some gliding object to the sound of rippling water.
She was not alone, for her three companions were lying beside her,
rather tightly packed and squeezed in the same mysterious vehicle.
Even in the profound darkness that surrounded her, Polly could feel
and hear that they were accompanied, and once or twice a faint
streak of light from the side of the tunnel showed her gigantic
shadows walking slowly on either side of the gliding car. She felt
the little hands of her associates seeking hers, and knew they were
awake and conscious, and she returned to each a reassuring pressure
from the large protecting instinct of her maternal little heart.
Presently the car glided into an open space of bright light, and
stopped. The transition from the darkness of the tunnel at first
dazzled their eyes. It was like a dream.

They were in a circular cavern from which three other tunnels like
the one they had passed through, diverged. The walls, lit up by
fifty or sixty candles stuck at irregular intervals in crevices of
the rock, were of glittering quartz and mica. But more remarkable
than all were the inmates of the cavern, who were ranged round the
walls; men, who like their attendants, seemed to be of extra
stature; who had blackened faces, wore red bandanna handkerchiefs
round their heads and their waists, and carried enormous knives and
pistols stuck in their belts. On a raised platform made of a packing
box, on which was rudely painted a skull and cross bones, sat the
chief or leader of the band covered with a buffalo robe; on either
side of him were two small barrels marked "Grog" and "Gunpowder."
The children stared and clung closer to Polly. Yet, in spite of
these desperate and warlike accessories, the strangers bore a
singular resemblance to "Christy Minstrels" in their blackened faces
and attitudes that somehow made them seem less awful. In particular,
Polly was impressed with the fact that even the most ferocious had a
certain kindliness of eye, and showed their teeth almost
idiotically.

"Welcome," said the leader. "Welcome to the Pirate's Cave! The Red
Rover of the North Fork of the Stanislaus River salutes the Queen of
the Pirate Isle!" He rose up and made an extraordinary bow. It was
repeated by the others with more or less exaggeration to the point
of one humourist losing his balance!

"O, thank you very much," said Polly, timidly, but drawing her
little flock closer to her with a small protecting arm; "but could
you--would you--please--tell us--what time it is?"

"We are approaching the Middle of Next Week," said the leader,
gravely; "but what of that? Time is made for slaves! The Red Rover
seeks it not! Why should the Queen?"

"I think we must be going," hesitated Polly, yet by no means
displeased with the recognition of her rank.

"Not until we have paid homage to your Majesty," returned the
leader. "What ho! there! Let Brother Step-and-Fetch-It pass the
Queen around that we may do her honour." Observing that Polly shrank
slightly back, he added: "Fear nothing, the man who hurts a hair of
Her Majesty's head, dies by this hand. Ah! ha!"

[Illustration]

The others all said, ha! ha! and danced alternately on one leg
and then on the other, but always with the same dark resemblance
to Christy Minstrels. Brother Step-and-Fetch-It, whose very long
beard had a confusing suggestion of being a part of the leader's
buffalo robe, lifted her gently in his arms and carried her to
the Red Rovers in turn. Each one bestowed a kiss upon her cheek
or forehead, and would have taken her in his arms, or on his
knees, or otherwise lingered over his salute, but they were sternly
restrained by their leader. When the solemn rite was concluded,
Step-and-Fetch-It paid his own courtesy with an extra squeeze of
the curly head, and deposited her again in the truck--a little
frightened, a little astonished, but with a considerable accession
to her dignity. Hickory and Patsey looked on with stupefied
amazement. Wan Lee alone remained stolid and unimpressed, regarding
the scene with calm and triangular eyes.

"Will Your Majesty see the Red Rover's dance?"

"No, if you please," said Polly, with gentle seriousness.

"Will Your Majesty fire this barrel of Gunpowder, or tap this
breaker of Grog?"

"No, I thank you."

"Is there no command Your Majesty would lay upon us?"

"No, please," said Polly, in a failing voice.

"Is there anything Your Majesty has lost? Think again! Will Your
Majesty deign to cast your royal eyes on this?"

He drew from under his buffalo robe what seemed like a long tress of
blond hair, and held it aloft. Polly instantly recognized the
missing scalp of her hapless doll.

"If you please, Sir, it's Lady Mary's. She's lost it."

"And lost it--Your Majesty--only to find something more precious!
Would Your Majesty hear the story?"

A little alarmed, a little curious, a little self-anxious, and a
little induced by the nudges and pinches of her companions, the
Queen blushingly signified her royal assent.

"Enough. Bring refreshments. Will Your Majesty prefer winter-green,
peppermint, rose, or accidulated drops? Red or white? Or perhaps
Your Majesty will let me recommend these bull's eyes," said the
leader, as a collection of sweets in a hat were suddenly produced
from the barrel labelled "Gunpowder" and handed to the children.

"Listen," he continued, in a silence broken only by the gentle
sucking of bull's eyes. "Many years ago the old Red Rovers of these
parts locked up all their treasures in a secret cavern in this
mountain. They used spells and magic to keep it from being entered
or found by anybody, for there was a certain mark upon it made by a
peculiar rock that stuck out of it, which signified what there was
below. Long afterwards, other Red Rovers who had heard of it, came
here and spent days and days trying to discover it; digging holes
and blasting tunnels like this, but of no use! Sometimes they
thought they discovered the magic marks in the peculiar rock that
stuck out of it, but when they dug there they found no treasure. And
why? Because there was a magic spell upon it. And what was that
magic spell? Why, this! It could only be discovered by a person who
could not possibly know that he or she had discovered it, who never
could or would be able to enjoy it, who could never see it, never
feel it, never, in fact know anything at all about it! It wasn't a
dead man, it wasn't an animal, it wasn't a baby!"

"Why," said Polly, jumping up and clapping her hands, "it was a
Dolly."

"Your Majesty's head is level! Your Majesty has guessed it!" said
the leader, gravely. "It was Your Majesty's own dolly, Lady Mary,
who broke the spell! When Your Majesty came down the slide, the doll
fell from your gracious hand when your foot slipped. Your Majesty
recovered Lady Mary, but did not observe that her hair had caught in
a peculiar rock, called the 'Outcrop,' and remained behind! When,
later on, while sitting with your attendants at the mouth of the
tunnel, Your Majesty discovered that Lady Mary's hair was gone; I
overheard Your Majesty, and despatched the trusty Step-and-Fetch-It
to seek it at the mountain side. He did so, and found it clinging to
the rock, and beneath it--the entrance to the Secret Cave!"

Patsey and Hickory, who, failing to understand a word of this
explanation, had given themselves up to the unconstrained enjoyment
of the sweets, began now to apprehend that some change was
impending, and prepared for the worst by hastily swallowing what
they had in their mouths, thus defying enchantment, and getting
ready for speech. Polly, who had closely followed the story, albeit
with the embellishments of her own imagination, made her eyes
rounder than ever. A bland smile broke on Wan Lee's face, as, to the
children's amazement, he quietly disengaged himself from the group
and stepped before the leader.

"Melican man plenty foolee Melican chillern. No foolee China boy!
China boy knowee you. _You_ no Led Lofer. _You_ no Pilat--you allee
same tunnel man--you Bob Johnson! Me shabbee you! You dressee up
allee same as Led Lofer--but you Bob Johnson--allee same. My fader
washee washee for you. You no payee him. You owee him folty dolla!
Me blingee you billee. You no payee billee! You say, 'Chalkee up,
John.' You say, 'Bimeby, John.' But me no catchee folty dolla!"

[Illustration]

A roar of laughter followed, in which even the leader apparently
forgot himself enough to join. But the next moment springing to his
feet, he shouted, "Ho! ho! A traitor! Away with him to the deepest
dungeon beneath the castle moat!"

Hickory and Patsey began to whimper. But Polly, albeit with a
tremulous lip, stepped to the side of her little Pagan friend.
"Don't you dare to touch him," she said, with a shake of unexpected
determination in her little curly head; "if you do, I'll tell my
father, and he will slay you! All of you--there!"

"Your father! Then you are _not_ the Queen!"

It was a sore struggle to Polly to abdicate her royal position, it
was harder to do it with befitting dignity. To evade the direct
question she was obliged to abandon her defiant attitude. "If you
please, Sir," she said, hurriedly, with an increasing colour and no
stops, "we're not always pirates, you know, and Wan Lee is only our
boy what brushes my shoes in the morning, and runs of errands, and
he doesn't mean anything bad, Sir, and we'd like to take him back
home with us."

"Enough," said the leader, changing his entire manner with the most
sudden and shameless inconsistency. "You shall go back together, and
woe betide the miscreant who would prevent it. What say you
brothers? What shall be his fate who dares to separate our noble
Queen from her faithful Chinese henchman?"

"He shall die!" roared the others, with beaming cheerfulness.

"And what say you--shall we see them home?"

"We will!" roared the others.

[Illustration]

Before the children could fairly comprehend what had passed, they
were again lifted into the truck and began to glide back into the
tunnel they had just quitted. But not again in darkness and silence;
the entire band of Red Rovers accompanied them, illuminating the
dark passage with the candles they had snatched from the walls. In a
few moments they were at the entrance again. The great world lay
beyond them once more with rocks and valleys suffused by the rosy
light of the setting sun. The past seemed like a dream.

But were they really awake now? They could not tell. They accepted
everything with the confidence and credulity of all children who
have no experience to compare with their first impressions and to
whom the future contains nothing impossible. It was without
surprise, therefore, that they felt themselves lifted on the
shoulders of the men who were making quite a procession along the
steep trail towards the settlement again. Polly noticed that at the
mouth of the other tunnels they were greeted by men as if they were
carrying tidings of great joy; that they stopped to rejoice
together, and that in some mysterious manner their conductors had
got their faces washed, and had become more like beings of the outer
world. When they neared the settlement the excitement seemed to
have become greater; people rushed out to shake hands with the men
who were carrying them, and overpowered even the children with
questions they could not understand. Only one sentence Polly could
clearly remember as being the burden of all congratulations. "Struck
the old lead at last!" With a faint consciousness that she knew
something about it, she tried to assume a dignified attitude on the
leader's shoulders even while she was beginning to be heavy with
sleep.

[Illustration]

And then she remembered a crowd near her father's house, out of
which her father came smiling pleasantly on her, but not interfering
with her triumphal progress until the leader finally deposited her
in her mother's lap in their own sitting room. And then she
remembered being "cross" and declining to answer any questions, and
shortly afterwards found herself comfortably in bed. Then she heard
her mother say to her father:--

"It really seems too ridiculous for any thing, John, the idea of
these grown men dressing themselves up to play with children."

"Ridiculous or not," said her father, "these grown men of the
'Excelsior' mine have just struck the famous old lode of Red
Mountain, which is as good as a fortune to everybody on the Ridge,
and were as wild as boys! And they say it never would have been
found if Polly hadn't tumbled over the slide directly on top of the
outcrop, and left the absurd wig of that wretched doll of hers to
mark its site."

"And that," murmured Polly sleepily to her doll as she drew it
closer to her breast, "is all that they know of it."

[Illustration]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Queen of the Pirate Isle, by Bret Harte

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE QUEEN OF THE PIRATE ISLE ***

***** This file should be named 17168-8.txt or 17168-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/1/6/17168/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Cori Samuel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
