The Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Cinderella, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Little Cinderella

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 1, 2007 [EBook #20723]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE CINDERELLA ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Roger Frank and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: LITTLE CINDERELLA]

BROWN, TAGGARD & CHASE, 25 & 29 CORNHILL, BOSTON.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




CINDERELLA.


In former times, a rich man and his wife were the parents of a beautiful
little daughter; but before she had arrived at womanhood, her dear
mother fell sick, and seeing that death was near, she called her little
child to her, and thus addressed her: "My child, always be good, and
bear everything that occurs to you with patience; then, whatever toil
and troubles you may suffer during life, happiness will be your lot in
the end."

After uttering these words the poor lady died, and her daughter was
overwhelmed with grief at the loss of so good and kind a mother.

The father, too, was very unhappy; but he sought to get rid of his
sorrow by marrying another wife; and he looked for some amiable lady who
might be a second mother to his child, and a companion to himself.
Unfortunately, his choice fell on a widow lady, of a proud and
overbearing temper, who had two daughters by a former marriage, both as
haughty and bad-tempered as herself.

Before marriage this woman had the cunning to conceal her bad qualities
so well that she appeared to be very amiable; but the marriage was
scarcely over when her real character showed itself. She could not
endure her amiable step-daughter, with all her charming qualifications;
for they only made her own daughters appear more hateful. She gave her
the most degrading occupations, and compelled her to wash the dishes and
clean the stairs, and to sweep her own rooms and those of her
sisters-in-law.

[Illustration]

When the poor girl had finished her work, she used to sit in the
chimney-corner amongst the cinders, which made her sisters give
her the name of "Cinderella." However, in her shabby clothes Cinderella
was ten times handsomer than her sisters, let them be ever so
magnificently dressed.

The poor girl slept in the garret, upon a wretched straw mattress,
whilst the bed-chambers of her sisters were furnished with every luxury
and elegance, and provided with mirrors, in which they could survey
themselves from head to foot. The amiable creature bore this ill
treatment with patience, and did not venture to complain to her father,
who was so completely governed by his wife that he would only have
scolded her.

It happened that the king's son sent invitations to a ball, which was to
last two nights, and to which all the great people of the land were
invited, the two sisters among the rest. This delighted them extremely,
and their thoughts were entirely occupied in selecting their most
becoming dresses for the important occasion. Poor Cinderella had now
more work to do than ever, as it was her business to iron their linen,
and starch their ruffles. The sisters talked of nothing but preparations
for the ball. The eldest said, "I shall wear my crimson-velvet dress,
and point-lace;" and the younger, "I shall put on my usual
dress-petticoat, a mantle embroidered with gold flowers, and a tiara of
diamonds." They sent to engage the services of the most fashionable
hairdresser. They also called Cinderella to their aid; for she had very
good taste, and she offered, in the most amiable manner, to arrange
their heads herself; of which offer they were only too happy to avail
themselves.

[Illustration]

Whilst so occupied, the eldest said, "Cinderella, should you like to go
to the ball?"

"Alas!" said she, "you are ridiculing me. I am not likely to go to the
ball."

"You are right," replied the sister; "people would be amused to see a
Cinderella there."

If Cinderella had been at all unamiable she might have dressed their
heads all awry, for such unkindness; but she returned good for evil, and
did it in the best possible style.

The sisters were in such spirits they could scarcely eat for two days.
All their time was spent before the looking-glass, and more than a dozen
laces were broken in attempts to tighten their waists into elegant
shapes.

At length the long-wished-for evening arrived, and these proud misses
stepped into their carriage, and drove away to the palace.

Cinderella looked after the coach as far as she could see, and then
returned to the kitchen in tears, where, for the first time, she
bewailed her hard and cruel lot, little dreaming that a kind fairy was
at the same moment watching over her.

[Illustration]

She continued sobbing in the chimney-corner until a rap at the door
aroused her, and she got up to see what had caused it. She found a
little old woman, hobbling on crutches, who besought her to give her
some food.

"I have only part of my own supper for you, Goody, which is no better
than a dry crust. But if you will step in and warm yourself by the fire,
you can do so, and welcome."

"Thank you, my dear," said the old woman, in a feeble, croaking voice;
and when she had hobbled in, and taken her seat by the fire, she
continued, "Hey! dearee me! what are all these tears about, my child?"

And then Cinderella told her of all her griefs,--how her sisters had
gone to the ball, and how she should like to have gone also.

"But you shall go," exclaimed her visitor, who was suddenly transformed
into a beautiful fairy, "or I am not queen of the fairies, or your
godmother. Dry up your tears, my dear goddaughter, and do as I bid you,
and you shall have clothes and horses finer than any one."

As Cinderella had often heard her father talk of her godmother, and tell
her that she was one of those kind fairies who protect good children,
her spirits revived, and she wiped away her tears.

The fairy took Cinderella by the hand, and said, "Now, my dear, go into
the garden, and fetch me a pumpkin."

Cinderella went immediately to gather the best she could find, and
carried it to her godmother, though she could not guess how this pumpkin
could make her go to the ball. Her godmother took the pumpkin and
hollowed it out, leaving only the rind; she then struck it with her
wand, and the pumpkin was immediately changed into a beautiful gilt
coach. She next sent Cinderella for the mouse-trap, wherein were found
six mice alive. She directed Cinderella to raise the door of the trap,
and as each mouse came out she struck it with her wand, and it was
immediately changed into a beautiful horse; so that she had now six
splendid grays for her gilt coach.

[Illustration]

The fairy was perplexed how to find a coachman, but Cinderella said, "I
will go and see if there is a rat in the rat-trap; if there is, he will
make a capital coachman."

"You are right," said the godmother; "go and see." Cinderella brought
the rat-trap, in which there were three large rats. The fairy selected
one, on account of its beautiful whiskers, and, having touched it, it
was changed into a fat coachman, with the finest pair of whiskers that
ever were seen. She then said, "You must now go into the garden, where
you will find six lizards, behind the watering-pot; bring them to me."
These were no sooner brought than the godmother changed them into six
tall footmen, in handsome liveries, with cocked hats and gold-headed
canes, who jumped up behind the coach just as if they had been
accustomed to it all their lives.

The coachman and postilion having likewise taken their places, the fairy
said to Cinderella, "Well, my dear girl, is not this as fine an equipage
as you could desire, to go to the ball with? Tell me, now, are you
pleased with it?"

"O yes, dear godmother," replied Cinderella; and then, with a good deal
of hesitation, she added, "but how can I make my appearance among so
many finely-dressed people in these shabby clothes?"

"Give yourself no uneasiness about that, my dear. The most difficult
part of our task is already accomplished, and it will be hard if I
cannot make your dress correspond with your coach and servants."

On saying this, the fairy touched Cinderella with her magic wand, and
her clothes were instantly changed into a most magnificent ball-dress,
ornamented with the most costly jewels.

The fairy now took from her pocket a beautiful pair of elastic glass
slippers, which she caused Cinderella to put on; and when she had thus
completed her work, and Cinderella stood before her, arrayed in her
beautiful clothes, the fairy was much pleased, and desired her to get
into the carriage with all expedition, as the ball had already
commenced. Two of the footmen then sprang and opened the carriage-door,
and assisted Cinderella into it. Her godmother, however, before she took
leave, strictly charged her on no account whatever to stay at the ball
after the clock had struck the hour of midnight; and then added that if
she stopped but a single moment beyond that time her fine coach would
again become a gourd, her horses mice, her footmen lizards, and her old
clothes resume their former appearance.

[Illustration]

Cinderella promised faithfully to attend to everything that the fairy
had mentioned; and then, quite overjoyed, gave the direction to the
footman, who bawled out, in a loud voice, to the coachman, "To the royal
palace!"

The coachman touched his prancing horses lightly with his whip, and
swiftly the carriage started off, and in a short time reached the
palace.

The arrival of so splendid an equipage as Cinderella's could not fail to
attract general notice at the palace gates, and as it drove up to the
marble portico the servants, in great numbers, came out to see it.

[Illustration]

The king's son, to whom it was announced that an unknown princess had
arrived, hastened to receive her. He handed her out of the carriage,
and led her to the ball-room. Immediately she entered the dancing
ceased, and the violins stopped playing; so much was every one struck
with the extreme beauty of the unknown princess; and the only sound
heard was that of admiration. The king, old as he was, could not take
his eyes off her, and said, in a low voice to the queen, that he had not
seen such a beautiful person for many years. All the ladies began
examining her dress, that they might have similar ones the next evening,
if it was possible to obtain equally rich stuffs, and work-people
skilled enough to make them. The king's son conducted her to the most
distinguished place, and invited her to dance. She danced with such
grace that everybody was in raptures with her; and when supper was
served the prince could partake of nothing, so much was he occupied in
contemplating the beauty of the fair stranger.

Seated close to her sisters, Cinderella showed them marked attention,
and divided with them the oranges and citrons which the prince had given
her; all of which surprised them greatly, as they did not recognize her.

When Cinderella saw that it wanted but a quarter of an hour of midnight
she left as quickly as possible, making a low courtesy to all the
company.

On reaching home she found her godmother there, thanked her for the
delightful evening she had spent, and begged permission to go to the
ball the following night, as the prince had desired her company. The
fairy kindly granted her request, on condition that she would return
before twelve. She then caused her clothes to resume their usual
plainness, that her sisters might not know of her adventure.

Whilst Cinderella was occupied in relating all that had passed at the
ball to her godmother, the two sisters knocked at the door, and as she
went to open it for them the fairy disappeared.

[Illustration]

"O, how late you are in coming home," said Cinderella, rubbing her eyes,
as if just awakened.

"If you had been at the ball," said one of the sisters, "you would not
have been tired; for there was there the most beautiful princess that
ever was seen, who paid us much attention, and gave us oranges and
citrons."

Cinderella could scarcely contain herself for joy. She asked the name of
the princess, but they said it was not known, and that the king's son
was therefore much distressed, and would give anything he had to know
who she could be.

Cinderella smiled, and said, "Was she, then, so very beautiful? Could
not I see her? O, Javotte, do lend me your yellow dress, that you wear
every day, that I may go to the ball, and have a peep at this wonderful
princess!"

"Indeed," said Javotte, "I am not so silly as to lend my dress to a
wretched Cinderella like you."

Cinderella expected this refusal, and was very glad of it; for she would
have been greatly embarrassed if her sister had lent her the dress.

The next evening the sisters again went to the ball, and Cinderella soon
made her appearance, more magnificently dressed than before. The king's
son was constantly at her side, saying the most agreeable things; so
that Cinderella did not notice how the time passed, and had quite forgot
her godmother's injunctions. While she therefore thought it was scarcely
eleven o'clock, she was startled by the first stroke of midnight. She
rose very hastily, and fled as lightly as a fawn, the prince following,
though he could not overtake her. In her flight she let one of her glass
slippers fall, which the prince picked up with the greatest care.

Cinderella arrived at home out of breath, without carriage or servants,
in her shabby clothes, and had nothing remaining of all her former
magnificence except one of her little glass slippers,--the fellow of
that she had lost.

[Illustration]

Upon inquiry being made of the guards, at the palace gates, as to
whether the princess had gone out, they replied that they had seen no
one go out but a young girl, very poorly dressed, who looked more like a
peasant than a fine lady.

When the two sisters returned from the ball Cinderella asked if they had
enjoyed themselves, and if the beautiful lady had again been there. They
told her that she had been there, but that when the clock struck twelve
she had started off so quickly that she let one of her pretty glass
slippers fall off; that the prince, who quickly followed her, had picked
it up, and had done nothing but look at it all the rest of the evening;
and that he was evidently very much in love with the beautiful creature
to whom it belonged, and would spare no pains to find her.

This was indeed the case; for, a few days after, the prince caused it to
be published, with the sound of trumpets, that he would marry the lady
whose foot would exactly fit the slipper.

[Illustration]

So the slipper was first tried on by all the princesses, then by all the
duchesses, and next by all the ladies belonging to the court; but in
vain. It was then taken to the two sisters, who tried every possible way
of getting their foot into it, but without success.

Cinderella, who was looking at them, and now recognized her slipper,
said, laughingly, "Let me see if it will fit me."

The sisters immediately began to laugh, and to ridicule her; but the
gentleman who had been appointed to try on the slipper, having looked
attentively at Cinderella, and finding her very pretty, said she was
quite right in her request; for he was ordered to try it on to
everybody.

He desired her to sit down, and at once found that the slipper would go
on her foot, without any trouble, and, indeed, fitted her like wax.

The astonishment of the sisters was very great, but still greater when
Cinderella drew from her pocket the fellow-slipper, and, to the great
delight of the gentleman, placed it upon her other foot.

Her godmother now made her appearance, and, having touched Cinderella
with her wand, she made her look even more magnificent than on either of
the former occasions.

The sisters now recognized in Cinderella the beautiful person they had
seen at the ball, and threw themselves at her feet, to implore
forgiveness for all the ill-treatment they had shown her. Cinderella
raised them up, and, embracing them, said she forgave them, with all her
heart, their unkindness to her, and hoped that for the future they would
be more kind in their behavior to every one about them. She told them
she had never forgotten the last words of her mother, on her
death-bed:--"My child, always be good, and bear with patience everything
that occurs to you; then, whatever toils and troubles you may suffer
during life, happiness will be your lot in the end."

These words now proved to be true; for, having borne unkindness and
cruelty with patience ever since her father's second marriage, she was
now going to be the wife of the king's son.

Cinderella then explained the visit of her godmother, the queen of the
fairies; and how her magic wand had furnished her with dresses,
carriages, and attendants; and how, by forgetting the good fairy's
orders, she was obliged to quit the ball-room so suddenly; and how, in
her haste, she lost her little glass slipper, and, for her disobedience,
was deprived of all her fine clothes.

Cinderella being now betrothed to the prince, she was taken to the
palace, dressed in all her splendor; and, being as amiable as she was
beautiful, invited her sisters to live in the palace with her, where
they were soon married to two great lords belonging to the court.

[Illustration]

The prince thought Cinderella more beautiful than ever, and in a few
days married her. She was most happy in the love of her husband, the
esteem of the court, and the good-will of all who knew her.

[Illustration]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Little Cinderella, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE CINDERELLA ***

***** This file should be named 20723.txt or 20723.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/7/2/20723/

Produced by Jason Isbell, Roger Frank and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
