The Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Nursery Book, by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The National Nursery Book
       With 120 illustrations

Author: Unknown

Release Date: March 8, 2008 [EBook #24778]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK ***




Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









THE

NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

   THE NATIONAL

   NURSERY BOOK.

   COMPRISING

   RED RIDING-HOOD.
   PUSS-IN-BOOTS.
   MOTHER HUBBARD.
   COCK ROBIN'S DEATH.
   JACK AND BEAN-STALK.
   TOM THUMB.
   CINDERELLA.
   THE THREE BEARS.
   PUNCH AND JUDY.
   THE PETS.
   NURSERY SONGS.
   NURSERY RHYMES.
   NURSERY DITTIES.
   NURSERY TALES.
   NURSERY JINGLES.

   WITH

   _ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ILLUSTRATIONS_.

   London:
   FREDERICK WARNE AND CO.,

   BEDFORD STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
   NEW YORK: SCRIBNER, WELFORD, AND ARMSTRONG.




[Illustration]

CONTENTS.


   RED RIDING-HOOD.
   PUSS-IN-BOOTS.
   MOTHER HUBBARD.
   COCK ROBIN'S DEATH.
   JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK.
   TOM THUMB.
   CINDERELLA.
   THE THREE BEARS.
   PUNCH AND JUDY.
   THE PETS.
   NURSERY SONGS.
   NURSERY RHYMES.
   NURSERY DITTIES.
   NURSERY TALES.
   NURSERY JINGLES.

[Illustration]




PREFACE.


The Publishers offer in this little volume well known and long loved
stories to their young readers. The tales which have delighted the
children of many generations will, they feel assured, be equally welcome
in the nurseries of the present day, which, with the popularity and
antiquity of the contents of the volume, justify them in styling it THE
NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK.




[Illustration]

RED RIDING-HOOD.


Once upon a time there lived on the borders of a great forest a woodman
and his wife who had one little daughter, a sweet, kind child, whom
every one loved. She was the joy of her mother's heart, and to please
her, the good woman made her a little scarlet cloak and hood, and the
child looked so pretty in it that everybody called her Little Red
Riding-Hood.


[Illustration: RED RIDING HOOD PREPARING FOR HER JOURNEY.]

One day her mother told her she meant to send her to her grandmother--a
very old woman who lived in the heart of the wood--to take her some
fresh butter and new-laid eggs and a nice cake. Little Red Riding-Hood
was very pleased to be sent on this errand, for she liked to do kind
things, and it was so very long since she had seen her grandmother
that she had almost forgotten what the dame looked like.

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD GATHERING FLOWERS.]


_THE WOLF._

The sun was shining brightly, but it was not too warm under the shade of
the old trees, and Red Riding-Hood sang with glee as she gathered a
great bunch of wild flowers to give to her grandmother. She sang so
sweetly that a cushat dove flew down from a tree and followed her. Now,
it happened that a wolf, a very cruel, greedy creature, heard her song
also, and longed to eat her for his breakfast, but he knew Hugh, the
woodman, was at work very near, with his great dog, and he feared they
might hear Red Riding-Hood cry out, if he frightened her, and then they
would kill him. So he came up to her very gently and said, "Good day,
Little Red Riding-Hood; where are you going?"

"To see my grandmother," said the child, "and take her a present from
mother of eggs and butter and cake."

"Where does your grandmamma live?" asked the wolf.

"Quite in the middle of the wood," she replied.

"Oh! I think I know the house. Good day, Red Riding-Hood." And the wolf
ran off as fast as he could


_AT PLAY IN THE WOOD._

Little Red Riding-Hood was not in a hurry, and there were many things to
amuse her in the wood. She ran after the white and yellow butterflies
that danced before her, and sometimes she caught one, but she always let
it go again, for she never liked to hurt any creature.

[Illustration: THE WOLF FOLLOWS LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD.]

And then there were the merry, cunning little squirrels to watch,
cracking nuts on the branches of the old trees, and every now and then a
rabbit would hurry away through the tall ferns, or a great bee come
buzzing near her, and she would stop to watch it gathering honey from
the flowers, and wild thyme. So she went on very slowly. By-and-by she
saw Hugh, the woodman. "Where are you going, Little Red Riding-Hood,"
said he, "all alone?"

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD CATCHING BUTTERFLIES.]

"I am going to my grandmamma's," said the child. "Good day; I must make
haste now, for it grows late."


_GRANDMOTHER AND THE WOLF._

While Little Red Riding-Hood was at play in the wood, the great wolf
galloped on as fast as he could to the old woman's house. Grandmother
lived all by herself, but once or twice a-day a neighbour's child came
to tidy her house and get her food. Now, grandmother was very feeble,
and often kept her bed; and it happened that she was in bed the day
Little Red Riding-Hood went to see her. When the wolf reached the
cottage door he tapped.

"Who is there?" asked the old dame.

"Little Red Riding-Hood, granny," said the wolf, trying to speak like
the child.

"Come in, my dear," said the old lady, who was a little deaf. "Pull the
string and the latch will come up."

The wolf did as she told him, went in, and you may think how frightened
poor grandmother was when she saw him standing by her bed instead of
Little Red Riding-Hood.


_RED RIDING-HOOD AT THE DOOR._

Very soon the wolf, who was quite hungry after his run, eat up poor
grandmother. Indeed, she was not enough for his breakfast, and so he
thought he would like to eat sweet Red Riding-Hood also. Therefore he
dressed himself in granny's nightcap and got into bed, and waited for
the child to knock at the door. But he waited a long time.

[Illustration: THE WOLF AT THE GRANDMOTHER'S COTTAGE.]

By and by Little Red Riding-Hood reached her grandmother's house, and
tapped at the door.

[Illustration: RED RIDING HOOD AT HER GRANDMOTHER'S DOOR.]

"Come in," said the wolf, in a squeaking voice. "Pull the string, and
the latch will come up."

Red Riding-Hood thought grandmother must have a cold, she spoke so
hoarsely; but she went in at once, and there lay her granny, as she
thought, in bed.

"If you please, grandmamma, mother sends you some butter and eggs," she
said.

"Come here, dear," said the wicked wolf, "and let me kiss you," and Red
Riding-Hood obeyed.


_THE WOLF AND THE CHILD._

But when Red Riding-Hood saw the wolf she felt frightened. She had
nearly forgotten grandmother, but she did not think she had been so
ugly.

"Grandmamma," she said, "what a great nose you have."

"All the better to smell with, my dear," said the wolf.

"And, grandmamma, what large ears you have."

"All the better to hear with, my dear."

"Ah! grandmamma, and what large eyes you have."

"All the better to see with, my dear," said the wolf, showing his teeth,
for he longed to eat the child up.

"Oh, grandmamma, and what great teeth you have!" said Red Riding-Hood.

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD DISCOVERS THE WOLF.]

"All the better to eat you up with," growled the wolf, and, jumping out
of bed, he rushed at Red Riding-Hood and would have eaten her up, but
just at that minute the door flew open and a great dog tore him down.
The wolf and the dog were still fighting when Hugh, the woodman, came in
and killed the wicked wolf with his axe.

[Illustration: DEATH OF THE WOLF.]


_DEATH OF THE WOLF._

Little Red Riding-Hood threw her arms round the woodman Hugh's neck and
kissed him, and thanked him again and again.

"Oh, you good, kind Hugh," she said, "how did you know the wolf was
here, in time to save me?"

"Well," said Hugh, "when you were gone by, I remembered that a wolf had
been seen about the wood lately, and I thought I would just come after
you and see if you were safe. When we came near grandmother's house Trim
sniffed and ran to the door and whined, and then he pushed it open--you
had not shut it close--and rushed in, and I followed him, and between us
we have killed the wolf."

Then Hugh took the child home, and her mother and father could not thank
him enough for saving Little Red Riding-Hood.




PUSS IN BOOTS.


Once upon a time there was a miller who had three sons. When he died he
left his mill to the eldest son, his ass to the second son, and his cat
to the youngest, who had always been his favourite.

The two eldest sons resolved to live together; but they would not let
their brother live with them, because he had only a cat. So the poor lad
was very sorrowful, and wondered what he should do to get his bread.
While he was sitting thinking about it, Puss jumped up on the table, and
touched him with her paw.

[Illustration: PUSS CONSOLING THE MILLER'S SON.]

"My dear master," she said, "do not fret. I will get your living for
you. Only you must buy me a pair of boots and give me a bag."

[Illustration: PUSS CATCHING THE RABBITS.]

The miller's son had very little money, but he thought it such a
wonderful thing to hear a cat talk that he could not refuse her request.
So he took Puss to the shoemaker's, and got him to make her a very smart
pair of boots, and then he gave her a nice large bag.


_THE RABBIT WARREN._

Now, not far from the mill there was a rabbit warren, and Puss resolved
to catch some rabbits for dinner. So she put some lettuce leaves and
fine parsley into her bag, went into the warren, and held the bag very
quietly open, hiding herself behind it. And little greedy rabbits, who
knew no better, ran into it, to have a feast. Directly they were safe
in, Puss pulled the string of the bag, and carried them off to her
master. The miller's son killed them, and cooked one for dinner; but
Puss took away the other, which was a very fine one, and hung it up for
their next day's meal.

But although their larder was thus provided, early the next day Puss
took her bag and went again into the warren, and in the same manner
caught two more fine young rabbits. But instead of carrying them home
she walked to the king's palace and knocked at the door.


_PUSS AT THE PALACE._

The king's porter asked who was there. "I have brought a present to the
king," said Puss. "Please let me see his majesty."

The porter let her in, and when Puss came into the king's presence she
made a low bow, and, taking a fine rabbit out of her bag, said, "My Lord
Marquis of Carrabas sends this rabbit to your majesty with his
respects."

[Illustration: PUSS MAKES A PRESENT TO THE KING.]

"I am much obliged to the marquis," said the king, and he ordered his
head cook to dress the rabbit for dinner.

[Illustration: PUSS CALLS ON THE OGRE.]

By the king's side sat his daughter, a very beautiful lady. She ordered
one of the attendants to give Puss a good cup of cream, which she
liked very much; and she went home and told her master all she had done.
The miller's son laughed; but every morning Puss caught a rabbit, and
carried it to the palace with the same message.


_THE OGRE._

Now, in that country there lived a cruel ogre, who used to eat children,
so everybody was afraid of him; but nobody could kill him, he was such a
giant. One day Puss went to call on him. He received her civilly, for he
did not care to eat cats, so Puss sat down, and began to talk:--"I
hear," she said, "great Ogre, that you are so clever, that you can turn
yourself into any creature you please."

"Yes, so I can," said the ogre.

"Dear me," said Puss, "how much I should like to see your ogreship do
it."

Then the ogre, who liked to show how clever he was, turned himself into
a lion, and roared so loudly that Puss was quite frightened, and jumped
out of the way. Then he changed back into an ogre again. Puss praised
him a great deal, and then said, "Can your ogreship become a small
animal as well as a large one?"

"Oh, yes," said the vain ogre; and he changed himself into a little
mouse. Directly Puss saw him in this form she jumped at him and killed
him on the spot.


_THE MARQUIS OF CARRABAS._

Then Puss ran home and bade her master go and bathe in the river, and he
should see what she would do for him. The miller's son obeyed; and while
he was in the water, Puss took away all his clothes, and hid them under
a large stone. Now, the king's carriage came in sight soon after, just
as Puss had expected, for he always drove in that direction, and
directly she saw it, she began to cry very loudly, "Help, help, for
my Lord the Marquis of Carrabas." The king put his head out, and asked
what was the matter.

[Illustration: PUSS ASKS HELP FOR HIS MASTER.]

"Oh, your majesty," said Puss, "my master the marquis was bathing, and
some one has taken away his clothes. He will catch the cramp and be
drowned."

[Illustration: PUSS THREATENS THE REAPERS.]

Then the king ordered one of his attendants to ride back to the palace
and get a suit of his own clothes for the marquis, "who had so often
sent him gifts," he said. And when they were brought, Puss took them to
her master, and helped him to dress in them.


_PUSS FRIGHTENS THE REAPERS._

The miller's son looked quite like a gentleman in the king's clothes,
and when he went to thank his majesty for them, the king asked him to
get into the coach and he would drive him home. Then Puss told the
coachman where to go, and ran on before and came to some reapers.
"Reapers," said she, "if the king asks you whose field this is, say it
belongs to the Marquis of Carrabas; if you don't say so, you shall be
chopped up as small as mincemeat."

The reapers were so frightened that they promised to obey her. And she
ran on and told all the other labourers on the road to say the same. So
when the king asked, "To whom do these fine fields belong?" the reapers
answered, "To the Marquis of Carrabas." The herdsmen said the same of
the cattle, and the king, turning to the miller's son, said, "My lord,
you have a fine property." But all had belonged really to the ogre, for
it was to his castle the cunning cat had told the coachman to drive.


_THE CASTLE._

At last the coach stopped at the Ogre's castle, and Puss came out, and
bowing very low, said, "Your majesty and the princess are welcome to
the castle of my Lord Marquis of Carrabas."

[Illustration: THE KING AND PRINCESS VISIT THE MARQUIS.]

The king was delighted, for it was indeed a very nice castle, full of
riches. They sat down to a great feast, which Puss ordered to be served,
and the king was so pleased with the miller's son and thought him such a
good match for the princess, that he invited him to court, and in a
little while gave him his daughter for his wife, and made him a prince.

[Illustration: MARRIAGE OF THE MARQUIS AND PRINCESS.]

You may be quite sure that the miller's son was very grateful to Puss
for his good fortune, and she never had to catch mice for her dinner any
more, for dainty meat and the best cream were every day given to Puss in
Boots.




OLD MOTHER HUBBARD.


   Old Mother Hubbard
   Went to the cupboard
     To get her poor Dog a bone;
   But when she came there
   The cupboard was bare,
     And so the poor Dog had none.

[Illustration: OLD MOTHER HUBBARD AND HER DOG.]

   She went to the baker's
     To buy him some bread,
   But when she came back
     The poor Dog looked dead.

[Illustration: THE DOG LOOKING DEAD.]

   She went to the hatter's
     To buy him a hat,
   But when she came back
     He was feeding the cat.

   She went to the barber's
     To buy him a wig,
   But when she came back
     He was dancing a jig.

   She went to the joiner's
     To buy him a coffin,
   But when she came back
     The poor Dog was laughing.

   She took a clean dish
     To get him some tripe,
   But when she came back
     He was smoking a pipe.

[Illustration: THE DOG SMOKING A PIPE.]

[Illustration: THE DOG STANDING ON HIS HEAD.]

   She went to the ale-house
     To get him some beer,
   But when she came back
     The Dog sat in a chair.

   She went to the tavern
     For white wine and red,
   But when she came back
    The Dog stood on his head.

   She went to the fruiterer's
     To buy him some fruit,
   But when she came back
     He was playing the flute.

   She went to the tailor's,
     To buy him a coat,
   But when she came back
     He was riding a goat.

[Illustration: THE DOG PLAYING THE FLUTE.]

[Illustration: THE DOG SPINNING.]

   She went to the sempstress
     To buy him some linen,
   But when she came back
     The Dog was a-spinning.

   She went to the hosier's
     To buy him some hose,
   But when she came back
     He was dressed in his clothes.

   She went to the cobbler's
     To buy him some shoes,
   But when she came back
     He was reading the news.

   The Dame made a curtsey,
     The Dog made a bow;
   The Dame said, "Your servant;"
     The Dog said, "Bow-wow!"

[Illustration: THE DOG READING THE NEWS.]

[Illustration: THE DOG MADE A BOW.]

   This wonderful Dog
     Was Dame Hubbard's delight;
   He could sing, he could dance,
     He could read, he could write.

   So she gave him rich dainties
     Whenever he fed,
   And erected a monument
     When he was dead.




COCK ROBIN.


   Who killed Cock Robin?
     I, said the Sparrow,
     With my bow and arrow.
   I killed Cock Robin.

[Illustration: THE SPARROW, COCK ROBIN, AND THE FISH.]

[Illustration: THE LINNET, THE DOVE, AND COCK ROBIN.]

   Who saw him die?
     I, said the Fly,
     With my little eye.
   I saw him die.

   Who caught his blood?
     I, said the Fish,
     With my little dish.
   I caught his blood.

   Who'll carry him to the grave?
     I, said the Kite,
     If it's not in the night.
   I'll carry him to the grave.

   Who'll carry the link?
     I, said the Linnet,
     I'll fetch it in a minute.
   I'll carry the link.

[Illustration: THE KITE AND COCK ROBIN.]

[Illustration: THE OWL, THE BEETLE, AND COCK ROBIN.]

   Who'll make his shroud?
     I, said the Beetle,
     With my thread and needle.
   I'll make his shroud.

   Who'll dig his grave?
     I, said the Owl,
     With my spade and shovel.
   I'll dig his grave.

   Who'll toll the bell?
     I, said the Bull,
     Because I can pull.
   I'll pull the bell.

[Illustration: THE BULL TOLLING THE BELL]

[Illustration: THE ROOK AND THE LARK]

   Who'll be the Parson?
     I, said the Rook,
     With my little book.
   I'll be the Parson.

   Who'll be the Clerk?
     I, said the Lark,
     If it's not in the dark.
   I'll be the Clerk.

   Who'll be chief mourner?
     I, said the Dove,
     For I mourn for my love.
   I'll be chief mourner.

   Who'll sing a psalm?
     I, said the Thrush,
     As she sat in a bush.
   I'll sing a psalm.

[Illustration: THE THRUSH.]

[Illustration: SIGHING AND SOBBING FOR POOR COCK ROBIN.]

   All the birds of the air
     Fell a-sighing and sobbing
   When they heard the bell toll
     For poor Cock Robin.




JACK & THE BEAN-STALK.


Once upon a time there was a poor widow who lived in a little cottage
with her only son Jack.

[Illustration: JACK SELLS A COW FOR SOME BEANS.]

Jack was a giddy, thoughtless boy, but very kind-hearted and
affectionate. There had been a hard winter, and after it the poor woman
had suffered from fever and ague. Jack did no work as yet, and by
degrees they grew dreadfully poor. The widow saw that there was no means
of keeping Jack and herself from starvation but by selling her cow; so
one morning she said to her son, "I am too weak to go myself, Jack, so
you must take the cow to market for me, and sell her." Jack liked going
to market to sell the cow very much; but as he was on the way, he met a
butcher who had some beautiful beans in his hand. Jack stopped to look
at them, and the butcher told the boy that they were of great value, and
persuaded him to sell the cow for them! And Jack was so silly as to
consent to this foolish bargain.

[Illustration: THE BEAN-STALK GROWS OUT OF SIGHT IN A NIGHT.]

When he brought them home to his mother instead of the money she
expected for her nice cow, she was very vexed and shed many tears,
scolding Jack for his folly. He was very sorry; but, he said, he might
as well make the best of his bargain, so he put the seed-beans into the
ground close by the side of the steep hill under shelter of which their
cottage was built, and went to bed. The next morning when he got up, he
found that the beans had grown, till the bean stalks reached right over
the top of the hill, and were lost to his sight. Greatly surprised, he
called his mother, and they both gazed in silent wonder at the
bean-stalk, which was not only of great height, but was thick enough to
bear Jack's weight.

"I wonder where it goes?" said Jack to his mother; "I think I will climb
up and see."

His mother wished him not to venture up this strange ladder, but Jack
coaxed her to give her consent to the attempt, for he was certain there
must be something wonderful in the bean-stalk.

Jack instantly began to climb, and went up and up on the ladder-like
bean till every thing he had left behind him, the cottage, the village,
and even the tall church tower, looked quite little, and still he did
not see the top of the bean stalk.

Jack felt a little tired, and thought for a moment that he would go back
again; but he was a very persevering boy, and he knew that the way to
succeed in anything is not to give up. So after resting for a moment he
went on, and at last reached the top of the bean, and found himself in a
beautiful country, finely wooded; and not far from the place where he
had got off the bean-stalk stood a fine and strong castle.

Jack wondered very much that he had never heard of or seen this castle
before; but when he reflected on the subject, he saw that it was as much
separated from the village by the perpendicular rock on which it stood
as if it were in another land.

While Jack was standing looking at the castle, a very strange-looking
woman came out of the wood and advanced towards him.

[Illustration: JACK CLIMBS THE BEAN-STALK.]

Jack took off his hat to the old lady, and she said, pointing to the
castle, "Boy, that castle belongs to you. A wicked giant killed your
father, and took it from your mother; try and win it back from the
monster who now has it." As she ceased speaking she suddenly
disappeared, and of course Jack knew she was a fairy.

[Illustration: JACK ASKS ABOUT THE CASTLE.]

He was much surprised; however, he walked up to the castle door and
knocked, and an old giantess came out. She did not wait till he spoke,
but pulled him in at once, for she thought he would make a nice supper
for her when her husband was asleep. Just at that moment, however, she
heard the giant's step approaching, so she put Jack into a press, and
told him to hide there, or the giant would eat him. As soon as the Ogre
came in, he cried in a terrible voice

   "Fee, fa, fie, fo, fum,
   I smell the breath of an Englishman."

"Oh!" said his wife, "there is nobody here. You only smell a crow that
is flying over the chimney." Then the giant sat down to dinner, which
was quite ready, and when he had eaten a whole sheep, he said, "Bring me
my hen."

The giantess brought a hen, and put it on the table before him, and then
she went away. "Lay," said the giant to the hen, and she laid a golden
egg. Jack could see quite plainly through a little hole which he had
bored in the door. Three times the giant said "Lay," and each time the
hen laid a solid gold egg. Then the Ogre, being drowsy, shut his eyes,
and soon snored very loudly. Directly Jack found that the giant was
asleep, he stole out of the press, caught up the hen, ran out of the
room, opened the door of the castle, which the giant had left ajar, and
descended the bean-stalk as fast as he could go. His mother was glad to
see him again, and much surprised at seeing the hen, which laid them
three gold eggs every day. Jack's mother took them to the next town and
sold them, and soon grew quite rich. Some time afterwards Jack made
another journey up the bean-stalk to the giant's castle; but first he
dyed his hair and disguised himself. The old woman did not know him
again, and dragged him in as she had done before to eat him by-and-by;
but once more she heard her husband coming and hid him in the press, not
thinking that it was the same boy who had stolen the hen. She put him
into the same press, and bade him stay quite still there, or the giant
would eat him.

[Illustration: THE HEN THAT LAYS GOLDEN EGGS.]

Then the giant came in, saying:

   "Fee, fa, fie, fo, fum,
   I smell the breath of an Englishman."

"Oh!" said his wife, "it is only the cowherd, who has just been here. We
cannot spare him for your dinner."

[Illustration: JACK TAKES THE GIANT'S MONEY-BAGS.]

Then the giant sat down, and when he had eaten half an ox, he told his
wife to bring his money-bags to him. She instantly went and fetched two
large bags full of gold; and then left him to go about her usual
house-work.

The Ogre counted out the gold twice over, and then put it into the bags
and tied them up. In a few minutes Jack heard him snore. He directly
crept out of the press, seized the bags, and hurrying out of the castle,
carried them home quite safely. Jack's mother was glad to see him safe
at home again, and for a long time she would not let him go up the
bean-stalk; but Jack knew he had not yet obeyed the fairy's command to
win back the castle, so after a time he set off once more on this
adventure, and tapped again at the castle door.

The giantess, who was very stupid, did not know him again, but she
stopped a minute before she took him in. She feared another robbery; but
Jack's fresh cheeks looked so tempting that she could not resist him,
and so she bade him come in.

But at that moment she heard her husband's step approaching.

Afraid of losing her supper, the Ogress at once shut Jack in the press;
and she had hardly hidden him when the giant came in, saying as usual,

   "Fee, fa, fie, fo, fum,
   I smell the blood of an Englishman."

"Oh no!" said his wife, "it is only the shepherd, who has been up with a
sheep for your dinner."

The giant sat down, and when he had eaten a whole sheep he said, "I
should like some music; bring me my harp."

The Ogress went and brought a golden harp to him, set it on the table,
and went away. Then the Ogre said, "Play," to the harp, and it played so
delightfully that Jack was charmed.

[Illustration: JACK TAKES THE TALKING HARP.]

By-and-by, however, the giant snored so loud that he could not hear the
music; and Jack quickly stole out, and seizing the harp, ran away with
it. But the harp was a fairy belonging to the giant, and as Jack ran, it
cried out, "Master! Master!" The giant woke up slowly and rushed after
Jack, but the boy was very nimble and outran him. You may imagine how
fast Jack went down the bean-stalk this time, hearing all the while
the tramp of the giant's feet behind him.

[Illustration: THE GIANT BREAKS HIS NECK.]

Just as he reached the bottom he saw the Ogre looking down on him.

The next moment his great feet were on the bean-stalk.

"Mother, mother! bring me the axe," cried Jack.

His mother hastened with it, and just as the giant was half way down the
bean-stalk, Jack succeeded in chopping it in halves; the lower half
fell; the upper half swung away, and the giant, losing his hold, fell
heavily to the ground on his head and broke his neck.

The same moment the fairy again stood beside Jack, and touching the
broken bean-stalk was turned into a flight of broad, easy steps.

"Go up," she said, "and take possession of your own home, so long kept
from you. The Ogress is dead, and there is no more danger. You have been
brave and good. May you be happy."

Jack thanked the fairy very warmly for her aid, and she again departed
to Fairyland, after explaining to Jack that she had been the butcher who
sold him the beans.




TOM THUMB.


In the days of good king Arthur there lived a countryman and his wife
who, though they had plenty to eat and to drink, and a very comfortable
cottage to live in, were not at all happy.

They had no children, and they both wished very much for a baby. The
wife was often in tears when her husband was out at work and she was all
alone, because she had not an infant to take care of and nurse. One day,
as she sat weeping by herself, more than usually sad, she said aloud,
"If I only had a dear little baby, I should not care what it was like. I
should be thankful for one if it were _no bigger than my husband's
thumb_."

Now it happened that the Queen of the Fairies was passing by, though the
poor woman could not see her, and as she knew the farmer's wife was kind
to the poor and likely to be a good mother, she thought she would grant
her wish.

[Illustration: THE FARMER'S WIFE CRYING BECAUSE SHE HAS NO BABY.]

So about an hour or two afterwards the woman was much surprised to see
standing by the table a very beautiful lady, dressed splendidly, with a
glittering star on her forehead and a wand in her right hand, with a
gem of great brilliancy at the top of it. But what delighted the woman
most of all was a tiny cradle, made of a walnut shell, lined with
velvet, in which lay the prettiest baby ever seen, but it was only just
as large as a man's thumb. "See," said the fairy, "your wish is granted.
Here is a baby for you. Take care of it; it is your own." The woman did
not know how to thank the fairy enough; she was so delighted, and the
queen went away quite pleased at having given so much happiness.

[Illustration: THE FAIRY QUEEN BRINGING TOM THUMB TO HIS MOTHER.]

Before the fairy went away, however, she gave the woman a little shirt
of spider's web and a doublet of thistle-down for the baby.

When the farmer came home he was very much pleased. He invited all his
friends to the christening, and the child was named "Tom," after him,
and "Thumb," because he was no bigger than one.

The baby was very well, and merry, and grew, of course; but still it was
very small.

However, at last Tom thought himself quite a great boy, and begged his
mother to make him a little suit of clothes, and she made him one; but
with a great deal of trouble, they were so small.

Tom was very often in mischief. He was so small that his mother used to
put him on the table to play; and once she found him in the salt-box.

[Illustration: TOM FALLS INTO THE PUDDING.]

One day she was making a plum-pudding, and Tom stood by the side of the
basin, and peeped over the edge; but he could not see into it very well,
and while his mother was gone for some more flour, he drew himself up on
the edge of the basin. Alas! he fell in and disappeared in the wet
pudding, which for poor Tom was a huge morass.

[Illustration: THE FALL OF THE PUDDING.]

Tom would have cried out, but the pudding stuck his lips together, and
his mother not missing him, stirred him up in the mixture, and put it
and him into the pot. Tom no sooner felt the hot water than he danced
about like mad; the woman was nearly frightened out of her wits to see
the pudding come out of the pot and jump about, and she was glad to give
it to a tinker who was passing that way. The tinker took the pudding and
put it into a cloth, to carry it home to his family, who seldom tasted
such a good dish.

But by-and-by, as he was climbing over a stile, he happened to squeeze
it, and Tom, who had made quite an arch over his own head in the dry
pudding by this time, cried out from the middle of it, "Hallo, Pickens!"
which so terrified the tinker that he let the pudding drop in the field
and scampered off as fast as he could. The pudding fell to pieces in the
fall, and Tom, creeping out, went home to his mother, whom he found in
great trouble, because she could not find him.

After this accident, Tom's mother never let him stay near her while she
was cooking, but she was obliged to take him with her when she went out
milking, for she dared not trust the little man in the house alone.

A few days after his escape from the pudding, Tom went, with his mother,
into the fields to milk the cows, and for fear he should be blown away
by the wind, she tied him to a thistle with a small piece of thread.

[Illustration: THE COW EATS TOM.]

Very soon after, a cow eat up the thistle and swallowed Tom Thumb. His
mother was in sad grief again; but Tom scratched and kicked in the cow's
throat till she was glad to throw him out of her mouth again, and he was
not at all hurt; but his mother became very anxious about her small son,
who now gave her a great deal of trouble. Sometimes he fell into the
milk-pail and was nearly drowned in the milk; once he was nearly killed
by an angry chicken, and another time had a narrow escape from a cat.

[Illustration: THE EAGLE FLIES AWAY WITH TOM.]

One day Tom went ploughing with his father, who gave him a whip made of
a barley straw, to drive the oxen with; but an eagle, flying by, caught
him up in his beak, and carried him to the top of a great giant's
castle, and dropped him on the leads. The giant was walking on the
battlements and thought at first that it was a foreign bird which lay at
his feet, but soon seeing that it was a small man, he picked Tom up with
his finger and thumb, and put the poor little creature into his great
mouth, but the fairy dwarf scratched the roof of the giant's mouth, and
bit his great tongue, and held on by his teeth till the ogre, in a
passion, took him out again and threw him over into the sea, which ran
beneath the castle walls. Here a very large fish swallowed him up
directly.

Tom did not at all like swimming about in the fish, but by-and-by he
felt it drawn upwards, and guessed at once that it was caught. And so it
was; and being a very large fish, the fisherman thought it would make a
good present for his beloved King Arthur. So he took it to the palace
and begged the king to accept it.

King Arthur was pleased with the poor man's affection, and ordered the
fish to be carried to the kitchen and cooked for his own dinner. The
fisherman took it to the cook, who admired it very much, but said it was
very heavy. Then he laid it on a table and began to cut it open. You may
imagine how he jumped with fear and wonder when Tom Thumb slipped out of
the fish!

The cook's cries brought the other servants, and soon everybody near ran
to behold this wonder--the tiny man who came out of the fish.

Tom begged for some water to wash himself, and when he was clean, the
courtiers thought him so pretty and such a marvel that they ran to tell
the king about him.

[Illustration: TOM COMES OUT OF THE FISH.]

Arthur was very much surprised; but he desired them to send the little
man up after dinner to see him, and the Court tailor made haste at once
to get ready a Court suit for Tom, which did not take him long to
make; there were so few stitches in it!

[Illustration: KING ARTHUR RECEIVING TOM THUMB.]

As soon as the king's great punch-bowl was set on the royal table, Tom
Thumb was carried to see the monarch, who was delighted with the little
man. Tom walked on the King's hand, and danced on the Queen's. He became
a great favourite with Arthur, who made him a knight. Such is the
wonderful history of Tom Thumb, who did much good when he grew older,
and thus proved that however small people are, they may be of use in the
world. He was good and kind to his parents, and to everybody; and the
old ballad says,--

   "Such were his deeds and noble acts
     In Arthur's court there shone,
   As like in all the world beside
     Was hardly seen or known."




CINDERELLA.


Cinderella's mother died while she was a very little child, leaving her
to the care of her father and her step-sisters, who were very much older
than herself; for Cinderella's father had been twice married, and her
mother was his second wife. Now, Cinderella's sisters did not love her,
and were very unkind to her. As she grew older they made her work as a
servant, and even sift the cinders; on which account they used to call
her in mockery "Cinderella." It was not her real name, but she became
afterwards so well known by it that her proper one has been forgotten.

She was a very sweet-tempered, good girl, however, and everybody (except
her cruel sisters) loved her.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA AT HOME.]

It happened, when Cinderella was about seventeen years old, that the
King of that country gave a ball, to which all ladies of the land,
and among the rest the young girl's sisters, were invited. And they made
her dress them for the ball, but never thought of allowing her to go
there.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA DRESSING HER SISTERS FOR THE BALL.]

"I wish you would take me to the ball with you," said Cinderella,
meekly.

"Take you, indeed!" answered the elder sister, with a sneer; "it is no
place for a cinder-sifter: stay at home and do your work."

When they were gone, Cinderella, whose heart was very sad, sat down and
cried bitterly; but as she sat sorrowful, thinking of the unkindness of
her sisters, a voice called to her from the garden, and she went out to
see who was there. It was her godmother, a good old Fairy.

"Do not cry, Cinderella," she said; "you also shall go to the ball,
because you are a kind, good girl. Bring me a large pumpkin."

Cinderella obeyed, and the Fairy, touching it with her wand, turned it
into a grand coach. Then she desired Cinderella to go to the trap, and
bring her a rat. The girl obeyed, and a touch of the Fairy's wand turned
him into a very smart coachman. Two mice were turned into footmen; four
grasshoppers into white horses. Next, the Fairy touched Cinderella's
rags, and they became rich satin robes, trimmed with point lace.
Diamonds shone in her hair and on her neck and arms, and her kind
godmother thought she had seldom seen so lovely a girl. Her old shoes
became a charming pair of glass slippers, which shone like diamonds.

"Now go to the ball, my love," she said, "and enjoy yourself. But
remember, you must leave the room before the clock strikes _eleven_. If
you do not your dress will return to its original rags. I approve of
pleasure, but not of dissipation, and I expect that you will show your
gratitude by obeying me."

Cinderella kissed and thanked her godmother. Then she stepped into her
coach and drove off, with her footmen behind, in great style. The Fairy,
when she was gone, returned to Fairyland.

Cinderella was received at the King's palace with great respect. The
Lord Chamberlain bowed low to her, thinking she must be a very great
lady by her dress and carriage, and he showed her at once into the
ball-room.

[Illustration: THE FAIRY GODMOTHER.]

She was so beautiful that everybody looked at her, and wondered who she
was; and the Prince asked her to dance with him, and afterwards would
dance with no one else.

[Illustration: ARRIVAL AT THE PALACE.]

But she made haste to leave a little before the hour fixed, and had time
to undress before her sisters came home. They told her a beautiful
Princess had been at the ball, with whom the Prince was delighted. They
did not know it was Cinderella herself, and she was amused to hear them
admire her grace and beauty, and say that they were sure she was a royal
lady.

The Prince was quite vexed when supper-time came, and he could not find
his beautiful partner, and no one had seen her leave the room. But in
hopes of beholding her again, he persuaded the King to give another
grand ball. As soon as her sisters were gone to it, Cinderella's
godmother arrived.

"You were so good and obedient last time, that I shall let you go out
again," said she to the young girl.

And once more the rat, mice, grasshoppers, and pumpkin (which had gone
back to their original shapes after the first ball) were turned into the
grand carriage and attendants, and Cinderella, in rose-coloured satin
and rubies, went to the royal ball.

Directly the Prince saw her, he asked her to dance, and would have no
other partner, and as he led her past her two unkind sisters, she saw
them look at her dress with envious eyes, and knew that they wished they
were as beautiful, and as well-dressed as she was.

But in the midst of her enjoyment, Cinderella remembered the Fairy's
command, and at half-past ten glided out of the room, and drove home
again. Her sisters found her waiting to undress them in her usual rags,
and kept her up to tell her how beautiful the unknown Princess was, and
how well she was dressed.

Again the Prince was vexed at the sudden disappearance of the beautiful
stranger, and once more he persuaded the King to give a grand State
ball.

"I wonder if Princess Beauty will be there!" said the sisters to
Cinderella. "We must have new dresses, for she is so splendid. She makes
every one look shabby."

[Illustration: CINDERELLA DANCES WITH THE PRINCE.]

Cinderella smiled as she helped them to dress. She was sure the Fairy
would let her go to the ball too. And she was right. Her godmother,
pleased with her obedience, came in good time, and Cinderella, dressed
in blue satin and pearls, went in the same style as before.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA RUNS HOME AND LOSES HER SLIPPER.]

The Prince would scarcely let her out of his sight, and Cinderella, who
was getting a little spoiled by all the flattery she heard, began to
think more of herself and less of the Fairy; so the time stole on, till
glancing up at the clock, she saw it wanted only five minutes to eleven.

At once she darted out of the room, and ran through the palace as fast
as she could go, but as she reached the hall, she lost one of her
precious glass slippers! She did not stop to pick it up, but rushed to
the door. Alas! the clock had struck ELEVEN. She found no coach, only a
pumpkin, and the rat and mice ran quickly away when they saw her; while
all her fine dress turned to rags, and she had to run home alone in the
darkness of the night.

The Prince was very much surprised when he missed Cinderella again, and
leaving the ball, went in search of her. He asked all the attendants,
but no one had seen her, and when enquiry was made of the porter, he
said that no one had gone out of the palace except a poor ragged
beggar-girl.

However, the Prince's search was rewarded by his finding the glass
slipper, which he well knew belonged to the unknown Princess. He loved
Cinderella so much that he now resolved to marry her; and as he felt
sure that no one else could wear such a tiny shoe as hers was, he sent
out a herald to proclaim that whichever lady in his kingdom could put on
this glass slipper should be his wife.

All the great ladies who wished to be a Princess tried to put it on, but
in vain. Cinderella's sisters tried, but could not get it on, and then
Cinderella asked if she might try. They laughed at her; but the Prince,
hearing of her wish, sent for her. She went with her sisters in her poor
dress, but very clean, and at once put on the slipper. Then she drew the
fellow of it from her pocket, and slipped it on her other foot.

The Prince, who had thought the moment he saw her that the poor girl was
very much like the beautiful Princess, was delighted. He insisted on
Cinderella telling him her story, which she did very modestly, and all
listened with wonder.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA TRIES ON THE SLIPPER.]

As her tale ended, the Fairy godmother suddenly entered the room, and
placing her godchild's hand in the Prince's, said:

"Take this young girl for your wife, Prince; she is good and patient,
and as she has known how to submit to injustice meekly, she will know
how to reign justly."

[Illustration: CINDERELLA MARRIED TO THE PRINCE.]

So Cinderella was married to the Prince in great state, and they lived
together very happily. She forgave her sisters, and treated them always
very kindly, and the Prince had great cause to be glad that he had found
the glass slipper.




THE THREE BEARS.


Once upon a time three bears lived in a nice little house in a great
forest.

There was the Father Bear, the Mother Bear, and the Baby Bear.

They had each a bed to sleep in, a chair to sit on, and a basin and
spoon for eating milk or honey, which was their favourite food.

One morning the three bears resolved on taking a walk before breakfast;
but before they went out, they poured their warm milk into their basins,
that it might get cool by the time they came back.

[Illustration: THE BEARS AT BREAKFAST.]

When the milk was poured out, the three bears set out for a walk.

[Illustration: THE BEARS OUT FOR A WALK.]

Mr. and Mrs. Bear walked arm-in-arm, and Baby ran by their side.

"WHAT A FINE DAY IT IS!" growled Mr. Bear.

"WHAT A FINE DAY IT IS!" said Mrs. Bear.

"What a fine day!" squeaked little Bear.

And so it was.

The sun shone brightly though it was low in the sky, and its rays
glittered on the fine webs on the grass. The leaves shivered in the soft
breeze; the wood-pigeon cooed; the lark sang loud enough to make himself
hoarse; the sparrows chirped; the bee buzzed, and a yellow butterfly
perched on great Bear's nose.

"What a squeaky noise these creatures make!" said big Bear, as he
brushed off the butterfly. "What a pity it is they have not _our_ deep
voices."

"Yes," said Mrs. Bear; "you have a much finer voice than the lark. I
should like to hear him growl as you do."

"Oh, my dear, you are too kind; my growl is nothing to the lion's."

And thus conversing, the bears walked on.

Now there lived in the same forest a sweet little girl, who was called
Golden Hair. She was the Woodman's daughter, and her hair looked just
like sunbeams. She knew every tree in the greenwood, and every flower in
it. She loved the birds, and liked to listen to their song; and
everything in the wood loved Golden Hair. The trees bent down their
lower branches to touch her glittering head as she passed; the birds
sang sweeter as she glided by. The lark's song in the sky was--

"Come up, come up, Golden Hair; here is your happy home."

"Coo, I love you; coo, I love you!" cooed the wood-pigeon, as she
passed.

"Twit, twit, pretty child," said the sparrow.

"Oh, you darling," sang the blackbird; and Golden Hair laughed with
glee, for she liked to be loved.

[Illustration: LITTLE GOLDEN HAIR.]

As to the butterflies, they flew after her, and rested on her hair, and
tickled her cheeks; but she never tried to catch them.

[Illustration: GOLDEN HAIR PEEPING INTO THE BEARS' HOUSE.] She would
not frighten or vex them for anything. She loved all the creatures, and
that is why they loved her.

Love makes love.

Dear little Golden Hair, she went on singing merrily through the
greenwood, saying sometimes to herself--

"I wish I could sing as well as the lark!"

By-and-by Little Golden Hair reached the Bears' house. She had never
seen it before, and she wondered who lived there. A window was open, and
Golden Hair peeped in.

"Dear me," thought the child, "whose house can it be! There is a table
and three chairs, and three basins of hot milk, all steaming, and nobody
to drink it. But I don't see any work or books, or anything else. I
think I will go in and see who lives here."

So she tapped at the door, and cried, "Is any one at home?"

But there was no answer. Then Golden Hair stepped in very carefully,
and looked about her.

She could not see any one, nor hear anybody snoring, so she walked into
the Bears' parlour.

There was a fire, which made the room cheerful, and the hot milk looked
very inviting; it quite seemed to say, "Come and have some breakfast;"
and the early spring air had made Golden Hair rather cold, and very
hungry; so she sat down by the fire in the little Bear's chair. It was
too small for her, but she did not quite sit down at first. In a moment
she got up again, and went round the table and tasted the milk in all
the basins. Little Bear's was the nicest, because it had sugar in it,
and Golden Hair thought it was good. So she took the basin and sat down
again in Little Bear's chair, took his spoon, and ate up _all_ his milk.
Now this was very wrong. A tiny bear is only a tiny bear; still, he has
a right to keep his own things. But Golden Hair did not know any better.
Unluckily, Baby Bear's chair was, as we have said, too small for her;
she broke the seat and fell through, basin and all.

[Illustration: GOLDEN HAIR EATS THE LITTLE BEAR'S BREAKFAST.]

Then Golden Hair went upstairs, and there she saw three beds all in a
row. Golden Hair lay down on Father Bear's bed first, but that was too
long for her; then she lay down on Mother Bear's bed, and that was too
wide for her; last of all she lay down on Baby Bear's bed, and there she
fell asleep, for she was tired.

[Illustration: THE LITTLE BEAR GRIEVES FOR HIS BROKEN CHAIR.]

By-and-by the bears came home. Baby Bear saw that his chair was broken
and thrown down, and he cried in a very squeaky voice,

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN HERE;" and Father Bear growled,

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN HERE;"

And Mother Bear growled, more softly,

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN HERE."

Then they went to the table and looked at their breakfasts, and Father
Bear growled, "WHO HAS TOUCHED MY BASIN?"

And Mother Bear growled, "WHO HAS TOUCHED MY BASIN?"

And Tiny Bear squeaked, "SOMEBODY HAS BROKEN MINE!"

And then Tiny Bear began to cry, for he was very fond of his own basin
and his own chair; and, besides, he was very hungry after his long walk
in the forest.

It really did seem a shame. Then the three bears thought they would go
over their house, to see who had been in it, and to try if they could
find the thief.

They went upstairs to their bedroom, which was over their other room,
and as soon as they saw the tumbled beds Father Bear growled,

"WHO HAS BEEN LYING ON MY BED?"

And Mother Bear growled

"WHO HAS BEEN LYING ON MY BED?"

And Tiny Bear squeaked out,

"Oh! here is a little girl in my bed; and it must be she who has eaten
my breakfast and broken my chair."

[Illustration: THE BEARS FIND GOLDEN HAIR IN LITTLE BEAR'S BED.]

Then Father Bear growled,

"LET US EAT HER UP;"

And Mother Bear growled, "LET US EAT HER UP;"

And Tiny Bear squeaked,

"LET US EAT HER UP."

[Illustration: GOLDEN HAIR ESCAPES FROM THE BEARS.]

The noise they made woke Golden Hair, and you may imagine how frightened
she was when she saw the three bears. She started out of bed, and jumped
at once out of the window. The bears rushed after her, and Father Bear
caught her golden hair in his teeth, but she left a lock behind, and
still ran on. Then the three bears all jumped out after her, but they
fell one on the top of the other and rolled over and over, and while
they were picking themselves up, little Golden Hair ran home, and they
were not able to catch her.

But I do not think she had acted rightly (though she did not deserve to
be eaten up); it was very wrong to break little Bear's chair and eat his
milk, and I think Golden Hair will have to take great care to keep out
of the reach of the THREE BEARS.




PUNCH AND JUDY.


   Mr. Punch and his wife
   Led a terrible life,
     Very much like a dog and a cat;
   Till, one summer morn
   A baby was born,
     A darling all dimples and fat.

[Illustration: PUNCH, JUDY, AND THE BABY.]

   Mrs. Judy was proud,
   And the nurses allowed
     That they never had seen such a child;
   And the proud mother thought
   When her baby she brought
     To her husband, "It must make him mild."

[Illustration: PUNCH AND THE BABY.]

   Mr. Punch was quite pleased;
   The poor baby he seized,
     And danced up and down in great joy.
   "Oh, my Judy," he cried,
   "With a father's just pride,
     I look on our beautiful boy."

   But the baby soon cried;
   Punch's temper was tried,
     And in a great passion he flew;
   He shook the poor child,
   And, with rage growing wild,
     The babe o'er the balcony threw.

   Judy, greatly displeased,
   A thick stick at once seized,
     And began her stern husband to beat;
   "O you monster," she cried,
   As her weapon she plied,
     "You deserve the same ending to meet."

[Illustration: PUNCH AND JUDY.]

   On his arms and his head
   Her blows fell like lead;
     She wonder'd such treatment he stood!
   Beating and battering,
   She made such a clattering,
     It sounded like chopping up wood.

[Illustration: PUNCH KILLS JUDY.]

   Of his beating quite tired,
   Punch's patience expired;
     He snatched the stick out of her hands,
   And gave Judy a blow
   Which, alas, laid her low,
     And above her a conqueror stands.

   Then he danced and he sang,
   And such nonsense began,
     That we laughed, though we couldn't tell why;
   For in such a sad case
   It were much more our place
     For Judy's misfortunes to cry.

[Illustration: PUNCH AND THE CONSTABLE.]

   But the constable see!--
   "Are you come here for me?"
     Cries Punch, as he dances about.
   "Yes, yes; come to jail,
   'Tis a terrible tale,"
     Said the constable, "you must come out,

   "And be tried for your life,
   For thus killing your wife;
     In prison, meantime, you'll abide."
   "Oh no, I won't go,"
   Cried Punch, and a blow
     He gave the poor man in his side.

[Illustration: PUNCH, TOBY, AND THE CLOWN.]

   Now Punch had a pet
   Whom we must not forget,
     A dog known as Toby by name;
   A clown from a show
   One day came to know
     If Punch would not sell him the same.

   But Punch would not part
   From his dog, for his heart
     (Though a wooden one) to him was true.
   He cried, "Give me a kiss,
   Dear Toby, I wis
     I never will sever from you."

[Illustration: PUNCH AND THE DOCTOR.]

   But Jack Ketch comes at last;
   Punch's frolics are past,
     There is no one his cause to befriend;
   His nonsense and fun
   Are all, alas, done;
     He has come to a very bad end!

   If he were not of wood
   It would not be good
     To laugh at the harm he has done;
   But 'twas only pretence,
   And there was not much sense
     In his crimes, or his grief, or his fun.

[Illustration: PUNCH AND JACK KETCH.]

   For a great many years,
   Punch's laughter and tears,
     Have amused both the child and the man;
   So I think at the last,
   For the sake of the past
     We will keep him as long as we can.




THE PETS.


_THE SHEEP._

The sheep is a very useful animal. Its wool, sheared off, makes us cloth
and flannel, and all kinds of woollen goods; and its flesh, called
mutton, is a chief part of our food. When sheep are little they are
called lambs, and are very playful, pretty creatures.

[Illustration: SHEEP.]

Sheep soon learn to know the voice of their shepherd, and will follow
it. In Eastern countries the shepherd walks before his flock, and they
are led by his voice. There are dogs called sheep-dogs, which take care
of the flocks, and protect the sheep, and keep them together. In some
countries these dogs have often to fight with wolves, which attack the
sheep and carry them off whenever they can; but the dogs are quite able
to keep the wolf away when they are trained to do so.

[Illustration: RABBITS.]

On the Scottish hills the sheep-dog is often obliged to seek his charge
in the snow-drifts, and to help get out a poor sheep or lamb which has
got buried in it. Sheep love green meadows and pure water. You remember,
I dare say, the beautiful Psalm, "The Lord is my shepherd, therefore I
shall lack nothing."


_RABBITS._

Are the favourite pets of boys. They are merry little creatures, and it
is an amusing sight to watch them running over the green turf about
their warren, when they are free. They have many enemies, however, such
as dogs, foxes, and weasels. But, in spite of their enemies, rabbits
live a merry life together.

There are a great many different kinds of tame rabbits; some are white,
with pink eyes and long ears. Rabbits have many young ones. One pair
will have fifty-six little rabbits in a year. So it is lucky many other
creatures feed on them. If they were left to increase, they would soon
eat up every stalk of corn and all the green herbs.

The native country of the rabbit is Spain. In the Orkney Islands, where
there are great numbers of rabbits, the wild ones are of a grey colour,
and in winter time almost white.

The fur of the rabbit is much used for making hats. They are good for
food also.


_THE COW._

Is a very valuable animal; indeed I do not know what we should do
without her. She gives us milk and butter, cheese and cream; her skin is
of great use, and her flesh is often eaten as beef. Cows grow fond of
those who are kind to them.

[Illustration: COW AND CALF.]

There are a great many different kinds of cows; some red, some black,
some brindled, white or spotted. Herefordshire cows have white faces.
The ancient Britons had great numbers of fine cows; and wild cattle
were common in our country seven hundred years ago. In the neighbourhood
of London, in Henry II.'s reign, there was a large forest which
contained a great many wild bulls and cows.

[Illustration: THE DONKEY.]

The cow is a good mother, very fond of her calf. The bull is a very
bold, fierce animal. It has a great dislike to the colour red, and will
run after and if it can toss any one wearing it. In Spain they have a
cruel sport, called bull fights, between these brave animals and men on
horseback.

The flesh of the cow and ox is called beef; that of the calf is veal.


_THE DONKEY._

This patient and useful animal is supposed to have come at first from
the East, where it still continues to be of a greater size and of a much
better appearance. They were as valuable there in former ages as horses;
great men and judges rode on asses. The ass is very fond of its foal,
and can be attached to its master if kindly treated. Its milk is thought
very good for consumptive people. It is very sure-footed, and strong,
and able to carry heavy burdens.

The Donkey is a very useful animal to the poor. It can do a great deal
of work on very coarse and cheap food. Thistles make a dainty dinner for
the ass. It is patient and gentle, but occasionally very obstinate; a
fault chiefly produced in the poor beast by ill-usuage.

Children should never be cruel to this poor animal, but treat it kindly,
and it will not then be stubborn and slow, but will do its best to carry
them.


_THE COCK, THE HEN, AND THE CHICKENS._

Here is a fine farm-yard family! very useful friends of ours. The cock,
who is a brave, spirited bird, wakes us up in the morning by crowing;
the hen lays us eggs for breakfast, and when the wee chicks are big
enough, they are very good food, as roast chicken. The cock teaches us
watchfulness; the hen, motherly love.

[Illustration: THE COCK, THE HEN, AND THE CHICKENS.]

There are many different kinds of fowls. The largest are the tall Cochin
Chinas; the smallest the pert little Bantams. It is a great amusement
for children to have a few fowls to feed, and take care of. Feeding them
and finding their eggs is one of the country child's pleasures.

The hen sits on her eggs for three weeks; and when the chicks are
hatched, she takes the greatest care of them, gathering them under her
wings when danger is near or the weather is at all cold; and she is
ready to fight a hawk or even a dog in defence of her little ones.

Fowls feed on barley or any kind of grain, and pick up worms, &c., in
their run. Stinging-nettles are very good food for chickens.


_THE HORSE._

This noblest of animals is believed to be a native of Arabia; but was in
our islands before the Romans came here. The first money coined in
Britain was stamped with the figure of a horse.

[Illustration: THE HORSE.]

The horse has a wonderful memory. He never forgets a place to which he
has once been taken. He loves his master if well treated; and in battles
he displays the greatest courage and joy. He also understands sounds,
and loves music. Indeed, the horse may be called the friend of man, and
deserves all the kindness we can show him.

The Arabs bring up their horses with their children in their own tents;
and the steed thus reared is very sensible and gentle. An Arab will not
sell his favourite horse for any sum, however large: it is as dear to
him as his children.


_THE GOAT._

The goat is a very useful animal. Its flesh is very good, though English
people seldom eat it. Its milk is very good also, and of use to people
in consumption. The most beautiful gloves are made from its skin.

[Illustration: GOATS.]

Goats abound on the Welsh mountains; it is, indeed, an animal that loves
the great hills. The Welsh goats are white; they are very active, and
walk on the brink of precipices, and take the most wonderful leaps. The
scent of a goat is unpleasant, but it is thought to prevent infection
amongst cattle.

Horses are very fond of goats. They are more common in France than with
us. In that country one sees a goat with nearly every flock of sheep.

Goats' flesh is called "kid." Do you remember how Jacob deceived his
father with the skin and meat of a kid of the goats?

[Illustration: PIGS.]




NURSERY SONGS.


     Little Miss Muffet
     She sat on a tuffet,
   Eating of curds and whey.
     There came a great spider,
     Who sat down beside her,
   And frightened Miss Muffet away.

[Illustration: LITTLE MISS MUFFET.]

[Illustration: PAT-A-CAKE, PAT-A-CAKE.]

   Pat-a-cake, Pat-a-cake, baker's man,
   Make me a cake as fast as you can;
   Pat it, and prick it, and mark it with T,
   And send it home for Tommy and me.

   Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
   Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
   All the king's horses and all the king's men
   Could not set Humpty Dumpty up again.

[Illustration: HUMPTY DUMPTY.]

[Illustration: YOUNG LAMBS TO SELL!]

   Young lambs to sell!--young lambs to sell!
   If I had as much money as I could tell,
   I never would cry, Young lambs to sell!
   Young lambs to sell!--young lambs to sell!
   I never would cry, Young lambs to sell!

[Illustration: LITTLE ROBIN REDBREAST SAT UPON A TREE.]

   Little Robin Redbreast sat upon a tree,
   Up went Pussy-cat, and down went he;
   Down came Pussy-cat, and away Robin ran;
   Says little Robin Redbreast, "Catch me if you can."
   Little Robin Redbreast jumped upon a wall,
   Pussy-cat jumped after him and almost got a fall;
   Little Robin chirped and sang, and what did Pussy say?
   Pussy-cat said "Mew," and Robin jumped away.

[Illustration: HANDY SPANDY, JACK-A-DANDY.]

   Handy Spandy Jack-a-Dandy
   Loved plumcake and sugar candy;
   He bought some at a grocer's shop,
   And out he came, hop, hop, hop.

[Illustration: LITTLE BOY BLUE.]

   Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
   The sheep's in the meadow, the cow's in the corn.
   Where's the little boy that looks after the sheep?
   He is under the hay-cock fast asleep.

[Illustration: THIS LITTLE PIG WENT TO MARKET.]

   This little pig went to market;
   This little pig stayed at home;
   This pig had a piece of bread-and-butter;
   This little pig had none;
   This little pig said, "Wee, wee, wee!
   I can't find my way home."




NURSERY RHYMES.


   Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
     Eating his Christmas Pie;
   He put in his thumb, and pulled out a plum,
     And said, "What a good boy am I!"

[Illustration: LITTLE JACK HORNER.]

[Illustration: TO MARKET, TO MARKET.]

   To market, to market, to buy a fat pig;
   Home again, home again, jiggetty-jig.
   To market, to market, to buy a fat hog;
   Home again, home again, jiggetty-jog.

   Taffy was a Welshman,
     Taffy was a thief;
   Taffy came to my house
     And stole a piece of beef.
   I went to Taffy's house,
     Taffy was from home;
   Taffy came to my house
     And stole a marrow bone.

[Illustration: TAFFY WAS A WELSHMAN.]

[Illustration: BAA, BAA, BLACK SHEEP.]

   Baa, baa, black sheep,
     Have you any wool?
   Yes, marry, have I,
     Three bags full:
   One for my master,
     One for my dame;
   But none for the little girl
     That cries in the lane.

[Illustration: PRETTY MAID, PRETTY MAID.]

   Pretty maid, pretty maid, where have you been?
   Gathering a posie to give to the Queen.

[Illustration: MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY.]

   Mary, Mary, quite contrary,
     How does your garden grow?
   Silver bells and cockle-shells,
     And columbines all of a row.

[Illustration: LITTLE BO-PEEP.]

   Little Bo-Peep has lost his sheep,
     And cannot tell where to find them
   Leave them alone, and they'll come home,
     And bring their tails behind them.

   Little Bo-Peep fell fast asleep,
     And dreamt he heard them bleating
   When he awoke, he found it a joke,
     For still they all were fleeting.

   Then up he took his little crook,
     Determined for to find them;
   He found them indeed, but it made his heart bleed,
     For they'd left their tails behind them.

[Illustration: HOT CROSS BUNS.]

           Hot Cross Buns!
           Hot Cross Buns!
   One a penny, two a penny, Hot Cross Buns.
           Hot Cross Buns!
           Hot Cross Buns!
   If you have no daughters, give them to your sons.

[Illustration: THE CAT AND FIDDLE.]

     Hey diddle diddle,
     The cat and the fiddle,
   The cow jumped over the moon,
     The little dog laughed
     To see the sport,
   While the dish ran after the spoon.

[Illustration: THE QUEEN OF HEARTS.]

   The Queen of Hearts,
   She made some tarts
     Upon a summer day;
   The Knave of Hearts,
   He stole those tarts,
     And took them quite away.

   The King of Hearts,
   He missed those tarts,
     And beat the knave full sore;
   The Knave of Hearts
   Brought back those tarts,
     And vowed he'd steal no more.

[Illustration: I HAD A LITTLE HUSBAND.]

   I had a little husband,
     No bigger than my thumb;
   I put him in a pint-pot,
     And there I bid him drum.

   I bought a little horse,
     That galloped up and down;
   I bridled him and saddled him,
     And sent him out of town.

   I gave him some garters,
     To garter up his hose,
   And a little handkerchief
     To wipe his pretty nose.

[Illustration: GOOSEY, GOOSEY, GANDER.]

   Goosey, Goosey Gander,
     Where shall I wander?
   Up stairs, down stairs,
     In my lady's chamber.

   There I met an old man
     That would not say his prayers;
   I took him by the left leg,
     And threw him down stairs.

[Illustration: LITTLE POLLY FLINDERS.]

   Little Polly Flinders,
   Sat among the cinders,
     Warming her pretty little toes;
   Her mother came and caught her,
   And scolded her little daughter,
     For spoiling her nice new clothes.

[Illustration: DING DONG BELL.]

       Ding Dong Bell,
       Pussy's in the well.
       Who put her in?
       Little Tommy Lin.
       Who pulled her out?
       Little Tommy Trout.
   What a naughty boy was that,
   To drown poor little Pussy cat,
   Who never did him any harm,
   But killed the mice in his father's barn.

[Illustration: "MULTIPLICATION IS VEXATION."]

   Multiplication is vexation;
     Division is as bad;
   The Rule of Three doth puzzle me,
     And Practice drives me mad.

[Illustration: THE DAPPLE-GREY PONY.]

   I had a little pony,
     His name was Dapple Grey,
   I lent him to a lady,
     To ride a mile away.

   She whipped him, she slashed him,
     She rode him through the mire;
   I would not lend my pony now,
     For all the lady's hire.

[Illustration: OLD WOMAN, OLD WOMAN, SAYS I.]

   Old woman, old woman, old woman say I,
   O whither, O whither, O whither so high?
   To sweep the cobwebs off the sky.
   Shall I go with you? Ay, by-and-by.

[Illustration: DAME TROT AND HER CAT.]

   Dame Trot and her cat
     Led a peaceable life
   When they were not troubled
     With other folks' strife.

   When Dame had her dinner
     Puss near her would wait,
   And was sure to receive
     A nice piece from her plate.

[Illustration: SIMPLE SIMON.]

   Simple Simon met a pieman
     Going to the fair;
   Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
     "Let me taste your ware."

   Says the pieman to Simple Simon,
     "Show me first your penny."
   Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
     "Indeed, I have not any."

   Simple Simon went a-fishing
     For to catch a whale;
   All the water he had got
     Was in his mother's pail.

[Illustration: MARY HAD A PRETTY BIRD.]

   Mary had a pretty bird,
     With feathers bright and yellow,
   Slender legs--upon my word,
     He was a pretty fellow.

   The sweetest notes he always sang,
     Which much delighted Mary;
   And near the cage she'd ever sit,
     To hear her own Canary.

[Illustration: IS JOHN SMITH WITHIN?]

   Is John Smith within?
     Yes, that he is.
   Can he set a shoe?
     Ay, marry, two;
   Here a nail and there a nail,
     Tick, tack, too.

[Illustration: GUY FAWKES.]

   Please to remember
   The fifth of November,
   Gunpowder treason and plot.
   I know no reason
   Why gunpowder treason
   Should ever be forgot.

[Illustration: JACK AND JILL.]

   Jack and Jill went up the hill
     To fetch a pail of water.
   Jack fell down and broke his crown,
     And Jill came tumbling after.

[Illustration: LITTLE FRED.]

   When little Fred went to bed,
   He always said his prayers.
   He kissed mamma and then papa,
   And straightway went upstairs.

[Illustration: LITTLE TOM TUCKER.]

   Little Tommy Tucker,
     Sings for his supper.
   What shall he eat?
     White bread and butter.
   How shall he cut it
     Without e'er a knife?
   How will he be married
     Without e'er a wife.

[Illustration: WHERE ARE YOU GOING, MY PRETTY MAID?]

   Where are you going, my pretty maid?
   I'm going a milking, sir, she said.
   May I go with you, my pretty maid?
   You're kindly welcome, sir, she said.
   What is your fortune, my pretty maid?
   My face is my fortune, sir, she said.
   Then I won't marry you, my pretty maid.
   Nobody asked you, sir, she said.

[Illustration: RIDE A COCK-HORSE.]

   Ride a cock-horse to Banbury Cross,
   To see an old lady upon a white horse;
   Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
   And so she makes music wherever she goes.

[Illustration: SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE.]

   Sing a song of sixpence,
     A bag full of rye;
   Four-and-twenty blackbirds
     Baked in a pie.

   When the pie was opened
     The birds began to sing.
   Was not that a dainty dish
     To set before the king?

   The king was in his countinghouse,
     Counting out his money;
   The queen was in the parlour,
     Eating bread and honey.

   The maid was in the garden,
     Hanging out the clothes;
   'Long came a blackbird
     And snapt off her nose.

[Illustration: TOM, TOM, THE PIPER'S SON.]

   Tom, Tom, the piper's son,
   Stole a pig and away he run!
   The pig was eat, and Tom was beat,
   And Tom went roaring down the street.

[Illustration: OLD KING COLE.]

     Old King Cole
     Was a merry old soul,
   And a merry old soul was he!
     He called for his pipe,
     And he called for his bowl,
   And he called for his fiddlers three.

     Every fiddler he had a fiddle,
     And a very fine fiddle had he!
   Twee tweedle dee, tweedle dee went the fiddlers.
     Oh, there's none so rare
     As can compare
   With King Cole and his fiddlers three!

[Illustration: FOUR-AND-TWENTY TAILORS WENT TO KILL A SNAIL.]

   Four-and-twenty tailors went to kill a snail;
   The best man among them durst not touch her tail.
   She put out her horns like a little Kyloe cow.
   Run, tailors, run, or she'll kill you all e'en now.

[Illustration: HUSH-A-BY BABY.]

   Hush-a-by, baby, thy cradle is green;
   Father's a nobleman; mother's a queen;
   Betty's a lady, and wears a gold ring,
   And Johnny's a drummer and drums for the king.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The National Nursery Book, by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 24778.txt or 24778.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/7/7/24778/

Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
