The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dave Darrin's Third Year at Annapolis
by H. Irving Hancock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dave Darrin's Third Year at Annapolis
       Leaders of the Second Class Midshipmen

Author: H. Irving Hancock

Release Date: November 27, 2003 [EBook #10319]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVE DARRIN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team





                 DAVE DARRIN'S THIRD YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS

                                   or

                 Leaders of the Second Class Midshipmen


                          By H. IRVING HANCOCK

                                  1911




Illustrated

[Illustration: "There She Goes!"]




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

      I. WHY THE MIDSHIPMEN BALKED.

     II. PROVING THEIR TRAINING.

    III. THE TROUBLE-MAKING FOP.

     IV. IN THE VIEW OF THE NAVY DEPARTMENT.

      V. NAVY FOOTBALL IN THE AIR.

     VI. THE HATE OF A RIVAL.

    VII. "DID JETSON DO IT?".

   VIII. DAN TRIES HARD TO KEEP COOL.

     IX. A NARROW SQUEAK WITH THE O. C.

      X. THE GRIDIRON START.

     XI. THE BAND COULDN'T MAKE ITSELF HEARD.

    XII. JOYCE IS BITTEN WITH THE TROUBLE BUG.

   XIII. HEPSON IS "SOME WILD".

    XIV. TWO SIDES OF A STORY.

     XV. THE NAVY GOAT WEEPS.

    XVI. THE MAN WITH A SCOWL ON TAP.

   XVII. AN AFFAIR OF SULKS.

  XVIII. THE CLASS MEETING SITS AS JURY.

    XIX. DAVE STANDS ON PRINCIPLE.

     XX. "DON'T BE A FOOL, DARRY!"

    XXI. MIDSHIPMAN JETSON HAS THE FLOOR.

   XXII. THE BIRTH OF A GENTLEMAN.

  XXIII. "RAGGED" AND NO MISTAKE.

   XXIV. CONCLUSION.




Dave Darrin's Third Year at Annapolis




CHAPTER I

WHY THE MIDSHIPMEN BALKED


"So Tom Reade and Harry Hazelton have been here?" demanded Midshipman
Dave Darrin.

That handsome young member of the brigade of midshipmen at the United
States Naval Academy at Annapolis was now in mufti, or cits,--meaning, in
other words, that he was out of his Naval uniform and attired in the
conventional clothing of a young American when calling on his sweetheart.

It will make the situation even clearer to the reader to explain that
Dave was back in the home town, on his September leave, after just having
completed his second summer practice cruise with the three upper classes
from Annapolis.

Dave was now a fine looking and "husky" second classman. He was just a
shade more than half way through his course of instruction at Annapolis.

Being back in the home town, where would Midshipman Darrin be more
naturally found than in the parlor at the home of his sweetheart, Miss
Belle Meade?

The first greetings had been exchanged fifteen minutes before.

Since that time the young people, being sweethearts as they were, had
naturally talked about themselves.

And Dave, who, in the Naval service, was fast learning to become a good
listener, had been content to have Belle do most of the talking, while he
sat back watching the motions of her pretty lips and catching glimpses of
two rows of pearly teeth.

But now Belle had just mentioned two of Dave's former High School chums.

"So Tom and Harry were really here?" he repeated.

"Yes; they came up from Arizona on leave."

"I wonder why they couldn't have remained here longer?" mused Dave.

"They both told me that they were very young in their profession as civil
engineers, and that they had to spend nearly all of their time 'on the
job,' as Tom phrased it," replied Belle.

"How did they look?" asked Dave.

"A shade older, of course, than when they were in the High School."

"Are they much taller?" asked Darrin.

"Somewhat; but they have not shot up in height, the way you and Dan, and
Dick Prescott and Greg Holmes have done," Belle continued.

"Brown as berries, I suppose, after working down in the alkali
deserts?" asked Dave, who felt that he could not hear enough of those
dear old chums.

"Meaning Tom and Harry?" smiled Belle. "Or Dick and Greg?"

"Tom and Harry, that time, of course," laughed Dave. "But I'm waiting to
hear a whole lot about Dick and Greg as well."

"No; I wouldn't call Tom and Harry exactly as brown as berries,"
went on Belle, laughing, "for I am not acquainted with many kinds of
brown berries."

"Coffee berries?" hinted Darrin.

"I would call Tom and Harry fully as bronzed as Indians," Belle ventured.

"Have you ever seen any Indians?" asked Midshipman Darrin, looking at his
sweetheart rather quizzically.

"Oh, haven't I?" laughed Belle Meade, her eyes sparkling. "We had Indians
here the early part of this summer. There was a medicine show here, with
Indians and cowboys, and that sort of thing. One day the Indians and
cowboys got intoxicated and they went through Main Street like a tornado.
They were yelling and shooting, and had people all along the street
running for cover. Even the chief of police, though he wasn't a coward,
ran into safety.

"In the midst of it all Dick Prescott, Greg Holmes, Tom Reade and Harry
Hazelton came out of an ice cream parlor. Tom and Harry got a glimpse of
the very Wild West looking company of yellers and shooters. Tom and Harry
have seen enough Indians and cowboys to know the real thing--and that
these were only poor imitations. All of a sudden Tom and Harry and Dick
and Greg charged into that howling, shooting crowd and knocked them right
and left. Your four old-time chums simply disarmed the 'bad' ones and
turned the weapons over to the chief of police."

Belle went on, describing the famous incident, while Dave leaned back,
laughing heartily.

"How I wish I had been on hand! I'd like to have helped, too," he added.

"Those four youngsters didn't need any help," laughed Belle.

"Which was the most surprised crowd--the 'bad' Western outfit or the
police department?" chuckled Dave.

Readers of our "WEST POINT SERIES" will find the "Wild West" scene fully
narrated in "DICK PRESCOTT'S THIRD YEAR AT WEST POINT."

"Isn't it outrageous," demanded Dave, "that the West Point and the
Annapolis leave of absence should be so arranged that midshipmen and
cadets who are old, old friends never get a chance to meet each other on
furlough!"

"I don't suppose," replied Belle, "that it often happens that one little
city often has the honor of furnishing, at the same time, two midshipmen
for Annapolis and two cadets for West Point."

"Very likely not," nodded Dave. "But it seems too bad, just the same.
What wouldn't I give to see Tom or Harry? Or Greg or Dick? And now that
I'm here Dick Prescott and Greg Holmes are but just barely gone."

"Yes; they have been but four days gone," assented Belle. "It does seem
too bad that you and your West Point chums couldn't have been one day
together."

"I haven't seen a blessed one of the good old four since I left for
Annapolis, more than two years ago," muttered Dave complainingly. "What
wouldn't I give--just to see what they look like in these days?"

"Well, what would you give?" demanded Belle, rising and hesitating.

"They've given you their photos, then!" asked Dave Darrin guessing.
"Please be quick--let me see the photos."

Belle glided from the room, to return with a large card.

"They were taken altogether," she explained, handing the card over to
Darrin. "There they are--all in one group."

Dave seized the card, studying eagerly the print mounted thereon.

"Whew! What a change two years make in a High School boy, doesn't it?"
demanded Darrin.

"Of course," answered Belle Meade. "Do you imagine that you and Dan
Dalzell haven't changed any, either?"

Readers of our "HIGH SCHOOL SERIES" will well remember Dick Prescott,
Greg Holmes, Tom Reade, Harry Hazelton, Dave Darrin and Dan Dalzell, a
famous sextette of young High School athletes, who, in their High School
days, were known as Dick & Co.

Readers of the four volumes of that series will recall that Dick Prescott
received the congressman's nomination to West Point, and that Greg Holmes
was appointed a cadet at the same big government Army school by one of
the state's senators. Dave Darrin and Dan Dalzell, a little later,
secured nominations to Annapolis from the same gentlemen; and Tom Reade
and Harry Hazelton, who had thrown their lot with civil engineering, had
gone West to engage with an engineering firm of railroad builders.

From that passing of the old High School days the experiences and
adventures of Dick Prescott and Greg Holmes are told in the volumes of
"THE WEST POINT SERIES."

Those of Tom Reade and Harry Hazelton are set forth fully in "THE YOUNG
ENGINEERS' SERIES."

As for Dave Darrin and Dan, their life, since leaving the High School,
and casting their lot with the Navy, has been fully told in the two
preceding volumes of the present series, "DAVE DARRIN'S FIRST YEAR AT
AKNAPOLIS" and "DAVE DARRIN'S SECOND YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS."

"Well, I'll meet Dick and Greg this coming Thanksgiving, at any rate,"
predicted Midshipman Darrin. "You know what happens the Saturday after
Thanksgiving on Franklin Field, don't you, Belle?"

"You young men of Annapolis and West Point play football, don't you!"
asked Belle.

"Do we?" demanded Dave, his eyes aglow with enthusiasm. "Don't we,
though. And, mark me, Belle, the Navy is going to carry away the Army's
scalp this year."

"Are you going to join the team?" asked Belle.

"I can't say, until I get back. But I've been training. I hope to be
called to the team. So does Dan."

"I hope you and Dan both make the eleven," cried Belle, "so that you can
get away to see the game."

"Why, we can see the game better," retorted Dave, "if we don't make
the team."

"Why, are midshipmen who don't belong to the eleven allowed to see the
game?" asked Belle in some surprise.

"Are we?" demanded Dave. "Belle, don't you know what the Army-Navy game
on the Saturday after Thanksgiving Day is like? The entire brigade of
midshipmen and the whole corps of cadets travel over to Philadelphia.
There, on Franklin Field, before an average of thirty thousand yelling
spectators, the great annual game of the two great national academies is
fought out."

"You haven't gone to see the annual game at Philadelphia before this,
have you?" asked Miss Meade.

"No."

"Why not?"

"Because, Belle, both years, at Thanksgiving time, Danny boy and I have
found ourselves so far behind in our studies that we just took the time
to stay behind and bone, bone, bone over our books."

"And you think this year will be different?"

"Oh, yes; when a man is half way through Annapolis the studies become
easier to him. You see, in two years of the awful grind a fellow, if he
lasts that long, has learned how to study in the right way. I'm going to
get two tickets, Belle, so that you and your mother can go to see the
game. And of course good old Dick can do as much for Laura Bentley and
her mother. You'll come, of course, to root your hardest for the Navy,
just as Laura will go and root for the Army. By the way, have you heard
whether Dick and Greg expect to play on the Army eleven?"

"When they were here this summer they said they hoped to play
football with the Army. That's all I know, Dave, about the plans of
Dick and Greg."

"I hope they do play," cried Midshipman Darrin cheerily. "Even with two
such old gridiron war horses as Dick and Greg against us, I believe that
the Navy team, this year, has some fellows who can take the Army scalp
with neatness and despatch."

Dave rambled on, for some time now, with of the athletic doings at the
Naval Academy. It was not that he was so much interested in the
subject--at that particular moment--but it was certainly fine to have
Belle Meade for an interested listener.

"Well, you're half way through your course," put in Belle at last. "You
passed your last annual examinations in June."

"Yes."

"How did you stand in your exams?"

"I came through with honors," Dave declared unblushingly.

"Honors?" repeated Belle delightedly. "Oh, Dave, I didn't know you were
one of the honor men of your class."

"Yes," laughed Midshipman Dave, though there was a decidedly serious look
in his fine face. "Belle, I consider that any fellow who gets by the
examiners has passed with honors. So we're all honor men that are now
left in the class. Several of the poor fellows had to write home last
June asking their parents for the price of a ticket homeward."

"But, now that you've got half way through, you're pretty sure to go the
rest of the way safely," Belle insisted.

"That's almost too much of a brag to make, Belle. The truth is, no fellow
is safe until he has been commissioned as an ensign, and that's at least
two years after he has graduated from the Naval Academy. Why even after
examination, you know, a fellow has to go to sea for two years, as a
midshipman, and then take another and final examination at sea. A whole
lot of fellows who managed to get through the Academy find themselves
going to pieces on that examination at sea."

"And then--" went on Belle.

"Why, if a fellow can't pass his exams, he's dropped from the service."

"After he has already graduated from Academy? That isn't fair," cried
Belle Meade.

"No, it isn't quite fair," assented Midshipman Dave, with a shrug of his
shoulders. "Yet what is one going to do about it? It's all in the
game--to take or leave."

"Who ever made the Naval Academy and the service so hard as that?" the
girl wanted to know.

"Congress, I guess," laughed Dave, "but acting, very likely, on the
advice of a lot of old admirals who are through themselves, and who
expect the youngsters to know as much as the very admirals. Why, Belle,
when I was a few years younger, and first began to dream about going to
the Naval Academy I had a mental picture of a very jolly life, in which
we sailed the seas and absorbed our knowledge. I had an idea that the
midshipman's life was made up mainly of jolly larks ashore and afloat,
with plenty of athletics to keep us from ever feeling dull. Of course, I
knew we had to do some studying, but I didn't imagine the studies would
be hard for a chap who had already gone through a good High School."

"Your High School studies did help, didn't they?" demanded Belle.

"They helped somewhat in the exams, to enter Annapolis, but they've never
helped me with any of the studies that I've had to tackle as a
midshipman."

"Oh, well, you'll get through," the girl predicted with cheery
confidence.

"I shall, if it's really in me," Dave promised. "But I'm not going to do
any bragging, Belle, until I'm safely through and have been out of the
woods for a long time."

"And you won't do any bragging then, either. It isn't in your line.
What's Dan Dalzell going to do while he's home on leave?"

"Sleep, he says."

"The lazy boy!"

"No, he's a tired boy, Belle. I think the past year has been even just a
little harder on him than it has on me. However, of course Dan won't
really sleep. He'll be out by this afternoon. Just now I imagine that
he's talking like wildfire with his mother."

It was a wrong guess, however. Just then the telephone sounded in the
next room, and Belle went to answer it.

"It's your shipmate, Dan," she called laughingly. "He wants to talk with
you, Dave."

"I wonder how the fellow ever guessed that I was here," smiled Darrin, as
he hastily joined Belle at the 'phone.

"Hello," hailed Dalzell at the other end of the wire. "Going to do
anything in particular this afternoon, David, little giant?"

"Yes; I hope to make myself more or less agreeable to Miss Meade."

"A small crowd won't be any bar to that, eh?" Dan wanted to know.

"Not if the crowd and the occasion are agreeable to Miss Meade."

"Well, you know Foss and Canty?"

"Two of our old High School boys? Yes."

"Foss has a new gasoline launch; he says it's a beauty, and he wants us
to invite Miss Meade and Miss Bentley, to join them and a couple of the
former High School girls for a couple of hours' cruise on the river.
What say you?"

"What does Belle say, you mean. Wait a moment, and I'll ask her."

Darrin explained the invitation.

"Why, if it will be pleasant for you, Dave, I shall be delighted to go,"
Belle answered.

"It's all right," Dave called back over the 'phone. "What's the hour for
the start!"

"Two o'clock," Dan answered.

"All right, then; will you ask Laura Bentley, or shall we, from here?"

"I've already asked Laura," Dalzell replied. "She accepted on condition
that Belie did. Now I'll ring up Laura and tell her that it's all
arranged."

"It'll be a pleasant trip for you, won't it!" inquired Belle,
half-anxiously. "Or do you get too much of boats in your working year?"

"I shall be glad to be anywhere that you are," Dave replied
gallantly. "The form of entertainment doesn't matter to me as long as
it appeals to you."

At two o'clock the young people met at the float of the Boat Club house
on the river's bank.

On the way across town Dave had been noting the direction and force of
the wind. He didn't altogether like it, but didn't say anything. At the
float he found Tom Foss, Ab Canty, Ella Wright and Susie Danes awaiting
the midshipmen and their fair companions.

"All ready and waiting for you amateur sailors," called Foss laughingly.
"And here's the boat. Say, isn't she really a beauty?"

"Good lines," nodded Dave Darrin. "And she looks speedy. But you've
changed your mind about going out this afternoon, haven't you, Foss?"

"Why?" demanded the young fellow, in very evident astonishment.

"Look at the water," responded Dave, pointing to the white-caps, which
were running rather high for an inland stream.

"Pooh! You're not afraid of a little foam on top of the water, are you?"
demanded Foss.

"The waves are running pretty high for the inches of freeboard that your
boat has," remarked Darrin quietly. "And look at the sky to windward.
There's a bit more blow coming out of those clouds yet."

"Say, what do they teach you at Annapolis?" grinned Foss. "To go sailing
only in calm weather?"

"Since you ask," Dave replied as quietly as before, though a slight flush
mounted to his face, "one of the things they teach us at the Naval
Academy is consideration for women. Now, if just we four fellows were
going out, I wouldn't say a word."

"Don't think we girls are afraid," broke in Belle with spirit.

"I'm well aware that you're not afraid," Darrin replied turning and
looking at her. "But I'm afraid, Belle of what I might think of myself
afterwards, if I were a party to taking you out in this boat when the
river is running so much to whitecaps."

"Do you think the boat is one of the kind that will turn turtle and sink
the crowd?" demanded Tom Foss, flushing in turn. "I tell you, Darrin, the
craft is as tight and sound, and as manageable, as any boat of her length
to be found anywhere on fresh water."

"She is a fine boat," Dave assented; "but I don't feel like being
responsible for what may happen to the young lady who is more especially
under my escort and care. There's too big a chance of danger this
afternoon, Foss."

"Pooh, Mr. Sailor!" laughed Ella Wright. "I'll show you that some
folks who don't know what Annapolis looks like are not frightened by
toy waves."

Miss Ella thereupon stepped into the launch and seated herself. Miss
Susie followed.

"Aren't you people going?" asked Ab Canty.

"I'm not going if Dave considers it so unwise that he'd be worried about
our safety," Belle answered promptly.

"Going, Laura?" called Foss.

"No, though I thank you," Miss Bentley replied. "If Mr. Darrin objects
on the score of safety I'm not going to torment him by disregarding
his opinion."

"I'm of about the same opinion as Darrin, if anyone cares to know,"
broke in Dan Dalzell.

Tom Foss looked at the other half of his party quizzically, then
called to Canty.

"Cast off, Ab. Ha, ha! I never thought to see United States sailors and
embryo Naval officers so much afraid of a little tossing water."

Chug-chug! Ella and Susie were laughing a bit teasingly as the motor
started and the little craft darted away from the float and took to the
waves beyond.

Dave did not answer. Instead, he gripped Dan's nearer wrist, muttering:

"Don't you say it, Danny!"

"Say what?"

"Whatever hot words were coming to your lips. As long as we feel that
we're right in not risking Belle and Laura, never mind what the others
think and say."

"This breeze is so fine," suggested Laura, "what do you say if we seat
ourselves here and watch the river for a while?"

Accordingly the four young people seated themselves. The launch was the
only craft in sight that was away from her moorings. A sailboat and three
canoes lay tied to the lee side of the float, that is the off-side from
the weather. Even they rocked a good deal.

"What kind of weather is coming?" asked Belle.

"It's going to be pretty squally, in all probability," spoke up
Midshipman Dan. "Do you see the big puffs of wind in the clouds yonder?"

"It must take a sailor to see that sort of thing," remarked Belle. "What
I see in the cloud looks like big, fluffy masses of cotton, streaked with
something darker."

"That's the wind," nodded Dave Darrin. "Now, girls, I don't want you to
think me a muff. That wind may swerve, and not come this way, although in
all probability the wind will get this way and the water will be rougher.
If it does get rougher on the river, and if we had taken you two out, and
the boat had capsized, then by some chance we might not have been able to
get you to shore. What would your folks then say to us if we had had the
miserable luck to survive you?"

"You did just right," Laura declared promptly. "To tell the truth, I
didn't want to disappoint either of you boys this afternoon, but I didn't
believe the wind was quiet enough for boating on the river. But mother
reminded me that I was going with two young men who had been trained as
sailors, and that I ought to be as safe as I would in the home parlor."

"Well, aren't you?" smiled Belle Meade.

"Did you really want to go out on the river, Belle?" Dave asked.

"Not when you don't believe it to be safe."

"I suppose Foss will be joking around town about our being afraid of the
water," muttered; Dan.

"What do you care!" asked Dave quietly. "You're responsible to the
United States Government--not to a few private citizens on the streets
of Gridley."

"You'll take us out on the water before your leave is over, won't you?"
urged Belle.

"A dozen of times, if you care to go," Dave; replied quickly.

"In a sailboat?" quizzed Belle. "It must; be great fun to sail, and I've
never been in a sailboat."

"I'd rather take you out in a good, solid rowboat," Dave answered slowly.

"Why, haven't you had much sailboat practice at Annapolis yet?"

"We've had some," Darrin nodded. "But I'm afraid I don't believe much in
small sailboats for girls' parties."

"Oh, very well."

"Now, Belle, you will begin to believe that I'm a muff at heart," Darrin
remonstrated.

"I won't anyway, Dave," Laura broke in. "I can see that you're merely
determined that we shall take no risks when we go out with you. I shall
feel very safe in whatever you propose for water sports."

"It's a good deal better to be safe, than sorry, when you have girls
under your care," Dan Dalzell added.

The motor boat, a fast though a low-hulled craft, had been long out of
sight up the river. Presently there came a new turn to the wind. Dan wet
a forefinger and held it up to the breeze.

"I hope Foss has sense enough to run in somewhere and tie up until the
coming squall blows over," Dalzell remarked.

"Are we going to have a storm?" Belle asked quickly.

"Not rain, if that's what you mean," Darrin replied. "But I believe the
river is going to be pretty rough before long."

Ere two minutes more had passed Dave suddenly rose and
straightened himself.

"Look downstream, girls," he cried. "Do you see the big rollers coming?"

In truth the surface of the river was now beginning to behave in an
unusual way. Where, heretofore, the water had been choppy and
whitecapped, the water now broke in longer, foam-crested waves. Owing to
the course of the wind the waves were rolling upstream. Within five
minutes from the time when Dave first called attention to the rougher
water the waves had considerably increased in size.

"Oh, I'm glad I'm not out on the water," shivered Laura.

"So am I," Belle admitted candidly.

"Do you believe Tom Foss can bring his boat down against such waves!"
Laura inquired.

"Oh, no doubt, he has had sense enough to run in somewhere and tie up,"
predicted Midshipman Dan charitably.

"I hope so," murmured Belle. "But Tom is an awfully stubborn fellow."

Toot! too-oo-oot! sounded a whistle up the river.

"By ginger, there comes Foss's boat now!" muttered Dan, standing up and
staring. "Why doesn't the idiot make land?"

"He's got his craft away on the other side of the river, looking for
quieter water," muttered Dave uneasily.

"Well, isn't that right?" asked Belle.

"Right, yes, unless he makes the mistake of trying to cross the
stream," nodded Darrin. "Then he'll run his craft into the trough of
the sea, and--"

"Well, what?" demanded Belle as Dave paused.

"Then, when he's in the trough, a big wave may roll his small boat
over," Dan finished for his comrade.

"Do you really think there's danger of that?" demanded Laura,
looking anxious.

"I don't know," murmured Dave. "But I wish I had some way of signaling
Foss, some way so that he could understand the signals."

"What good would it do?" demanded Midshipman Dalzell, grimly. "Tom would
only laugh and say it was more old maidishness on the part of Navy men."

"There--confound the idiot!" suddenly blazed Dave Darrin. "He is
crossing. Look at that boat wallow in the trough. Jupiter! There she goes
over--nearly!"

All four young people on the float held their breath for an instant. The
motor launch, after almost having turned turtle, righted itself.

"I wish I were at the wheel of the boat for about three minutes,"
muttered Darrin hoarsely.

At that moment Laura and Belle both screamed, while Dan Dalzell shouted:

"There she goes--for sure, this time!"

A bigger wave than usual had half filled the launch and caused it to
careen. Before the little craft could right itself a second and a third
wave, rolling along, had completed the work. The launch had sunk!




CHAPTER II

PROVING THEIR TRAINING


In the same instant, without a word to each other, Dave Darrin and
Dalzell had done the same thing. That is, they started to run and at the
same time doffed coats and vests, leaving these garments to flutter
behind them.

As they reached the sailboat both midshipmen cast off their shoes. Dave
leaped into the boat while Dalzell threw off the bowline, then boarded.

Like a flash both youngsters went at the lashings of the mainsail.

"There isn't a reef in," Dan discovered. "Going to take time for a close
reef, Dave?"

"There isn't time," Darrin muttered, with drops of cold perspiration on
his forehead as he toiled. "We'll have to go out under a full sail, Dan."

"Great Scott!" muttered Dalzell.

"We may be too late to save any one as it is. There! Jump to the halyard.
I've got the sheet."

Dan Dalzell began to hoist with a will. In an incredibly short time he
had the sail hoisted all the way up, while Darrin, stern and whitefaced,
crouched and braced himself by the tiller, gripping the sheet with his
left hand.

In a twinkling Darrin had the wind in his canvas. They had nearly a fair
wind as they bounded away from the float.

During these few instants of preparation neither Belle nor Laura had
spoken. Both girls realized the gravity of the situation, and they knew
that a word from them might distract the rescuers from the work in hand.

Knowing that he had the high, fast wind with him, Dave steered straight
for the last spot where he had seen the motor launch. Though the boat was
no longer visible, and the distance too great for seeing the heads of the
swimmers, if there were any, Darrin had taken his bearings by trees on
the further shore upstream.

At first, to keep the sailboat from capsizing, the young skipper at
the helm let the sheet well out. Then, when Dan hurriedly rejoined
him, Darrin passed the sheet over to his comrade as to one who would
know exactly what to do with it. Dan perched himself on the weather
gunwale, his weight there serving as ballast to keep the craft from
capsizing. Yet, even so, everything had to be done with the utmost
skill, for, with the mainsail up, the least fluke in handling the boat
would send her over.

"We've got to go fast and take all the chances," muttered Dave.

"Sure," nodded Midshipman Dan understandingly. "It would be no great
scare to us if we did heel over into the drink. It might mean a different
story, though, for those who are already sopping up the wet."

"Aren't they splendid fellows?" cried Laura.

"Yes," answered Belle, her eyes snapping and her face glowing. "Though I
won't claim that they're any finer than your own West Point boys."

That brought an added flush to the color in Laura Bentley's face, and her
eyes sparkled her gratitude, for Dick Prescott, now at West Point with
his chum, Greg Holmes, had been her High School sweetheart, and doubtless
was to become her Army sweetheart after he had made sure of his career.

"Dave and Dan are experts," glowed Miss Bentley. "They'll know just
what to do."

"They're better than mere experts," returned Belle Meade. "They're strong
and manly to the core, and with them there's no such word as fear when
there's a duty to be done."

Both Dave and Dan were peering fixedly ahead all the time that they drove
the sailboat toward the scene of the late disaster.

"I think I see a head," cried Darrin.

"Boy or girl!" demanded Midshipman Dalzell.

"Can't tell at this distance. And now the next wave has blotted out what
I thought I saw."

"We've got to be patient," uttered Dan.

The position of the midshipmen was far from being free of danger. With
all their coolness and their undoubted skill in boat handling, there was
grave danger, with the mainsail set, that, at any instant, wind and wave
would capsize the boat.

Indeed, Dave was running the lee gunwale under water half the
time, trusting to the human ballast supplied by his comrade to
keep them afloat.

"See anything now?" demanded Dave.

"No," uttered Dan, "though I'm working my eyes three shifts to try to
make out something. I'll have to go to an oculist as soon as I get
through with this. This eyestrain is awful."

Midshipman Dan Dalzell was really unconscious of the fact that
he was joking. It was second nature with him; he would have
jested--unconsciously--with death in its most awful form.

"There, I see a head--two of them!" cried Midshipman Dave suddenly, as he
half rose and pointed.

"Hurrah!"--from Dan.

Dan let the boat's head fall off a point in order that he might see
better around the mast on the weather side, just where he must head his
craft in the last dash in.

"It's Foss and Ella Wright," called Dan, as the flying sailboat got in
closer over the foam-crested waves. "No, it isn't; Foss has Susie."

"Can you make out Canty and Ella?" demanded Darrin hoarsely.

"Not a sign, Dave. Maybe he's gone under trying to save Ella."

"Canty was one of our Gridley High School boys, so I'd expect him to have
both the nerve and the grace to go down with a girl, if he couldn't save
her as well as himself," muttered Darrin.

"There's Canty, just come up!"

"Can you make out Ella's head?"

"No."

"Look hard."

"I don't see her, and--there!"

"What's up?"

"Nothing," returned Dalzell soberly. "Canty's down--just gone down
again."

"I hope he's gone down trying to find and rescue Ella," murmured Dave.

They were now so close that the young midshipmen would have been able to
hear the shouts of the imperiled ones had it not been that the wind blew
the sounds of voices away from the would-be rescuers.

"Better ease off the sheet a bit, I guess, Davy," called Dan, as he
suited the action to the word. "We don't went to run 'em down."

"No."

As he spoke, Dave Darrin brought the boat slightly around. They were now
close enough to see that Tom Foss was supporting dead weight in the
person of Susie, who was unconscious.

"Waiting the word from you on the sheet, Davy," nodded Dan, as the boat
drew close to the only pair of survivors now visible.

"Let go the sheet!" called Dave an instant later, and Dan let it run off
clear, handing the end of the rope to Darrin.

"Can you head Susie this way, Foss?" Dalzell called.

"I'd rather have help," came the faint answer. Tom Foss was evidently
well spent by his exertions in keeping up the girl so long.

Splash! Dan Dalzell was in the water, without waiting to hear more. The
athletic young midshipman swam with a steadiness and speed that was
glorious to see. Many an excellent swimmer, in smooth water, would dread
buffeting with such waves as were now rolling.

Dave Darrin, meanwhile, held on to the tiller and the paid-out sheet,
ready to manoeuvre the now pitching, rolling boat at an instant's notice.
It took all his seamanship to keep the craft afloat, though the sailboat
was far better modeled for such water than the motor launch had been.

"Give her over to me, and save yourself," commanded Dalzell cheerily, as
he reached Tom Foss. "Think you can make it, old fellow?"

"If I can't, I ought to drown," retorted Tom Foss, as he struck out, none
too strongly. "This is all my fault. You fellows gave me better advice
than I had sense to follow."

Dan, with a skill that he had acquired directly from the excellent
instruction given him by the swimming master at the Naval Academy, was
now piloting the unconscious form of Susie Danes toward the sailboat.

Even encumbered as he was, Dan made the boat before Tom Foss could
accomplish that feat alone. Truth to tell, Foss was very nearly "all in."
Had rescue been delayed a few moments longer, Foss and his fair companion
must have sunk.

"Get hold of her, Davy," called Dan, as he ranged up on the weather side
of the tossing boat.

Darrin promptly leaned over and lifted the unconscious girl into the
boat. By the time he had done that Tom Foss reached up both hands,
seizing the boat's stern.

"Going to help me in?" he called.

"I don't know," Dave answered dubiously.

"If we can find Ella Wright there may not be room. With such a sea
running, this boat won't hold many."

"No matter about me, then," muttered Tom. "If Ella isn't found right away
I don't believe I care about going back to Gridley."

Dave's response was swiftly to knot a noose and let it down over Tom's
shoulders. The other end of the line he made fast astern. Dalzell, in the
meantime, had swum back again. Susie Danes lay as still as death in the
bottom of the boat.

As Dalzell got back where he had first reached Foss and Susie, he espied
the head of Ab Canty some distance away.

"Ab!" called Dan.

"Here!"

"What has become of Ella?"

"Oh, I wish I knew!"

"Was she afloat at all!" demanded Dan, swimming nearer.

"Yes; I kept her up for a couple of minutes, maybe. Then she got more
scared, wound her arms tight around me, and we both sank. We had a
struggle under water. I freed myself, but when I came to the top I found
that my hand was clutching nothing but her empty jersey. There it is
now," chattered Ab, his teeth, knocking against each other, as he pointed
to the garment in question on the top of a distant wave. Then Ab sank.

For just an instant Dalzell thought Canty had gone below on purpose. Dan
swam closer, to be of assistance. Then he saw the bubbles of air coming
up rapidly.

"Cantys given out--he's going to drown!" gasped Midshipman Dan,
with horror.

Like a flash Dan dived below, found and clutched at Canty. The young man
returned the grip with interest, but Midshipman Dalzell struggled to the
surface with him. Ab Canty was exhausted, out of his head and altogether
past reasoning. Dan hated to do it, but he had to strike the young man in
the forehead. Canty gave a gasp and ceased to resist.

Dave Darrin, watching, had run the boat up close alongside as soon as the
struggling pair appeared above the waves.

"You'll have to take him in, Davy," announced Midshipman Dalzell. "Canty
isn't strong enough to tow behind. And I'm coming aboard for a fresh look
before I dive for Miss Wright."

"You're going to stay aboard and manage the boat," retorted Darrin
quietly. "I'm going in next."

"Oh, all right, if you want to," half grumbled Dan. "But I'm just
beginning to get used to it and to like it."

Dan, however, followed orders and took his seat by tiller and sheet as
soon as they had towed Canty safely in the boat. Tom Foss, lied and
holding on at the stern, was beginning to chatter hard, but said he was
all right.

A brief instant of consultation the two midshipmen held. Then Dave
Darrin, holding his hands before him, dived hard and deep into the water.

After nearly a minute he came up again, but only to take an observation.
Then he sank, to explore more of the space under water.

For five minutes Darrin continued this, making four dives in all, and
sinking twice without diving.

"I can't give this up, and abandon a girl," he muttered. "Dan, I've got
to take more account of the current, and work gradually downstream."

A little later Dave rose with a whoop the instant that his head showed
above the water.

"I've got her," Dave announced, though his voice was hoarse and panting.

"Hurrah!" came from Dan, as he saw the girl's head show above the
surface. Dalzell, hauling on the sheet, ran the boat in close. Dave
grasped at the rail on the weather quarter, while Dan bent over him,
hauling hard. And so Ella Wright was dragged unconscious into the boat.

"I'd stay here in the water with you, Tom," explained Dave, "but I've got
to be in the boat to do my share of handling her."

"Th-th-that's all r-r-r-r-right," chattered poor Foss, "I'm d-d-d-doing
f-f-f-fine here--c-c-c-couldn't h-help in the b-b-b-boat"

While lying to, it had taken some fine management on the part of the
midshipmen to keep the sailboat from capsizing. And now, on this rough,
wave-strewn river, they had to tack back against a nearly head wind.

"Look at the crowd on the clubhouse float," gasped Dan as soon as the
Naval chums had gotten their craft under way.

"Good thing," muttered Darrin. "We'll need plenty of help."

"I wonder how the crowd got wind of the thing in such short time?"

"You forget," nudged Darrin, "that there's a telephone in the clubhouse.
Laura and Belle are not given to losing their heads. Undoubtedly they've
been 'phoning to Gridley."

"Then they can't have overlooked the need of physicians," ventured Dan,
"especially as Laura is the daughter of one."

As the boat drew nearer to the float the noise of cheers was borne to the
ears of the midshipmen.

"More of the hero racket," uttered Dan disgustedly.

"I hope this won't get into the newspapers," grunted Darrin in a tone of
something like real alarm. "Say, the fellows of the brigade wouldn't do
a thing but make us mount chairs and read all the fulsome gush about
this rescue."

"And then, after we'd finished a straight reading," groaned Dan, "we'd
have to sing it next, to the tune of 'Columbia, the Pride of the Ocean.'"

"'Gem of the Ocean,' Dan," Darrin corrected.

Though in the middle of the river the sailboat had many a close shave
from capsizing in the strong puffs of wind, especially with the load that
the little craft carried, yet Dan Dalzell, at the tiller, brought the
boat at last in under the lee side of the float, and there a score of
pairs of willing hands reached out with offers of help.

Dr. Bentley was in the crowd, as were two other Gridley physicians. There
were also two trained nurses, and one of the druggists had brought along
a big emergency box of drugs and supplies. Between them the telephone and
the automobile can accomplish a lot in these modern times.

Laura and Belle, though they had summoned the aid, now kept tactfully in
the background.

The two apparently drowned girls were lifted from the boat in haste and
borne to a room that had been made ready on the second floor of the
clubhouse. Ab Canty was carried to another room, and Tom Foss, who nearly
shook to pieces when lifted from the water, was helped after his friend.

"You two young midshipmen will have to come inside and get some of our
attention," called Dr. Bentley in an authoritative voice.

"I think not, thank you, doctor," replied Dave Darrin. "The most that we
want is some place where we can strip and rub down, while waiting for dry
clothing."

"I know just the room, and I'll take you there," urged Len Spencer,
reporter for the "Morning Blade." Len was an old friend of Dick Prescott,
who, in his High School days before going to West Point, had worked as an
amateur space reporter for the "Blade."

Len led the way gladly. While Dan and Dave stripped and rubbed down, Len
got out of them the whole account of what they had been through.
Reporter Spencer had already talked with Belle and Laura. A man in an
auto had already started for the homes of the two midshipmen, to obtain
changes of clothing for them.

"Now, Len," begged Dave, "don't spread on a lot of taffy. Don't smother
us under the hero racket."

"But it was an heroic thing," Len argued. "And, besides, it was done with
great skill, of the kind that you've gained at the Naval Academy. It
makes a corking, elegant story about two of our brightest Gridley lads."

"But, Len, do you realize that the fellows at the Naval Academy will make
us read aloud to them this yarn you're proposing to write about us--that
is, if they happen to hear about it?"

"And then, after we've read the yarn straight, they'll make us sing it
all to some blamed old tune or another," groaned Dalzell.

"Well, I can't help it," sighed good-natured Len. "It's a story we've got
to have to-morrow morning. I'd lose my position if I didn't write a good
story about this afternoon's work. And, now that I've got a wife and baby
to feed, I can't afford to waste any good time in job-hunting."

"Then I hope none of the other fellows at the Naval Academy hear about
the 'Blade's' story," gulped Dan, as he wrapped himself in a blanket
while waiting for his dry clothes.

"Hear about it?" retorted Len. "They'll hear about it, all right. The
Associated Press man at Gridley will be sure to send something about it
to the papers all over the country."

"I guess we've got to take our medicine, Danny," hinted Midshipman
Dave Darrin.

In the meantime Tom Foss was soon comfortable, wrapped up in blankets and
with plenty of coffee inside him. Nor did it take long to bring Ab Canty
around. In three quarters of an hour Susie Danes opened her eyes.

As for Ella Wright, the physicians and nurses worked over her long and
earnestly, and were on the point of giving her up when at last a flutter
of her eyelids was seen.

By night time all of the young people were quite out of danger, but the
parents of the Wright and Danes families were highly indignant over the
recklessness of Tom Foss in taking the girls out on the river in such a
heavy wind.

Three days later even the launch was saved; that is, it was raised and
was towed to a boat-builder for overhauling and repairs.




CHAPTER III

THE TROUBLE-MAKING FOP


The story that Len Spencer wrote for the "Blade" was "worse" than the
midshipmen had expected. That is, the newspaper made them out to be
heroes of some rare, solid-gold type. To add to the trouble, the
story, in a condensed form, was printed broadcast by the dailies all
over the country.

"We can't hope to keep it quiet, Danny boy," groaned Dave when the two
chums met the next morning.

"No," sighed Dan. "The most we can hope for is to be allowed to
live it down."

"And I'm much afraid that we've got to stand for a lot more of gush this
afternoon," continued Darrin.

"At the reception? Oh, yes! I wish we could desert the town and get away
somewhere to hide."

The affair for the afternoon was a reception for which Laura Bentley had
sent out hurried invitations to a lot of the former High School boys and
girls of Gridley. Though Laura was more especially interested in the U.
S. Military Academy at West Point--because Dick Prescott was there--yet
she did not show undue partiality to the Army.

"I'm sorry Laura didn't wait a fortnight," Dan continued.

"Oh, well, she doesn't understand," Dave urged.

"You're going, of course?"

"I surely am. I wouldn't slight that splendid girl. She's a whole lot to
me, Danny boy, both for her own sake and Dick Prescott's."

Even the short stroll, however, between Belle Meade's home and Laura's,
was bound to bring Dave Darrin again into the unwished-for limelight.

He and Belle had turned into Main Street together, and were walking
along, chatting, when Belle's eyes flashed suddenly.

"There's that horrid wretch Ardmore," she murmured in an undertone.

"Don't believe I know him," Darrin returned.

"Then you haven't been deprived of much," replied Belle, in a tone that
was very nearly bitter. "I've been meaning to tell you about him, Dave,
but other matters have been cropping up and it has escaped me until now."

"What's wrong with Ardmore?" asked Dave.

"He's posing as an admirer of mine."

"I can't quarrel with his taste," smiled Darrin.

"But he annoys me."

"Has he dared to do that?" demanded Dave, a quick flash in his eyes.

"Not in any way that it would be easy to resent," Belle assured him.

"Who is this fellow Ardmore?"

"He appears to be a gentleman--at least in his ordinary conduct," Belle
Meade answered. "He moved here last spring with his parents. The father
is a retired lawyer, and wealthy. The Ardmores move in a rather good set
in town. About a month ago Caspar Ardmore, the young man, met me at a
church affair. Ever since then he has all but waylaid me. Several times
he has tried to walk with me when we met, and has often tried to see me
home from church or elsewhere. I've been almost downright rude to him,
and have shown him in every way I can that I don't wish to continue
acquaintance. But he's hard to discourage."

"He hasn't insulted you?" asked Dave quietly.

"Oh, dear, no! If he had, I think I might have been able to startle him
somewhat," laughed Belle, who had a "temper" when it was necessary to
have one. As she spoke she raised her eyes, glancing ahead.

"There, he has stopped, and looks almost as though he were waiting for
us," she added.

"There's an ugly scowl on his face, too."

Dave Darrin looked ahead at the foppish, rather good-looking, tall and
slender young man of some twenty-six years.

"I hope he isn't going to be troublesome," murmured Dave. "I don't want
to have to fight with him--at least, not when you're along with me."

As they neared Ardmore, Dave continued to look at the young man quietly,
steadily, frankly. Ardmore seemed trying to ignore the gaze, and looked,
instead, at Belle.

Just as the young couple reached him, Ardmore raised his hat, at the same
time stepping forward so that he blocked Belle's progress.

"Good afternoon, Miss Meade," was Ardmore's greeting. "I was on my way to
your house when I saw you. Mother has some tickets for a concert at the
Sorosis rooms, and is unable to use them this afternoon. So I have come
to ask you if you will not honor me with your company at the concert?"

"Thank you, no," Belle answered coldly. "And I would also like to make it
plain, Mr. Ardmore, since you make it necessary, that I do not wish your
company at any time or place. I am sorry to have to speak so plainly."

A deep flush dyed the cheeks of the fop. But he was not so easily
discouraged.

"I had intended to call this evening, Miss Meade. I am to have a box at
the theatre."

"You may call anywhere you wish," Belle retorted, her eyes flashing,
"provided it is not at my home."

"Oh, I am very much afraid that you are annoyed with me," cried Ardmore.

"I am," Belle admitted. "Mr. Ardmore, will you do me the very great favor
of ceasing your attempts at acquaintance?"

"Acquaintance? Why, we're already very well acquainted, Miss Meade; in
fact, I had hoped that we were, by this time, the most excellent friends.
If this gentleman," with a sidelong look at Dave, "will excuse us, Miss
Meade, will you stroll along with me and tell me in what way I may have
offended you without intending anything of the sort?"

Dave, who had remained quiet, now felt called upon to interpose.

"Sir," he demanded, "will you observe Miss Meade's request and take
yourself away?"

"And what have you to say about this?" demanded Ardmore sneeringly.

"The young lady is under my protection."

"I have offered her mine."

"And Miss Meade has just told you that you will please her most by
keeping away from her at all times," replied Darrin quietly but firmly.

"What? After all the good times she and I have enjoyed together?"
demanded Ardmore, as though astounded beyond measure.

"I? Good times with you?" cried Belle, her cheeks flaming. "I've never
even spoken to you when I could avoid it."

"That's false!" cried young Ardmore hotly.

"Stop, right there!" warned Dave Darrin in a quieter voice than ever,
though his face paled swiftly. "Did I understand you to remark that Miss
Meade had made a false statement?"

"You did!"

Whack! Darrin's clenched right fist caught the fop on the temple, felling
him to the ground.

"Go right on to Laura's, Belle," begged Dave quickly. "I'll be
along soon."

Miss Meade walked rapidly ahead.

Ardmore was on his feet in an instant. Not wanting in a certain amount
of animal courage, he rushed at Dave, only to be met with a blow in
the mouth that floored him again. The fop's lip was cut and bleeding
when he rose.

"You cur!" bellowed the fellow.

"The opinion of a person like you can't matter very much," Dave
retorted coolly.

A little crowd was beginning to gather. Dave's pallor increased, for his
very soul writhed at the thought of having Belle's name involved in a
brawl in this fashion.

"You're a--" began Ardmore, but Dave Darrin moved quickly up to him.

"Do you retract the statement you made?" demanded the midshipman in a
low voice.

"I retract nothing," quivered Ardmore. "I repeat, and repeat--"

Dave closed in like lightning, Ardmore attempted to guard himself, but he
was all but helpless before such a fast, trained hitter as Dave. The fop
went down under two well-aimed blows delivered almost together.

Once more Ardmore leaped to his feet, while Darrin disdainfully
awaited him.

But two or three men in the crowd leaped between the enemies, forcing
the fop back.

"Don't be a fool, Ardmore!" urged one of the men, speaking in the
fellow's ear. "That's Midshipman Dave Darrin, and he's one of the
quickest, hardest hitters in Gridley."

"Oh, that's the midshipman, is it?" demanded Ardmore in a sneering voice.
"Oh, well, then, I won't hit him again. I know another way of making his
skin smart."

Dave tarried only long enough to make sure that the fop did not care to
carry the encounter further. Then, turning on his heel, he walked rapidly
in the direction Belle had taken. He overtook that young lady before she
reached the Bentley home.

[Illustration: Darrin's Blow Felled the Fop to the Ground.]

"If the fellow intends to trouble you again, I hope he'll do it before
my leave is finished," spoke Dave quietly. "I think I've given him a
little lesson, Belle, though there's no telling how long it will last
with inferior animals of Ardmore's type."

"He's a spiteful fellow, Dave. You must be on your guard against him,"
Belle urged.

"I guess Ardmore is wishing his own guard had been more effective,"
smiled the midshipman.

Caspar Ardmore was "busy" within an hour after Dave's summary handling of
him. Ardmore had never been considered a truly bad fellow, though he was
foppish, conceited and wholly unable to understand why anything that he
wanted should be denied him. Belle was now two years beyond her High
School days, and had developed into a most attractive young woman.
Ardmore had fallen victim to her charms and had decided that he would
make a better husband for her than any Naval officer could. Hence the
young dandy had pursued Miss Meade with his attentions; upon finding her
with Dave, he had hoped, in his foolish way, to put an end to Darrin's
pretensions.

Ardmore, therefore, having met only disaster, was now engaged in drawing
up a complaint to be sent to the Secretary of the Navy, complaining that
he had been set upon and treated with severe physical violence by
Midshipman Darrin.

Nor was there great difficulty in finding three men, out of the small
crowd that had witnessed the assault, to swear to affidavits that they
had seen Darrin knock Caspar Ardmore down repeatedly.

All this "evidence" Ardmore got together with great relish, and mailed
the mass of stuff, that same night, to the Secretary of the Navy at
Washington.

Then Ardmore went out of town for three days. Behind him he left an
active toady who promised to keep watch of matters and to advise him.

It was through this toady that Dave received an intimation that his case
would be attended to at Washington. Belle, also, received a hint, and
with it she went to Darrin.

"Can the fellow really make any trouble for you, Dave?" she asked
anxiously.

"Why, yes," admitted Dave. "Anyone can make trouble for a midshipman, to
the extent that the charge must be investigated by the Navy Department.
If the Secretary were satisfied that I am a reckless sort of bully, he
would decide that I am unfit to be an officer of the Navy."




CHAPTER IV

IN THE VIEW OF THE NAVY DEPARTMENT


Dave Darrin did not let the news of the charges disturb his outward
serenity, though he was inwardly aware that perjured evidence might work
great harm to his future career.

Until he was advised by the Navy Department that charges had been made
against him, he really could do nothing in the matter.

But that letter from the Secretary was not long in coming. The letter
informed Midshipman Darrin that he has been accused of severely
assaulting a citizen without just provocation, and contained, also, some
of the circumstances alleged by Caspar Ardmore. Dave was commanded to
forward his defense promptly.

This Darrin did, in a courteous answer, as briefly as he could properly
make it. He admitted knocking Ardmore down, but stated that he did it in
resenting an insult offered by Ardmore to a young lady under his
(Darrin's) escort at the time.

This letter he showed Belle.

"It is the first step, on my side in the matter," he explained
with a smile.

"I should think the Secretary of the Navy ought to be satisfied with
your answer and drop it at once," replied Belle.

"He may."

"But you think he won't?"

"It is likely, Belle, that there will be a court of inquiry at least."

"Oh, dear!" cried Belle, a few tears gleaming in her eyes now. "Why
should so much fuss be made over the matter?"

"Because I am being trained to be an officer in the Navy. An officer must
be a gentleman as well. Any charge affecting a Naval officer's honor or
courtesy must be investigated, in order that the government may know
whether the accused is fit to hold an officer's commission. The
government wouldn't be dealing justly with the people if such standards
were not observed."

"And I am the cause of all this trouble for you?" cried Belle.

"No, Belle, you are not. You have nothing to do with the matter, except
indirectly. Ardmore is the one responsible for the trouble. If he had not
insulted you he wouldn't have gotten into any difficulty."

"It seems too bad, just the same."

"It's annoying; that's all," Dave assured her. "If I had to do the same
thing over again, for the same reason, I'd do it cheerfully."

Mrs. Meade heard of it all, from her daughter. Without saying a word as
to her intentions the mother herself wrote a letter to the Secretary of
the Navy. Mrs. Meade set forth the persistent fashion in which Ardmore
had sought to force his attentions upon Belle, to the latter's great
annoyance. Mrs. Meade's letter declared that Darrin had taken the only
possible means of saving Belle from future annoyance. The mother's letter
to the Secretary concluded by offering to procure statements from other
people on the subject if the Secretary wished.

Mrs. Meade received a prompt reply from Washington. The Secretary thanked
her for her statements and expressed entire belief in them.

By the same mail Caspar Ardmore, just returned to Gridley, received
this letter:

"Referring to your letter and complaint bearing date of September 6, the
Department has to advise you that other statements have also been
received bearing upon your accusations of an assault alleged to have been
committed upon your person by Midshipman David Darrin.

"It is claimed by the signers of other statements, including that of
Midshipman Darrin, that you grossly insulted a young woman under his
escort and completed the insult by accusing her of falsehood. If these
statements be true, and there be no other important circumstances,
except the assault, the Department begs to advise you that, had not
Midshipman Darrin resented the gross insult tendered the woman under
his protection, he would thereby, by such inaction, have rendered
himself liable to dismissal from the Navy. It is always the first duty
of a gentleman to afford ample protection to any woman under his
escort and care.

"Should you deny the statements quoted above in favor of Midshipman
Darrin, and should you further desire to have the matter brought to issue
before a duly appointed court of inquiry, before which you would be
required to appear as a material witness, this Department will be glad so
to be advised. If you do not make formal application for the appointment
of such court of inquiry within the next few days, no further action will
be taken in the matter. Very respectfully,

"Your obedient servant,
"(Signed) LEOK B. CHAMBERS,
"_Secretary of the Navy_."

As he read, and realized how flat his charge had fallen, Ardmore's face
passed through several shades of red.

"Of all the government red tape!" he muttered wrathfully. "I didn't think
the fool Secretary would do anything like this. I thought he'd just call
Darrin down hard and plenty, and perhaps bounce him out of the Naval
Academy. Humph! I guess all these Navy folks stand together. There
doesn't seem to be much justice about it."

Ardmore thereupon took another vacation away from Gridley. A few days
after he went Midshipman Darrin received a brief communication from the
Secretary of the Navy, stating that no further action had been taken by
the accuser, and that the Department was satisfied that the midshipman's
conduct had been fully justified. Therefore the matter would not be
called to the attention of the Naval Academy authorities for action.

"So you see," smiled Dave, as he called at Belle's home and handed her
the letter, "there is never any need to be worried until trouble breaks
in earnest."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" cried Belle, her eyes shining with delight, "I hope
you won't meet that Ardmore fellow again while you're home."

"If I do," promised Dave, "I shall merely look over his head when we
meet, unless he repeats the offense that brought him that thrashing."

Ardmore, however, did not appear in Gridley again during Dave's leave
of absence.

Dave and Dan tasted, to the full, the delights of life in the old home
town until the day when it was necessary for them to take train and
return to Annapolis.

"Mother, Laura and I will go down to Annapolis whenever we hear from
you as to the best time for coming," Miss Meade promised at the
railway station.

Then she found chance to murmur, in a voice too low for any of the others
present to hear:

"And I'll try hard not to be such a goose as I was last winter!"

She referred to the trouble that had been made by another girl at
Annapolis, the circumstances of which are wholly familiar to the readers
of the earlier volumes of this series.

"I don't blame you for the way you felt last winter," Dave assured her
heartily, "Next time, however, I hope you'll come to me first for an
explanation."

"There isn't going to be any next time, Dave."

Three minutes later two midshipmen were being whirled through the city
limits of Gridley.




CHAPTER V

NAVY FOOTBALL IN THE AIR


Back on the old, familiar Academy grounds!

Both Dave and Dan underwent an unconscious brace as they passed the
watchman at the main gate and stepped on, each with a suit case in hand,
to the left, with Bancroft Hall in the distance.

Their first move was, as it must be, to report their return to the
officer in charge. By that officer the two midshipmen were assigned to
the rooms that they were to occupy during the coming academic year.

Once behind their doors, both young men hastened to get out of cit.
clothes and back into their beloved uniforms.

"There are worse liveries to wear than Uncle Sam's," murmured Dan
Dalzell when, having arrayed himself, he glanced down lovingly at the
neat, dark blue.

"Much worse," replied Dave briefly, as, having dressed, he set to work to
help make their quarters neat enough to please even the captious eye of
the discipline officer. By the time that the two midshipmen finished
policing their quarters no housekeeper in the land could have found the
least sign of disorder.

Rap-tap! sounded briskly at the door.

"Come in," called Dave.

The door opened, revealing Midshipman Hepson, of the first class.

"Are you fellows to rights?" he called.

"Come in, Hepson," urged Dave. "Yes; we're to rights as far as
quarters go."

Hepson came no more than inside the door before he halted, asking
briskly:

"Have you anything on!"

"Nothing but our clothes," grinned Dan, "and some hair."

"You've no appointments or engagements, then?" persisted Hepson. "My
being here won't interfere with anything that you want to do?"

"Not in the least," Dave replied.

"Oh, then, I'll invite myself to a chair," declared the first
classman, suiting the action to the word. "Now, you fellows can guess
why I'm here."

"You're captain of this year's football eleven," Dave replied. "Has that
anything to do with your call?"

"Everything," admitted Hepson briskly. "Have you fellows any notion that
we've a poor eleven, so far, this year?"

"Why I thought it pretty good, from the practice work that I saw done in
August," Darrin answered slowly.

"A pretty good eleven doesn't win games, sir," retorted Hepson. "Man,
we've got to strengthen the team all along the line, or I'll go down in
Naval Academy history as captain of the worst lot of dubs who ever chased
a pigskin around the field!"

"Is it as bad as that?" demanded Dan, opening his eyes.

"Dalzell," said Hepson, "our eleven is rotten, sir--simply and
fiercely useless!"

"If it's as bad as that," hinted Dan innocently, "wouldn't it be a prime
good idea to draw our eleven from the field this year?"

"What? Strike the Navy's colors, and especially to the Army?" glared Mr.
Hepson. "What are you talking about?"

"Then I guess," nodded Dan, "that we'll have to stay in the ring, and let
it go by apologizing to the Army for getting in their way on the field
the Saturday after Thanksgiving."

"We won't do that, either, by Jingo!" retorted Midshipman Hepson. "But
we've got to strengthen our team. We've got to practice every minute that
the commandant will allow us for practice. We've got to make a front-rank
team out of--nearly nothing!"

"Aren't there any good players who have been holding back?" asked
Dave Darrin.

"Two that I know of, Darrin," rejoined Hepson, fixing his eyes
keenly on Dave.

"Who are they?"

"You and Dalzell."

"We haven't backed out, or refused duty," Darrin retorted quickly.

"No; but you haven't pushed yourselves forward any, either."

"Well, we're hardly team material," objected Dave modestly. "However,
I'll promise for myself and Dalzell, too, that we'll turn out to all the
practice we can, and work like blazes!"

"Will you?" cried Midshipman Hepson delightedly. He jumped up, grasping
each midshipman by the hand in turn.

"But you don't want to bank on us too much," Darrin continued. "You
know, we've never played on anything as big as the Navy team. We used to
be good enough little players on a country school team. But it's
different here."

"Let the coaches and the captain find that out, then," grunted Hepson.
"But you'll work? You'll try to make good? You'll try to make the team
and some history?"

"We'd lay down our lives for the Navy, at any point and in any sort of
game," rejoined Dave Darrin simply.

"Good! Bully! That's the way I like to hear a fellow talk!" glowed
Hepson, making toward the door. "You'll turn out for practice to-morrow
afternoon?"

"Without fail, if we're physically able," promised Midshipman Darrin.

"Awfully obliged to you, fellows," cried Hepson, throwing the door open.
"And now you won't mind if I cut my visit short? I've a lot of fellows to
see, you know."

The door banged and Hepson was gone.

"Say, how's the Navy going to win under a chap as nervous as Hepson?"
asked Dan.

"That isn't nervousness, Danny boy."

"If it isn't, what is it, then?"

"Electricity."

"Elec--Oh, say, now--"

"It's electricity," Dave insisted. "He's a live wire, that man Hepson.
He'll pull us through on the field this year, if any one can."

"There's nothing like looking on the bright side of things," murmured
Dalzell, drumming on his chair.

"I'd rather see Hepson under estimate the Navy team," went on Dave, "than
feel too sure that it is invincible. Still, I believe that the Navy is
going to put forward a mighty strong eleven this year. Though, of course,
that is not saying that we can beat the Army."

"Why not?" demanded Dalzell almost fiercely.

"Because, no matter how good a line we put forward, the Army may put
forward a better."

"Now, don't go tooting the Army's bugle!"

"I am just considering the average of chances," Darrin returned. "Danny
boy, sometimes the Navy wins, but most of the games of past years have
gone to the Army. So the chances are that we'll be beaten this year."

"Not if I have to die on the line to stop it!" glowed Dalzell at red
heat.

"Maybe you won't even get on the Navy line; perhaps I won't, either,
Danny boy. But you know we saw by the "Army and Navy Journal" that
Prescott and Holmes are playing on the West Point eleven this year."

"Holmes isn't necessarily such a much, is he?" flared Dan.

"Greg Holmes is a pretty handy man on the football field," retorted
Darrin warmly. "None ought to know that better than we, after we've seen
Holmes pull out so many victories for the old High School team. Of
course, Prescott is the better player, but Holmes can back him up to
amazing advantage."

"Didn't we play about as good a game as that pair?" Dalzell demanded.

"I don't know," Dave answered thoughtfully. "Perhaps not quite as good a
game. You see, in the old High School days, Dick Prescott used to lead
and I often backed up his plays. So one could hardly compare us."

"If you're in such a blue funk over the Navy's chances, you'd better keep
off the line-up," muttered Midshipman Dalzell.

"Oh, I'm in no funk," returned Darrin, smiling. "However, I'm not going
to be betrayed into any bragging until we've wiped the field up with the
Army--if we can."

Rap-tap! came on the door.

"I'll wager that's Farley," whispered Darrin.

"Or Page"--from Dan.

"Come in," called Dave.

The door opened, to let in Farley, with Page crowding on his heels.

Dave and Dan both hastened forward to clasp hands with these tried chums
of other days.

"Seen Hepson?" asked Dan.

"Yes," nodded Farley. "He told us he had gobbled you. Hepson just left
us."

"You're going to be on the eleven!" pressed Dan.

"If we can make it," nodded Farley slowly. "I'd like to play, too, but
I'm hoping that the Navy can hit on some one better than myself."

"Cold feet!" grinned Dan.

"Not exactly," Farley answered, with a slight flush. "But it's a big
thing to play on the Navy's fighting eleven. It seems almost too big a
responsibility for any but a demi-god."

"Demi-gods don't play football," jeered Dan. "They're nothing but idols,
anyway, and they're two thousand years out of date. What we want on the
Navy line is real human flesh and blood."

"There'll be blood on the doorstep of the moon if the Army carries things
away from us this year," predicted Page mournfully.

"Well, all we can do is our best," declared Dave. "We'll do that, too,
and do it mightily. Wow! What's that?"

Ta-ra-ra-ta-ra-ta! sounded musically in the corridors.

"Supper formation, by Jove!" gasped Dan.

Farley and Page fled without a word. Soon the "decks" of Bancroft Hall
swarmed with young life. Then, outside, to seaward, the brigade fell in
by companies.

Military commands rang out briskly, roll was called, reports made and the
brigade marched in to supper.

What a joyous, noisy affair it was. Some license in the way of
boisterousness was allowed this evening, and most of the young men took
full advantage of the fact.

Swat! A slice of bread, soaked in a glass of water and kneaded into a
soppy ball, struck Dalzell full in the back of the neck, plastering his
collar and sending a sticky mess down his spine.

"I'll fight the man who did that," promised Midshipman Dan, wheeling
around. Then added cautiously:

"If he's a graduate."

There being, naturally, no graduates present except the officer at the
furthest corner of the mess hall, Dan's challenge provoked laughter.

Many other pranks were played, but there is not room to record them here.
The meal over and the brigade dismissed, some of the midshipmen--there
were nearly eight hundred of them--went to their own quarters, or visited
the rooms of cronies. Hundreds took the air in the grounds.

Almost the sole topic was football. Hepson speedily had most of the
members of the big squad gathered about him. Others, who could not hope
to "make" in football, gathered near-by, as though afraid of losing some
of the talk.

"Remember, gentlemen, until the Army game is over, it's to be nothing
this year but work, work, work!" warned Midshipman Hepson, with intense
earnestness.

With nothing but football in the air, Dan soon caught the infection even
more deeply than his chum.

"Hang it, I'm a dub," groaned Dan. "Lots of the fellows gave up their
leave in order to be here and practise. Why in the mischief didn't I?"

"For the same reason that perhaps I didn't sacrifice leave," replied
Dave. "I wasn't asked to. And you weren't, either, were you?"

"No; but I wish I had flung myself at Hepson's head, and made him take
me, instead of going off to Gridley like a deserter! It's October now,
and what earthly chance, Dave, have you and I to get in shape?"

"We'll do our best, Danny boy, or stay off the line. There's nothing to
be gained by losing our heads. Regrets will be equally worthless."

"Hepson," called one midshipman, "has anyone invented the Navy yells for
this year?"

"Yells?" repeated the football captain scornfully. "It's more to the
purpose to fit ourselves to do something worth yelling about!"

"Has Hepson got the blues?" asked another midshipman.

"Or only the rattles?"

Football was still in the air, dominating the minds of the midshipmen
when a turn of the master switch shut off the lights at taps.




CHAPTER VI

THE HATE OF A RIVAL


The day following was one of intense, almost complicated routine.

There were books and supplies to be drawn for the new academic year.
There were uniforms and other articles of apparel to be drawn. The
sections were detailed and section marchers to be appointed. There were
details of military organization to be announced. Some of the young men
had to go up for physical examination, even if only of the eyes.

At the afternoon recreation hour Hepson led the big football squad out to
the field. Hundreds of midshsipmen went there to see how the Navy would
show up in the vitally important tests. At the outset Hepson was
everywhere, like a buzzing, excitable wasp. Nor did he prove to be minus
a sting at times.

"I think, sir," suggested Hepson, going over to Lieutenant-Commander
Havens, the head coach, "that it would be well for us to know something
about the running speed of every candidate."

"Very good, Mr. Hepson; try out any man that you're curious about,"
replied the officer.

"Darrin, Dalzell, Page, Farley, White, Bryant," called the captain of
the Navy team. "Each of you pick up a ball. Line up at this goal-line,
Joyce, will you take a stop-watch and go over to the other goal-line?
Adams, go along and assist Joyce. I want a record of the time it takes
each man to cover the distance, running as fast as he can with the ball."

The men designated took their places.

"I'll run you first, Darrin," announced the captain. "Go like a streak,
if you can. If you fall down it counts zero. Start when I say 'go.' Are
you ready?"

"Quite ready."

"Go!"

At the word Dave sped away like a shot, Hepson giving a hand signal as he
uttered the starting word, that the time-keeper at the other end might
know when to release the watch. Dave's time was noted. Then Dan took a
try, covering the distance in only two fifths of a second more time than
Darrin had required. Farley was a second and three fifths behind Darrin's
time; Page, a full two seconds behind. White and Bryant then ran, but
only succeeded in about tying Page's work.

Then six more men were called to the line and tried out. After that a
third squad. By this time Midshipman Hepson had his mind about made up
as to the relative speeds of some of the most likely men for the final
Navy team.

"Get out for some kicks, now!" called Hepson.

"When are you going to play football?" growled one man.

Midshipman Hepson turned on him like a flash.

"Jetson, there's a substitute captain in the squad, but you're not the
man. Neither are you one of the coaches."

"Oh, you make me--" began Jetson, but Midshipman Hepson cut him
short with:

"If you can't keep silence when you've nothing to say, your absence from
the field will be considered a favor to the whole squad."

Jetson scowled, but said nothing more. Neither did he offer to retire
from the field.

"Jetson has always been a kicker and a trouble mosquito," whispered Dan
Dalzell to his chum.

"Oh, in a lot of ways Jetson is a nice fellow," Darrin replied quietly.
"The greatest trouble that ails him is that he has just a trifle too
large opinion of the importance of his own opinions. There are a lot of
us troubled in that way."

The kicking practice was put through with dash and vim. Then Midshipman
Hepson, after a brief conference with the head coach, called off the
line-up for the provisional Navy team, following this with a roster of
the second team, or "Rustlers," so called because they force the men of
the Navy team to rustle to keep their places.

Dave Darrin was called off for left tackle, Dan for left end. Farley and
Page held the corresponding positions on the right end of the line-up.

"Begin the game, the Rustlers to have the ball," called
Lieutenant-Commander Havens.

"And mix it up lively, Navy," called Hepson, who, both on account of his
size and other qualifications, played center.

At the whistle-blast the Rustlers kicked it off--a beautiful,
long, arching curve. The ball came to quarter-back, who passed it
to Dave Darrin.

Then the fun began.

The Navy line hit the Rustlers hard and tried to bump through. Dan
Dalzell devoted every ounce of his strength and every turn of his energy
to boosting Darrin through--and Dave himself was not idle. There was an
instant of sullen, hard resistance. Then, somehow, Dave was shot through
the opposing line. Like a deer he sped, Dan hanging to his flanks. It was
up to the Rustlers' halfback now, and that bulky young midshipman leaped
to the fray, cleverly barring the way.

At least, the Rustlers' halfback thought he had Darrin blocked. It is
never wise to take too much for granted.

As the halfback planted himself for the grapple, Dave suddenly dropped
through that opponent's grip and went to the ground.

As though he had been shot through, Dave Darrin went under and past, on
one side, between the halfback's legs. He was up again, with Dan at his
back. Fullback came at them, but Dan bumped that player aside. Dave
dashed on across the line, scoring a touchdown.

Never had the gridiron been the scene of greater excitement than in that
rousing moment.

"Darrin! Darrin! Darrin!" came hoarsely; from hundreds of throats.

"Dalzell! Dalzell!" came the next gusty roar.

Hepson wiped a moist brow with one hand.

"There are two real players, if they can keep that up," muttered the
captain of the eleven.

Jetson had been the tackle opposed to Dave. Just now Jetson was nursing a
bump to his vanity.

"How on earth did I ever happen to let Darrin through?" Jetson demanded
of himself. "I won't do it again, anyway. If I can only make Darrin look
small, I may get his place on the Navy eleven. Darrin is a good fellow,
but I've got to make the team, confound him!"

The kick for goal failed. Then the Navy took the ball and promptly
enough the Rustlers came back with it, Jetson carrying.

Dave and Dan met the ball-carrier. The Rustlers' support failed, and
Jetson went down with the ball. Nor could the second team advance the
ball, so it presently came to the Navy men again.

"I want you to put it through again like a cannon-ball, Darrin,"
Midshipman Hepson whispered as they passed.

So the quarter-backs called for a repetition of the play, giving
different signals.

Dave received the ball with a rush of his old-time fervor and confidence.
Dan started behind him as full of fire as ever.

In a fraction of a second the impact of the two opposing lines came.
Jetson went down, one of his legs flying between Darrin's in such a way
as to constitute a foul.

Dave Darrin went down on top of the ball. Half a dozen players sprawled
over him. The referee's whistle blew.

"Jetson, that was a mean, deliberate trip," remarked Darrin, as he sprang
to his feet. He spoke coolly, with a warning flash in his eyes.

"Not on my part," retorted Jetson.

"You thrust your leg between mine as you went down."

Coach signed to referee not to renew the game for the moment. Then
Lieutenant-Commander Havens and the two team captains crowded close.

"I didn't do it deliberately, as you charged," retorted Jetson, hot
with anger.

"You deny it?" insisted Dave.

"I do."

"On your word as a gentleman you did not intend, a foul trip?" demanded
Midshipman Darrin.

"I have already answered you."

"Answer me on your word as a gentleman."

"I don't have to."

"Very good, then," retorted Dave, turning away with a meaning smile.

"Hold on. I pledge you my word as a gentleman that I did not intend
to make a foul trip," said Jetson, swiftly realizing the error of
his refusal.

In the meantime Lieutenant-Commander Havens had turned to Motley, of the
first class, who was serving as referee.

"Mr. Motley," demanded coach, "did you see just what happened?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you call it a foul trip?"

"I do, sir. If I were referee in a regular game, I would penalize the
team and order the player from the field."

"Mr. Jetson--" began the coach, but, swift as a flash Dave Darrin
interposed, though respectfully, saluting at the same time.

"Will you pardon me, sir. Mr. Jetson has given me his word that he did
not intend a foul trip. I accept his word without reservation."

"Very good, then," nodded coach. "But Mr. Jetson, you will do well to be
careful in the future, and avoid even the appearance of evil."

"Yes, sir; very good, sir," answered Jetson, looking decidedly sheepish.

In giving his word Jetson had told the truth, or had intended to. The
exact truth was that he really did not realize what he had done until it
was too late to avoid the foul. He had meant to stop Darrin, somehow.

"Pull that scrimmage off again," directed Coach Havens dryly.

The ball was placed, the whistle sounded, and again Dave received the
ball and tried to break through. With the Rustlers prepared for the move,
it was blocked and the ball was "down."

Jetson felt his face burning. He knew, well enough, that many of the
players regarded him with suspicion.

"I suppose that suspicion will stick, and my chances of making the Navy
eleven are now scantier than ever," muttered the unfortunate midshipman
to himself.

The whistle blew before any further advantage had been gained. Coach
and Midshipman Hepson had gained considerable insight into the work
of the team.

"Mr. Hepson," said coach aside, in the interval that followed, "you have
done well, I think, to place two such men as Darrin and Dalzell on the
provisional team."

"I am glad you think so, sir," replied the Navy football captain, "for
that is the way it strikes me."

"If you keep them at the left flank you'll have something like dynamite
there," smiled coach. "Mr. Darrin goes through like a cannon-ball, and
Dalzell is always just where Darrin needs him."

"These men have played together before, and they're used to team work,
sir," said Midshipman Hepson.

"So? Where did they play before coming to Annapolis?"

"On what was, in their day, one of the best High School eleven's
going, sir."

"Oho! Do you know, Mr. Hepson, they play more like college men than
anything else. It must have been a bully High School team that
graduated them."

"From the little that I've heard, sir, that High School team was a
great one."

Coach and captain walked back to the scene.

"You will now play another ten-minute period," directed Mr. Havens.
"Jetson will withdraw from the second eleven during the next period and
Doyle will take his place."

"So that's what coach and team captain were hatching up?" thought
Midshipman Jetson. "That gives me a black eye, and my chances of making
the Navy eleven are now worse than ever. Probably I won't even make sub."

As Navy and Rustlers again collided in the fray, Jetson watched Dave's
work narrowly, furiously.

"Darrin always was a smooth one," Jetson declared angrily to himself.
"And now, just because he raised a 'holler', my football prospects are
set back for this year. Probably I can't make the eleven next year,
either. And it's all Darrin's fault!"

In forming the second half the coach called:

"Mr. Jetson will resume his place as right tackle on the second eleven."

"Jetson's not here, sir," called a midshipman.

"Where is he?" asked Coach Havens.

"I think he went off the field, sir, to un-tog."

"He should not have left the field without permission," remarked the
coach coldly.

Jetson heard of the remark that evening, and his anger against Dave
Darrin increased.




CHAPTER VII

"DID JETSON DO IT?"


No sooner had release from studies sounded through big and handsome
Bancroft Hall, than there came a tap at Dave Darrin's door.

"Come in," called Dave.

Hepson came in first, followed by a score of other midshipmen.

"Say, I didn't hear assembly blow lately," remarked Dan Dalzell, closing
a new text-book and looking up with a smile of welcome.

"Are we intruding--so many of us," inquired Hepson, halting.

"Not on me, anyway," answered Dave pleasantly. "As for Danny boy, don't
mind the little chap. He really believes that study release sounds
before supper-call. Come right in, all of you fellows. Dan barks, but
won't bite."

"And take seats, all of you, do," urged Dan, with unnecessary
hospitality. "After the table and the chairs are used up, we'll provide
tacks for the rest."

"Does this little boy ever have a serious streak?" asked one of the
callers, regarding Dan with feigned interest.

"Yes; whenever he finds himself marked down to 2.1 in more than three
studies," laughed Dave.

"Oh, that's no laughing matter," grimaced another of the visiting
midshipmen.

"I don't suppose you can guess what we came to talk about?" went on
Midshipman Hepson.

"At a wild guess it might be football," hazarded Darrin.

"Wonderful! Marvelous!" gasped another visitor.

"Darry, we've come in to tell you that we believe that you and your
erratic roommate are going to save a desperate situation for us," resumed
the captain of the Navy team. "Not that we were destitute of good players
before. But we lacked enough of different kinds to make a strong,
all-around eleven. Now we've a team that we're not afraid, after more
work, to put up against anything that the Army can show us."

"Now, I wouldn't be too sure," urged Dave. "Confidence is all right, but
don't let it rob us of a jot of practice and work."

"Are you afraid of the Army, Darry?" demanded Hepson.

"I'm not going to be too cock-sure, if the story is true that Prescott
and Holmes are out with the Army team this year."

"Are they such great players!" demanded Hepson.

"They are," Dave responded solemnly, "or were. I know something
about that pair, since I've played on the same eleven with Prescott
and Holmes."

"Are they better than you two, Darry?" Hepson demanded.

"Yes," answered Dave unhesitatingly.

"Is that honesty or extreme modesty?"

"Extreme mod--" broke in Dan Dalzell, but he closed his mouth with a
snap and ducked as he saw three of the visitors making for him.

"It's hard to believe," muttered Hepson, though he spoke uneasily. "Why
do you rank Prescott and Holmes so high, Darry?"

"Well, for one reason, Dick Prescott taught Dalzell and myself the game.
Anything that we know about the game we learned in the team that Prescott
captained."

"Still, it's hard to believe," spoke up Midshipman Joyce. "Darrin, we
look upon you as the best thing that ever happened to the Navy end of the
gridiron."

"I don't know that I care about being 'kidded,'" responded Dave
seriously.

"But we honestly do," contended the same speaker, "and we don't like to
have you tell us that Prescott is a better man."

"But I believe he is."

"Are you afraid of him?"

"I'm not afraid of any one on the gridiron," Darrin retorted bluntly.
"I'll work hard to beat any man that I have to go up against, and if
work, this season, will do it, I'll beat Dick Prescott out!"

"Good! That's the way we like to hear you talk," glowed Hepson.

"And I'll bottle up Holmes and put the stopper in," promised Dan with
solemn modesty.

Again two of the men made a rush for him to quiet him.

"It may be only a rumor that Prescott and Holmes are on the Army eleven,"
spoke up another midshipman.

"No," objected still another, "I had a letter, this afternoon, from a
cousin who has been up to West Point and has seen the Army crowd at work.
The Army is rejoicing over Prescott and Holmes as a pair of precious
finds, and they're both nailed to the colors for this season."

"Then we're going to have a tough time in our game with the Army," Darrin
declared thoughtfully. "And the Army will beat more college teams this
year than usual."

"We won't die until the Army shoots, anyway," promised Hepson. "And now,
Darry, there's another question we want to put to you, and we want an
out-and-out answer. Do you believe that Jetson really meant to trip you
this afternoon?"

"You heard his denial," Dave rejoined.

"Yes."

"Well, Jetson is a midshipman and a gentleman. There has never been any
question here about his honor," Darrin replied. "I accepted his denial of
intention at the time, and I still accept it."

"It's queer, then, how Jetson came to give you such a nasty trip,"
observed another caller.

"I'll tell you what I think really must have happened," Dave continued
frankly. "I think Jet was crazy to stop me. It was on his mind, and he
was determined to do it. He tripped me, of course, but I think he
really acted on an unconscious impulse and without intention. So, at
that rate, the trip was not really intended, since he had not
deliberately planned it."

"Would you be willing to play on the same team with him, Darry?" pursued
Midshipman Hepson.

"Yes, or with any other man in the brigade. I don't suspect any man here
at the Naval Academy of anything intentionally and deliberately
dishonorable."

"Good, Darry!" cried several midshipmen.

For a few minutes the talk grew fast and furious. Then some one looked
at his watch and there was a prompt flight of visitors. Ten minutes later
taps sounded and a master switch turned off the lights in midshipmen's
quarters, with nearly eight hundred young men in their beds and already
dropping asleep.

At eight the next morning the many sections marched off to recitations
and for hours the grind of the day was on. At the Naval Academy, as at
West Point, not even football is allowed to interfere in the least with
studies or recitations. No football player is permitted to go into
section room, after extra practice in the field, and announce himself
unprepared to recite. Only midshipmen of a good grade of scholarship are
permitted to join or remain in the football squad.

Late in the afternoon, when recreation time came, all was speedily
changed. Every member of the squad hastily reported in togs. Scores of
midshipmen not of the squad hastened over to see the practice work. The
scores were presently increased to hundreds. Fifty or more Naval officers
detailed at the yard were scattered along the side lines. Many of the
wives and daughters of officers stationed at Annapolis turned out to view
the work. Other young ladies came from Annapolis. There was also a big
delegation of "St. Johnnies," as the gray-clad young men from St. John's
College are called.

The news had evidently traveled far that the Navy had two new men on the
team who were expected to prove "wonders."

"A big part of this crowd is out to see you and Danny boy," Hepson
remarked to Darrin.

"Haven't they anything better to do with their time, then?" laughed Dave.

"Great Scott, man! Every one of the spectators wants to see the Navy beat
the Army this year."

"But these spectators are a heap cheered up by what they've heard about
you and Dalzell."

Dave, however, went about his work all but unconsciously. Never much
of an egotist, he declined to believe himself the star man of the
Navy eleven.

When Coach Havens called off the two teams that were to play that day,
Jetson observed that he was not called for either.

"It looks as though Darrin has queered me," muttered that midshipman
gloomily to himself. "I didn't think Darrin was quite as bad as that."

After the practice game had started, and Dave had put through the most
brilliant play that he had yet exhibited, the air rang with his name from
hundreds of throats.

"That's the way!" grumbled Jetson. "It's all Darrin now! These idiots
will forget that I was ever at Annapolis."

Jetson sulked about. After the rebuke he had received the day before from
the head coach, he did not dare to carry his sulk so far as to go and
un-tog without leave.

Towards the end of the first half of the practice game, a man on the
second team was hurt enough to be retired, and Joyce was called.

"They might have given me a chance," quivered Jetson sulkily. "I'm a lot
better player than the fool coach imagines. But, anyway, I suppose Darrin
has turned the coach and Hepson against me. I owe Darrin for that one!"

Five minutes later another player of the second eleven was retired with
an injured wrist.

"Howard!" called the coach briskly.

"Excused for to-day, sir," reported another player.

"Any one but me!" growled Jetson.

"Jetson!" sounded the head coach's heavy voice.

Midshipman Jetson started. His face flushed. Then, for an instant, a
sulky impulse seized him to reply that he did not feel up to form to-day.
But the midshipman smothered that desire and started forward.

"Here, sir," he reported.

"Take right guard on second," directed Coach Havens.

"Very good, sir."

The game was resumed. Jetson, however, had a face full of sulkiness. As
he joined the line-up his eyes rested on Dave Darrin.

"I wonder if Jetson means me any harm?" flashed through Dave's mind. In
an instant, however, he dismissed the suspicion.

"Jetson is a midshipman, a gentleman and a man of honor," thought Darrin
generously.

The whistle sounded, the ball was snapped back and passed, Darrin
received it and dashed forward to carry it past the opponents.

In a twinkling there was a staggering crash. Dave was down with the ball,
with men of two teams piled above him.

At the sound of the referee's whistle the mass disentangled itself. Dave
and Jetson were at the bottom of the heap. Jetson was the last man up,
but Dave still lay there.

"Surgeon here?" called the coach's steady voice, devoid of excitement.
But there was anxiety enough when it was seen that Midshipman Darrin
still lay face downward.

"Has Darrin been hurt--our Darrin--the great Darrin?" flew from tongue
to tongue.

"Did Jetson do it?" was another question that was instantly asked.




CHAPTER VIII

DAN TRIES HARD TO KEEP COOL


A surgeon and a hospital man were quickly on the spot, the others,
anxious as they were, drawing back considerately to give the men of
medicine room in which to work.

As Dave Darrin was gently turned over on his back it was seen that Damn's
face was a mass of blood.

"Jetson's work," grunted two or three of the players.

"He did it on purpose!"

"If he didn't, then the fellow is too clumsy to be trusted on the
gridiron, anyway."

"We must chase Jetson away from the squad."

"Silence!" remarked Head Coach Havens, very simply, though in a tone
which meant that obedience must follow.

Jetson, however, was not ignorant of the comments that were passing. His
dark face flushed hotly with anger.

"They'll blame anything on me, if I'm within a mile of the field," he
told himself sullenly.

"Is Mr. Darrin badly injured, doctor!" inquired Lieutenant-Commander
Havens of the Naval surgeon.

"I think not, sir, beyond a possibly nasty mark on the face," replied the
surgeon, as he examined and directed the hospital men. "Mr. Darrin is
merely stunned, from too hard an impact of some sort. He'll soon have his
eyes open--there they come now."

As if to back up the surgeon, Dave opened his eyes, staring curiously at
the faces within his range of vision.

"What's all this fuss about?" Dave asked quietly.

"There isn't any fuss, Mr. Darrin," replied the surgeon. "You were
stunned by the force of that scrimmage, and there's some blood on
your face."

"Let me wipe it off then, please, sir?" Dave begged. "I want to get back
in the game."

"You won't play again, Mr. Darrin," replied the surgeon.

"Not play this season?" demanded Dave in anguished amazement. "Please
don't joke with me, sir."

"Oh, you'll play, after a few days," replied the surgeon, wetting a piece
of gauze from the contents of a bottle that he had taken from his bag.
With the gauze he wiped the blood away from Darrin's cheek, revealing a
surface cut of more width than depth. Then a light bandage was put on
over the cut.

"Now, I guess you can rise all right, Mr. Darrin. This hospital man will
go over to hospital with you."

"I'm not ordered to stay there, I hope, sir?" murmured Dave anxiously.

"For two or three days, at any rate--yes," replied the Naval surgeon.
"Not because you're going to be weak, but because we've got to have you
under our eyes all the time if your face is to heal without a bad scar."

Midshipman Darrin brought his hand up in salute to the surgeon, and again
to Lieutenant-Commander Havens.

"Darrin laid up for a few days!" growled Captain Hepson, of the Navy
team, just after Dave had started. "Now, when every day's work counts!"
Then wheeling suddenly:

"How did Darrin come to get cut in that fashion, anyway! Mr. Jetson, do
you know anything about it?"

"What do you mean, sir?" demanded Jetson, bridling. "Do you insinuate
that I tried to put a scar on Mr. Darrin's face?"

"I asked you what you knew about the accident--if it were an accident?"
Hepson pursued coldly.

"Your 'if,' sir, is insulting!"

Then there came to the spot a presence that could not be treated with
anger. Lieutenant-Commander Havens was determined to know the truth.

"Mr. Jetson, had you anything in your possession, or did you wear
anything, that could cut Mr. Damn's face like that?" demanded the
head coach.

"Nothing, sir, unless the sole of one of my shoes was responsible,"
returned Jetson, barely concealing his anger under a mask of respect to
an officer of the Navy.

"Let me see your shoes; sit down on the ground first, Mr. Jetson."

The midshipman obeyed, though with no very good grace, and held up his
right shoe for the inspection of the head coach.

"Now the other shoe, Mr. Jetson. Hm! Yes; along the inner sole of
this shoe there are signs of what looks very much like blood. See
here, Mr. Hepson."

"Yes, sir; most certainly this is a streak of blood rubbed into the
leather along this rather sharp edge of the sole."

"May I suggest, Mr. Havens," hinted Jetson, "that something else may
have scratched Mr. Darrin's face, and that the blood trickled to my
shoe? I was under Mr. Darrin, somewhat, sir, in the scrimmage when the
bunch went down."

There was really nothing that could be proved, in any case, so the head
coach could only say very quietly:

"Let the practice go on, Mr. Hepson. Put Mr. Wardell temporarily in Mr.
Darrin's place on the line."

There was one in the group who had not said a word so far. But he had
been looking on, his keen eyes studying Jetson's face. That looker-on was
Midshipman Dan Dalzell, who, as the reader knows, sometimes displayed a
good deal of temper.

"Jetson," muttered Dan, as the other midshipman came over by him, "I
shall need a little talk with you at the early convenience of us both."

"Whenever you like," retorted Midshipman Jetson, flashing back a look
of defiance.

Then the game went on. By supper time the men of the brigade knew that
Darrin was getting along comfortably; that he was in no pain and that he
was in hospital only in the hope that he might be saved the annoyance of
wearing a disfiguring scar on his face throughout all his life.

"I'm afraid that some of the fellows think I purposely cut Darrin up in
that fashion," remarked Jetson to his tablemates during the evening meal.

"Don't you know that you didn't?" inquired one of the midshipmen
laconically. None of the other men at table took heed of Jetson's words.

At some of the other tables equal silence did not prevail. Midshipmen who
did not accuse or suspect Jetson of intentional wickedness expressed the
opinion that he was, at all events, careless and not a valuable member of
the football squad.

Jetson himself was wholly aware that he was more or less suspected in the
minds of many, and the knowledge made him savage.

During the few minutes recreation that followed the evening meal, Dan
Dalzell approached the sullen one, who was now standing quite alone.

"Mr. Jetson, I shall be glad to have a talk with you," announced Dan.
"Will you come to my room, or shall I go to yours?"

"Lead the way to your room, sir," replied Jetson stiffly.

Dan did so, and behind the door the two midshipmen faced each other.

"Well, sir!" demanded the visitor.

"Mr. Jetson, both times that you have played against Darrin something has
happened to him."

"Don't insinuate, Mr. Dalzell. If you anything to say, speak out
plainly, sir."

"I hardly know what to say," Midshipman Dan confessed. "As a midshipman,
your honor should be above question."

"Do you wish to remark that it isn't?"

"Why, I don't know," Dan answered frankly. "It seems a fearful thing to
say, or even to think, about a midshipman."

"Mr. Dalzell, either I did, or I didn't, intentionally injure Mr. Darrin.
Yon must think one thing or the other. If you suspect that I did the
thing intentionally, then why beat about the bush?"

"I don't want to beat about the bush, and, on the other hand, I don't
want to do you any injustice, Mr. Jetson, I thought perhaps you would be
willing to help me out by proffering your midshipman's word of honor--"

"And I," rejoined Jetson in cold anger, "consider it insulting, sir, that
I should be asked to pledge my word of honor."

"That is an extreme position to take," protested Dan. "No good man,
when appearances are against him, should be afraid to offer his word
of honor."

"Suppose," sneered Jetson, in suppressed fury, "I should go to the other
extreme, and say that I did it on purpose?"

"Then I'd knock you down, like a dog," Dan answered directly and simply,
"and next call on the men here to drive you forth from the brigade."

"If you think you could knock me down," quivered Midshipman Jetson,
"you'd better go ahead and find out whether your guess is correct.
Dalzell, you've been highly insulting, and I don't mind declaring that a
fight with you would suit me, at present, better than anything that I can
think of."

"Then you have your recourse, in a challenge," Dan hinted promptly.

"What's the need of a challenge, seconds--or of anything but fists? I
don't need them."

"The brigade claims some supervision over fights between the men here,"
Dan replied. "I intend to demand that the class take up, as a class
matter, the mishap to Darrin this afternoon."

"You--you hound!" panted Jetson, in a sudden flare-up of anger.

"Careful!" warned Dalzell, clenching his fists and facing his man
squarely.

With a snort of rage Jetson launched himself forward, aiming two
blows at Dan.

Dan parried the blows coolly, but his eyes flashed.

He had not lost control of himself, but he was warming up to the instinct
of fighting when no other course seemed open.




CHAPTER IX

A NARROW SQUEAK WITH THE O.C.


Jetson's next blow grazed Midshipman Dalzell's chin. The follow-up blow
landed on Dan's left ear.

Now Dalzell "sailed in" in earnest. He attacked forcefully and swiftly.
Jetson was forced to give ground. Dan pursued him around the room. Being
no coward, Jetson stood well up to the work, driving in for himself at
least two out of every five blows that were landed.

Rap-tap-tap! sounded on the door, but neither combatant heard.

Smash! Dan's forceful right landed on Jetson's neck, sending that
midshipman to the floor, whereupon Dalzell sprang back three paces.

"Take your time getting on to your feet," called Dan in a low voice.

"I don't want any time," snapped Jetson, leaping to his feet.

The words of both speakers were heard at the door, and the visitor who
had knocked now promptly entered.

Fortunate it was for the combatants facing each other that the intruder
was not one of the discipline officers. Had it been, both midshipmen
would have been reported at once under charges that would have borne
serious results.

Instead, it was Farley who entered, followed by Page, Hepson and Joyce.

"Wow!" uttered Midshipman Farley in a low voice. Then: "Stop this,
fellows!"

At the order, which Dan knew to be intended for his own good, the latter
turned away, letting his hands fall. Jetson, on the point of a rush,
realized that he had better desist.

"Joyce, you stand outside," ordered Farley in a low voice. "Stand right
at the door. If you see the O.C. (officer in charge) turning into this
corridor, you rap as hard as you can on the door, and we'll understand."

Midshipman Joyce wanted most badly to be a spectator to what was likely
to happen on the inner side of the door, but he had the good sense to
realize that some one must do guard duty, so he stepped outside, closing
the door after him.

"Now, gentlemen, what's this all about?" demanded Hepson in a low,
smooth voice.

"It means," cried Jetson passionately, "that I'm not going to stand any
more of this petty persecution. Everyone has been trying to pretend that
he believes I've been trying to do Darrin up so that he can't play on the
Navy football team. It's all just a mean scheme to keep me from making
the Navy eleven."

"There's no such scheme afloat, or I'd know about it," returned Hepson
coolly. "Fact is, there isn't any intention whatever of playing you on
the Navy team."

"Ah, you admit it!" snapped Midshipman Jetson, first turning white, after
which his face showed a deep crimson of humiliation. "You've already done
the dirty work."

"Fellow, stop this talk!" commanded Hepson, almost at a white heat of
resentment, "Among midshipmen and gentlemen there can be no thought of
what you term 'dirty work.' The fact that you won't play with us is due
to your uncontrollable temper. A fellow who can't control his nerves and
temper isn't fitted to play football--a game that requires cool judgment
at every moment of the game."

"Then, while you're telling me what to stop, you just stop addressing me
as 'fellow,'" cried Jetson, his lip quivering with rage.

"I'll admit that was hasty on my part," agreed Midshipman Hepson, "but it
seemed necessary to use some word to bring you to your senses. And now,
this fight, which would get you both into serious trouble if a discipline
officer came upon the scene, must cease."

"I'm afraid it can't," broke in Midshipman Dalzell with quiet dignity.
"At least, I won't agree to stopping until Mr. Jetson admits himself
satisfied. It was he who started the fight, and only his word can close
it. But we don't want you other fellows pulled into this trouble as
spectators, so we'll wait until you all withdraw."

"If you're determined to fight," rejoined Hepson, who was the only first
classman present, "then we don't want to stop the fight. We'll stay and
see it pulled off fairly. But, Dalzell, do you really want to fight?"

"I didn't want to," Dan answered. "But, now that Mr. Jetson has started
it, it must go on until he's satisfied. Up with your hands, sir, and when
you start in, I'll answer you."

The visitors skipped back, in order to leave the combatants plenty of
room for footwork. Since Jetson had heard definite announcement of the
fact that he could not hope to be called to the Navy eleven, his inward
flame of passion had burned up high. He was now ready to fight with all
the force that there was in him.

In the first few seconds his assault was so resolute that Dalzell was
forced to give ground. As he slowly retreated and shifted, Jetson drove
in more impetuously than ever.

Midshipman Dan found himself at last in a position of advantage.

"Now, hammer him, Danny boy!" advised; Farley, breathing deeply.

"Silence among the spectators," warned Hepson in a low, stern voice.
"Absolutely fair play, gentlemen, to both contestants!"

Again the showering exchange of blows. Jetson, after his late rapid
expenditure of force and nerve-energy, was now just the least bit
confused. Dan landed on one ear, and then against his enemy's chin. Both
were hard, dazing blows, though neither left a mark.

Then an uppercut and Dalzell landed on Jetson's jugular. With, a gasp the
fellow went down to the floor.

"One, two, three, four--" Hepson began counting.

"Don't bother with the count," begged Dalzell "I'll give him all the time
he wants to get to his feet."

Rap-tap-tap-tap! came a banging summons on the door, followed by
Midshipman Joyce's voice demanding:

"Are you in, Danny boy?"

Swift as a flash Hepson and Farley leaped forward, fairly snatching
Jetson, who was still half dazed, to his feet.

In the same instant Page called out cheerily:

"Come in under full steam, whatever craft is outside!"

"Brace up? Jetson! Don't look silly or dazed,", warned Hepson, in a stern
whisper. "That rap was the signal of the approach of the O.C."

Farley was industriously brushing the signs of dust from Jetson's
uniform.

"I tell you, fellows," boomed Hepson's tranquil, earnest voice, "we've
got to hustle every minute of practice time. Nothing else will give us a
chance to win."

"We haven't even a chance if Darry isn't soon back on the gridiron,"
argued Farley.

"Oh, he'll be all right soon," broke in Dan Dalzell eagerly.

Joyce had already stepped into the room, leaving the door open. Now, as
though by instinct, the midshipmen seemed aware that the O.C., who to-day
happened to be Lieutenant Cotton, U.S.N., was standing in front of the
doorway gazing in.

Instantly the middies came to the position of attention, looking straight
ahead of them.

"Good evening, gentlemen," greeted the O.C. "Is anything unusual
going on?"

"We have been discussing the football situation, sir," announced
Midshipman Hepson quite truthfully.

Had Hepson been asked if there had recently been a fight in progress he
would have answered truthfully, but he did not feel called upon to
volunteer damaging information.

"I thought I heard sounds as of some disturbance," remarked the O.C.,
looking at the young men rather sharply. "That is to say, I was under the
impression that there had been some unusual agility in operation. I heard
something that sounded like scuffling."

"Yes, sir," replied Mr. Hepson; "I think it very likely. The men on this
deck, sir, can't think of anything in these days but line-ups and
scrimmage tactics."

"It occurred to me," went on the O.C., "that there was some sound of
scuffling in this room."

"There was, sir," admitted Midshipman Hepson candidly. "There was a
species of scrimmage."

"Was it in connection with football?" inquired Lieutenant Cotton.

"Yes, sir,"--which answer, again, was wholly truthful.

"Ah, I thought I heard something like a scrimmage in the room," assented
Lieutenant Cotton. "Yet remember, gentlemen, that quarters is not the
place for football practice."

"Very good, sir; thank you, sir," replied the unmovable Hepson.

"And remember that it is now very close to the time for study call,"
continued the O.C.

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir. We are just parting to our various
quarters, sir."

"Good evening, gentlemen."

"Good evening, sir."

Lieutenant Cotton passed on down the corridor, and the midshipmen eased
themselves from the rigid position of attention.

"That was a narrow squeak," grunted Hepson. "Now, Jetson, get out ahead."

"I'll renew this argument at another time," retorted Jetson slowly, as he
crossed the floor.

"You don't need to, sir," Midshipman Hepson advised him. "Every gentleman
here will agree with me that Mr. Dalzell had the best of the affair right
up to the end. Nor is Mr. Dalzell under any obligation whatever to afford
you another meeting on the score of to-night's disagreement."

"We'll see about that," snapped Jetson, as he passed through the doorway.

At that instant the study call sounded. The others hastened away to
their quarters.

Dan Dalzell stepped over to the handbowl, washing his hands, after which
he went to his study-table and began to arrange his books.

"It's kind of lonely to sit here without old Darry," sighed Dan dismally.
"I hope he'll be here with me to-morrow evening. No; I don't either,
though. I want him to stay over in hospital until there's no chance
whatever that he'll have to wear an ugly scar through life."

It was three evenings later when Midshipman David Darrin returned to
his own quarters in Bancroft Hall. By this time the surface wound on his
face was healing nicely, and with ordinary care he would soon be without
sign of scar.

"Pills (the surgeon) told me that I'll have to be careful and not let
anything bump this face for days to come," remarked Dave, pointing to the
strip of adhesive plaster that neatly covered his injury.

"Well, you don't need to bump anything," replied Dan quietly. "Hepson
wants you on the gridiron the worst way, but he has told me that he
won't even allow you to get into togs until Pills has certified that
you're fit to play."

"It's tough," sighed Dave, then quietly began his studies.

It is a rare proceeding to send a midshipman to Coventry; a step that is
never taken save for the gravest reasons. Dan, having fought, did not
feel it necessary to bring Jetson's case before a class meeting, and
Jetson escaped Coventry. He was not cut, yet he soon discovered that the
average classmate paid no more heed to him than appeared to be necessary
for courtesy's sake.

After another week "Pills" consented to Dave Darrin's going out for
regular gridiron practice. Dave needed the work badly, for the Navy team
was now on the eve of the first game of the season.

Jetson, with no hope now of making the eleven this year, avoided the
field for a few days.

The first game of the season took place on a Saturday afternoon. The
opponent was Hanniston College. Ordinarily, in the past, Hanniston had
been an easy enough opponent, though there had been years in which
Hanniston had carried the score away from the field.

"How many of the regular team do you want to throw into the game against
Hanniston, Mr. Hepson?" inquired Lieutenant-Commander Havens the night
before the game.

"Every one of them, sir," Hepson answered the head coach. "Until we get
into a real game, we can't be sure that we've the strongest eleven.
To-morrow's game will show us if we have made any mistakes in our
selections."

Even though Hanniston was considered one of the lesser opponents, every
man in the brigade speculated with great interest, that night, on the
probable outcome of the morrow.

"Darrin will have a good chance to prove himself, a dub to-morrow,"
thought Midshipman Jetson darkly. "I hate to wish against the Navy, but
I'll cheer if Darrin, individually, ties himself up in foozle knots!"




CHAPTER X

THE GRIDIRON START


On the day of the game the midshipmen talked eagerly, and mostly of
football, through dinner in the great messhall of the brigade.

"Did any one see the Hanniston infants arrive?" demanded Page.

"Infants, eh!" called Joyce from the next table. "That shows you didn't
see the visiting eleven."

"Why? Are they of fair size?" asked Farley.

"It took two 'buses to bring the regular eleven, besides the subs and all
the howlers," retorted Joyce. "And the regular eleven, I am reliably
informed, tip the scales at four tons."

"Oh, come, now, Joyce, shave off a ton or two," protested Farley.

"I won't take off more than fifty pounds, sir," retorted Joyce with mock
stubbornness. "Say! The Hanniston fellows are enormous."

"Then they've run all to bones and haven't any brains," grinned Dan.
"After all, we don't mind mere bulk, for intelligence wins most of the
games on the gridiron."

"As to their intelligence, I can't say," admitted Joyce. "At any rate,
from the glimpse that I got of the Hans, I should say that they average
two years older than our men."

"Let's throw up the sponge, then," proposed Dalzell demurely. "If we
can't beat the visitors what's the use of playing them? It isn't even
necessary to get into togs. We can send a note to the referee, and he can
award the game to Hanniston."

"Fine!" broke in Hepson scornfully.

"However, I guess we aren't going to have any cinch to-day," joined
in Midshipman Waite, from another table. "I have word from outside,
by the way."

"What word?"

"Well, the Hanniston fellows have brought over some money with which to
back up the howls they're making for their team. They're offering odds of
ten to six that Hanniston wins."

"They stand to lose a lot of money," grinned Hepson.

"But here's the funny part of it," continued Waite. "You know, when the
townspeople in Annapolis think they have a really good thing on us, they
cover the money of visitors in any wagers on the games."

"Then here's hoping that the Annapolis townspeople win a lot to-day,"
laughed Midshipman Hepson.

"Yes, but," returned Waite, "what I hear from town is that the Annapolis
townspeople have been driven to cover; that they aren't taking up the
offers of the visiting Hanniston boys."

"Too bad!" sighed Dave Darrin. "And Annapolis needs the money so
badly, too."

"Are we going to win?" asked Waite bluntly.

"Too early to tell you," replied Hepson coolly. "Ask me at supper
to-night. But the townies won't wager any money on us this year, eh?"

"The Annapolis people have put up some, but not much," replied Waite.

"We're going to win, just the same," announced Dan Dalzell.

"Sure?" questioned several voices.

"Oh, yes! It's all settled now," laughed Midshipman Waite. "I've been
waiting for Danny boy to tell us. Now, we know--we've heard from the
hot-air meter."

There was a laugh in which Dan didn't join readily, though his face
reddened considerably. Midshipman Dalzell was one of those who always
believed that the Navy must win, just because it was the Navy. Some of
the other midshipmen didn't go quite as far as that in their confidence.

"Better not call Danny boy names," advised Dave Darrin gravely. "He
might be sulking at just the time when we need him this afternoon."

"That would be unmilitary," retorted Mr. Waite.

"Oh, no," said Dave lightly. "Even as good a soldier as Achilles sulked
in his tent, you know."

"Achilles? What class was he in, then?" demanded Waite. "I don't remember
the name."

"He was in a class of his own, at the siege of Troy," volunteered Farley.

"Troy, N.Y.?" inquired Waite.

"If you keep on, Waite," muttered Farley, "someone will have to give you
an ancient history book at Christmas. You don't seem well posted on
Greek tales."

"Don't have to be, thank goodness," returned Waite, helping himself to
another piece of beef. "Greek isn't on the list here."

There was abundant time for rest before the game. The players and
subs, for the Navy team, however, were early at dressing quarters.
Jetson hadn't been called as one of the subs., so he walked sulkily
and alone through the grounds while most of the midshipmen strolled,
about in groups.

Half an hour before the time for the game the spectators' seats held
fair-sized crowds. At that time the Naval Academy Band began to play,
just to keep the waiting ones more patient.

Ten minutes later the Hanniston players came on to the field at a slow
trot. Instantly the Hanniston howlers in the audience began to whoop up
the noise. The midshipmen joined in cheers, and then the band took up the
music again.

At first sight of the visitors, some of the Navy people began to have
their doubts about victory. The Hannistons surely were "bulky." In size
and age, the visitors were as formidable as any of the college elevens.

Many of the midshipmen, too, recalled what they had heard Waite say
at table. It seemed little wonder that the popular odds were against
the middies.

But the band, having played its welcome to the Hannistons, who were now
chasing a ball over the field in practice, almost immediately switched
off into the strains of "See, the Conquering Hero Comes!"

All doubts were dispelled for the moment at least, as all the Navy people
present let loose a tremendous cheer in which the midshipmen spectators
led, for now Captain Hepson was leading his own men on to the field, the
hope of the Navy that day.

"Hepson! Hepson!" went up rousingly from the brigade.

"Darrin! Darrin!" howled others.

"Dalzell!"

"Darrin! Darrin!"

"Hepson must enjoy hearing more noise for Darrin than for himself,"
reflected Jetson moodily.

But Hepson, big in body, heart and mind, was intent only on victory. It
did not even occur to the captain of the Navy eleven that Darrin was
getting more of a reception than himself. Hepson was simply and heartily
glad to find himself supported by two such promising gridiron men as
Darrin and Dalzell.

"Remember, Darry, how much we're backing on you to-day," muttered Hepson,
after another round of yells for Dave had been given.

"I can't do everything, and perhaps not much," smiled Dave. "But I'll do
my level best to do all that you call upon me for at my own little spot
in the line."

A din of Hanniston yells was now smiting the air. Uncle Sam's midshipmen
waited with patience and courtesy, but when their turn came they volleyed
forth four times as much as the visiting howlers could supply.

"I hope Darry is in great form to-day," murmured the midshipman seated
next to Jetson.

"He looks to be in as good shape as ever doesn't he?" asked Jetson
sullenly.

"Oh, I forgot," exclaimed the other. "You don't like Darry any
too well."

"I've nothing against him that would make me want to see him in bad
form," grumbled Jetson. "I'm a Navy man and I don't want to see any but
Navy victories."

The toss had just been made, the visitors winning the kick-off. At a sign
from a Navy officer in the field the leader silenced his band and a hush
fell over the gridiron and the seats of the onlookers.




CHAPTER XI

THE BAND COULDN'T MAKE ITSELF HEARD


Within five minutes the Hanniston players had established the fact that
they were not only bulky, but quick and brainy. In fact, though the Navy
promptly blocked the ball and got it, the middies were unable to make
headway against the college men. Then Hanniston took the ball, fighting
slowly but steadily toward the Navy goal line.

"I don't see Darrin making any wonderful plays," thought Jetson to
himself. He was gloomy over seeing the Navy outplayed, but secretly glad
that the spectators had as yet found no occasion to shout themselves
hoarse over Midshipman Dave's work.

Outside of the brigade the other spectators in the Navy seats felt
themselves tinder a cloud of increasing gloom.

"From all the talk I had expected more of Mr. Darrin," remarked an
officer's wife-to her husband.

"Darrin has a fearful Hanniston line against him," replied the officer.
"Captain Hepson realizes that, too, and he isn't pushing Darrin as hard
as you might wish to see."

"We're going to be beaten, aren't we?" asked another Navy onlooker.

It was as yet too early to predict safely, though all the appearances
were that the visitors would do whatever scoring was to be done to-day.

Yet, even when they felt themselves outclassed, the middies hung to their
opponents with dogged perseverance. It took nearly all of the first half
for the Hannistons to place the Navy goal in final, desperate danger.

Then, of a sudden, while the Hannistons worked within a dozen yards of
the Navy goal line, the college boys made a new attack, the strongest
they had yet shown.

There was a bumping crash as the lines came together, at the Navy's
right. Farley and Page were swept clear off their feet and the assailants
swept onward. Another clever attack, backed by a ruse, and one of the
college boys started on a dead run with the ball. In vain the Navy's
backs tried to stop him. The Hanniston boys successfully interfered for
their runner, and the ball was touched down behind the goal line.

Gone were the cheers that had been ascending from the brigade. All the
Navy crowd gasped in dismay. The ball was carried back, kicked, and
Hanniston had scored six points.

"Ha, ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha, ha--Hanniston! Wow!" went up derisively from
the visiting howlers.

"Hepson! Hepson! Pull us out!" came the appeal.

"Darry! Darry! Rush it!"

As the two elevens were lining up for another start the time-keeper's
whistle sounded the end of the first half of the game.

Gloomy, indeed, were those who had hoped to see the Navy win. There were
no cheers, save from the visitor-howlers. The best that the leader of the
band could do, was to swing his baton and start in the strains of "'Twas
Never Thus in Olden Times."

"What do you make of the enemy, Hepson?" inquired Joyce, as the middies
rested at the side lines.

"We haven't made anything of them yet, but we've got to make wrecks of
'em before the last half is over," grunted the captain of the Navy.

"How are we going to do it?" asked another player.

"By just hanging at them with sheer grit," replied the captain gravely.
"Fellows, they've beaten us so far, but they haven't worn us out any. Big
fellows as the Hannistons are, they may not have the endurance to hang to
us through all of the coming half."

"That makes me remember a song I heard when on leave this year," grinned
Page. "A part of it runs:

'Said the ant to the elephant,
"Who are ye shoving?
There's one wide river to cross!"'

"And we're the elephants?" inquired Farley in mock innocence.

"Do we look it?" demanded Page in disgust.

"Remember, fellows," warned Hepson, as the signal summoned both teams
back to the field, "many a hopeless game has been won in the last five
minutes. But don't wait. Hammer the college boys from the start!"

"Dalzell and I can stand hard work and pounding whenever you get ready to
put it on us," Dave announced to Hepson. "Don't try to spare us any. Both
of us would sooner be carried away on stretchers than see the Navy lose
its first game to a minor college."

The game was resumed. For ten minutes the Navy played mainly on the
defensive. Indeed, to the spectators it seemed all that the middies could
do against such big fellows as the visitors.

Just after that, however, Hepson passed the silent signal, and then the
midshipmen hurled themselves into the fray to test out all the endurance
that the Hanniston players might possess.

Many a college boy on the opposing line wondered where these smaller men
in the Navy togs had obtained all the fight that they now showed. The big
fellows didn't seem able to stand it long. The Navy had the ball, and now
slowly fought down toward the college goal. Onlookers in the Navy seats
began to stand up, to watch breathlessly, and be ever ready to cheer.

"Hurl little Darry in!" yelled someone hoarsely in a momentary lull in
the noise.

But Hepson, watching every chance with tigerish eyes, was yet
cool-headed, as a football general should be. Twice he used Darrin to
advance the ball, and each time Dave gained a few yards. The third time,
wearied by pounding his head against a human stone wall, Dave failed to
gain more than half a yard. Watchful Hepson sent the ball, after the next
snap-back, over to the Navy's right.

The time of the second half was slipping away, and it now looked as
though the middies might gradually have won by the steady, bull-dog
quality of their tactics.

Nearer and nearer to the college goal line the team of smaller men fought
the pigskin, until at last they had it within six yards of the Hanniston
fortress. But at this point the visitors stayed further progress long
enough to have the pigskin ovoid come to them by a block.

The situation was desperate. Hanniston could not get the ball away from
its present locality, and in dread the college captain sent the ball back
of his own line to a safety.

This counted two for Annapolis, but it also set the ball back twenty-five
yards from the college line.

"Block! block! block--if you can't fight the ball back to the Navy goal,"
was the word that Captain Hart, of the college team, sent along his own
line. "Don't be too reckless. Just fight to keep the Navy from scoring."

"Hepson! Hepson!" came, appealingly, from the seats, as the two elevens
lined up at the twenty-five-yard line.

"Darry! O Darry!"

Grim determination written on their faces, eleven middies awaited the
signal, then hurled themselves forward like tigers.

The ball came to Dave, who started with it. Dan Dalzell, watching his
chum with cat-like eyes, followed and made the best interference that he
had offered that day.

Five and a half yards won!

As center bent for the snap back, a "fake" signal was called by the Navy
quarter-back.

Just as the ball started, the Navy players back of the line started
toward the right The Hanniston men, tired now, but full of grit as ever,
moved to block. The Navy gained a second or two, for the pass was really
to the left, and again Darrin had the pigskin clutched tightly as he
started to ran and deceive. Again Dan and the others of the interference
sustained their idol and champion. Dave went soon to earth, but he had
forced the ball another six yards!

"Darry--oh, Darry!"

"One more play and over the line!"

"You've got the elephants going at last."

"Rush 'em!"

"A touchdown saves us!"

Dan's face was flushed, Dave's white and set as the line again formed for
the next play.

Quarter-back Joyce held up his head, watching the field like a mouse
seeking escape.

Then came the emergency signal: "Nine--fourteen--twenty-two--three!"

Back came the pigskin while the middies seemed to throw their
bodies toward the right. It looked as though they were trying to
mask this feint.

The ball was in motion. But Dave had it, instead of Farley. Instantly the
Navy swung its entire line toward the left, for this was the grand rush,
the die on which everything was cast!

Dave was darting forward, and never had his interference backed
him better.

Before Midshipman Darrin stood one of the big college men, who looked
fully equal to stopping the midshipman anywhere and at any time.

Nor did Darrin try to dodge this bulky player. Instead, Dave, as he
hurled himself at the opponent, sprang high into the air, as though he
had some desperate plan of leaping over the barrier.

Braced on his legs, his two feet solidly planted, this Hanniston man felt
ready for any shock that Dave Darrin could bring against him.

But Darrin did not touch him. On the contrary, the Navy's hope fell to
the ground, just short of the blocking opponent.

Like a flash Dave went between that pair of solidly braced, wide-spread
legs. In a wriggle that looked flash-like to the breathless beholders,
Darrin was through. He had taken desperate chances, when he went down, of
being beset, end forced to hold the pigskin where he had fallen.

But now Dave was up and running, and the player who had sought to block
him was far in the rear.

The whole Navy force hurled itself around this point, battering down the
startled opposition. With fast-coming breath Dave's comrades pushed him
along breaking down all opposition--until Dave, with a sudden, wild
dash, was over the line for a touchdown.

"Darry did it! Darry did it!"

For fifteen seconds the uproar was deafening. The college players looked
stunned, while their howlers, over on the visitors' seats, seemed to
shrink within their coats.

"Seven to six!"

"Make it eight!"

Dave Darrin had borne the brunt of battle. Now his eyes were flashing
with excitement.

"I'd like you to try the kick for goal, Darry, but I don't know," called
Hepson in his ear. "You may be about used up."

"Let me have the kick. I'm not afraid," Dave half boasted, for now he
could think of nothing but victory.

"All right. Take it," agreed Hepson.

Dave Darrin did take the kick. Never had he made a better one. The ball
went straight and true between the goal-posts.

The band-leader held his baton poised, but the Navy spectators broke into
such a riot of joy that he let the baton fall inertly.

"What's the use?" he asked the musicians.

Again the players lined up, with the Navy; score eight to six.

Ten seconds later, the whistle blew, announcing the end of the game.




CHAPTER XII

JOYCE IS BITTEN BY THE TROUBLE BUG


The game was over. The giant visitors had departed, and the Naval Academy
atmosphere appeared to be rarefied.

Most of the members of the brigade were back in Bancroft Hall, and this
being late Saturday afternoon, study was over save for those who felt the
need of devoting extra time to their books.

Farley, Page and Joyce had dropped into the room occupied by Dave and
Dan.

"Hepson was nearly crazy this afternoon," remarked Joyce, laughing.

"Then he had an easy way of concealing the fact," Dave replied. "I call
him a cool football captain, with plenty of judgment and patience."

"Yes; but I happen to know that he was badly upset," returned Joyce.
"Twice he sent me the wrong signal about the numbers to call, and he
admitted it afterward. He was afraid, before the game was twenty minutes'
old, that we were up against a big walloping."

"Oh, well," Darrin replied, with a shrug of his shoulders, "the Navy is
just as used as the Army is to being walloped in athletics. The trouble
with the Army and Navy teams, in athletics, is that we're always pitted
against college men who are bigger and older than we are. It's just about
as unfair to us, as it would be unfair to High School teams if we played
against High Schools instead of colleges. We could wallop High School
outfits at either baseball or football, and the only wonder is that the
Army and Navy win as many games as they do against the colleges. College
teams have more time for training than the Army or Navy teams do."

"What are you going to do to-night, Darry?" Joyce asked presently.
"The hop?"

"No," Dave answered almost shortly. The truth was that he was no
"hop-fiend" or "fusser." Except when Belle Meade was at Annapolis to go
to a hop with him, Darrin had little liking for the ball.

"I don't intend to hop either," Joyce continued. "Now, are you well
enough up in grease to get town leave for the evening?"

"Grease" means good standing on the conduct report.

"Yes," nodded Dave. "Danny and I could easily get town leave, if we had a
good excuse. But, of course, it's out of the question to get leave merely
to roam the streets. We'd have to explain where we were going, and then
go there."

"There's a show on at the theatre," broke in Dalzell.

"Yes," nodded Dave. "But do you know what kind of show it is?"

"No."

"It's a burlesque show, brought here to win away the half dollars of the
sailors on the ships here. We'd stand very little chance of getting leave
to go to that kind of show."

"But I want to go somewhere, away from the Academy grounds, just for a
couple of hours," sighed Joyce.

"I'd like to go also," agreed Dave. "But where could we go? That is, to
what place or for what purpose could we go that would be approved by
the O.C.?"

This proved to be a poser indeed.

"Fact is," Joyce went on, "I'm so desperate for a little change that I
don't believe I'd funk at taking French over the Academy wall. What do
you two say?"

"That dog won't bark," Dave retorted.

"Oh, you greaser!" Joyce shied at him.

"Well, I am greasing to the extent that I won't imperil my chances of
keeping in the service by taking any French leave," Darrin replied
steadily. "So, Joyce, I'm afraid a trip to town to-night is out of the
question, unless you can think up some plan to get by the O.C."

"How are you on Frenching the wall, Danny boy?" queried Joyce.

"Just about as big a muff as Darry," Dan returned dryly.

Joyce remained for some moments in deep meditation. He wanted to go into
Annapolis, and he didn't care about going on a lonesome expedition. The
more he thought the better Joyce realized how hard it was to frame a
request that would get past the O.C.

"I have it," spoke up Dalzell at last. "We'll ask leave to run up to
Baltimore to consult an oculist."

"You idiot!" cried Joyce impatiently. None of us need spectacles."

"Besides, there's no train running to Baltimore as late as this,"
added Dave.

"No good, then," sighed Dalzell, "and my inventiveness is gone."

"I'm afraid we'll have to French it over the wall," insisted Joyce.

"You'll French it alone, then," Dave declared. "I draw the line at
leaving the grounds without official permission."

"Prig!" grunted Joyce under his breath. Then he started up, his eyes
shining with the light of a new resolve.

"Got an idea?" asked Dan.

"Yes," said Joyce. "And you'll call me a fool if I let you in on it now.
Wait until I see how it works."

With that he hastened from the room. Darrin drew down a book from the
bookshelf, and from between its pages extracted a letter from Belle,
which he began to read for the dozenth time.

A few minutes passed. Then Joyce knocked, next entered the room with
jubilation apparent in his face.

"I've fixed it," he cried. "All you fellows have to do is to go to the
O.C. and make your request in person."

"Request for what?" Dave asked, looking up as he folded the letter.

"I told the O.C., plumply, that we were so tired of being on this side of
the wall that we felt desperate for a change. I reminded him that we are
all three in the top grease grade, and told him that we wanted permission
to take a short stroll through Annapolis to-night. O.C. hemmed and hawed,
and said it was a most unusual request for the evening, though proper
enough for Saturday afternoon. At last he called up the commandant of
midshipmen, stated the case and asked if he might grant the permission.
The com. was game and said all right. So all that remains is for you two
to go to the O.C. and make your request in person. Scat! Get in motion!
Start! I'll wait here until I hear that you've put it through."

"Of course, Joyce, you're not putting up a joke on us?" demanded Darrin,
looking keenly at the Navy quarter-back.

"On my word I'm not."

"Come on, Danny boy," called Dave, starting, and Dalzell followed
readily enough. They entered the office of the O. C., saluted and stated
their case.

"It is, of course, a somewhat unusual request to grant for the evening,"
replied Lieutenant-Commander Denham. "However, I can grant it if you will
both assure me that you will take extreme pains to keep out of trouble of
any kind, and that you will not enter the theatre or any other resort
that would be bad judgment for a midshipman to enter."

"As to that, sir," Darrin replied, "I long ago resolved not to take any
chances whatever of breaking any disciplinary requirements that would
bring me demerits. I am working hard to get through the academic
requirements, sir, and I don't intend to pass the mental ordeals here and
then find that I can't keep on as a midshipman just because I have too
many demerits against me. I think, sir, you may feel assured I shall not
allow myself to do anything that would bring me under discipline."

"Your resolution was and is a most excellent one, Mr. Darrin," replied
the O.C. "Mr. Dalzell, do you share Mr. Darrin's determination as to
keeping out of trouble in Annapolis this evening?"

"Emphatically, sir."

"Then the desired permission is granted. You will enter proper report as
to the time of leaving and returning."

Thanking the O.C. and saluting, Dave and Dan hastened back to Joyce.

"Not so difficult, was it?" demanded the Navy quarter-back.

"It was a whole lot better than planning to French the trip," retorted
Darrin. "Now, we shall leave here to-night feeling perfectly safe as to
our place on the pap."

"Pap" is the sheet on which the day's report of midshipmen conduct is
kept.

"I'll admit that caution is sometimes worth while," laughed Joyce.

Soon after the call for supper formation sounded. The meal hour was a
merry one that evening. The afternoon's game was naturally the main
subject for conversation.

Dave naturally came in for much praise for the way he had saved the Navy
game, but this flattery bored him. Darrin did not in the least imagine
that he was a wonder on the gridiron. In fact, the game being past and
won, he did not take any further interest in it. Such thought as he now
gave to football concerned the games still to come.

Immediately after the meal the three midshipmen reported their departure
into Annapolis. Then they went to the main gate, passed through and
strolled on up Maryland Avenue into State Circle.

"I'm sorry we promised not to go to the theatre," murmured
Midshipman Joyce.

"I'm not," retorted Dave. "Without that promise we wouldn't have secured
the leave."

"But what are we going to do," demanded the dissatisfied one, "now that
we are outside the grounds?"

"We can't do much, except what we came out to do," Dave reminded Joyce.
"We can just walk about and stretch our legs, look in at a few store
windows and make a few trifling purchases that won't exhaust our small
store of pocket money."

"Exciting prospect!" remarked Joyce.

"Well, what ails you?" demanded Dalzell with unusual quietness. "What do
you want to do? Something that will get us into big trouble with the O.C.
and the com.?"

"Joyce can't tell you what he longs for, for he doesn't know himself,"
explained Dave.

"But I know. He wants to do something irregular; anything that is
slightly in breach of the regulations--something that will get him hauled
up before the O.C. and the pap."

"You're a wonderful guesser," laughed Joyce. "Well, I'll admit that I'm
simply restless, and that anything that will stir my blood and my liver
will fill the bill. I'm afraid I'm so depraved to-night that even a
street-fight wouldn't go against the grain."

"You'd better forget it," advised Darrin quietly. "It's a dangerous frame
of mind for a future officer and gentleman, who must acquire control over
himself before he can be fit to command men."

"You talk like a padre!" (chaplain) uttered Joyce in disgust "Can't you
forget, for one evening, that you're a midshipman?"

"No; I don't want to," Dave returned quietly.

"Prig!" uttered Joyce again, and this time he did not take the pains to
speak under his breath. But Darrin only smiled indulgently.

By way of simple dissipation the three midshipmen went to a drug store,
enjoying themselves with ice cream sodas. Soon after they found
themselves in a Main Street bookstore, looking over post cards. They
could, however, find no new ones, and so left without buying.

"And there's the theatre right over there!" sighed Joyce.

"It would be against our word as midshipmen and gentlemen to visit it,"
Dave urged. "Come on, Joyce; we'll turn into one of the very quiet side
streets and stroll along. Then we'll be out of temptation."

Accordingly they went to one of the all but deserted side streets of the
better sort.

"There's a comrade ahead of us," said Dave in an undertone presently, as
he made out the uniform half a block away.

Hardly had he spoken when a door opened and a young man in evening
clothes came lightly down the steps. At once the unknown midshipman
wheeled and sprang at the young civilian. There was a swift interchange
of blows, over almost as soon as it started, for the unknown midshipman
speedily knocked down the man he had assaulted. Nor did the civilian get
up at once. Instead, he bawled lustily for help.

Joyce made a move to spring forward, but Dave caught him by the arm.

"Don't get forward, Joyce. If you do, you'll probably recognize the
midshipman. Then you'll have to report his name."

Answering the calls for help five other young men ran out of the same
house. The midshipman disdained to flee and stood his ground.

"We'll teach you!" snarled one of the newly arrived civilians, raising
his cane as though to bring it down on the midshipman's shoulders.

The midshipman, like a flash, wrenched the cane from the other's
hands and began to lay it lustily about him. The whole crowd,
therefore, including the young man who had first been knocked down,
joined in the attack.

"That's too much like cowardice, and we're bound to go to the rescue of a
comrade!" muttered Dave Darrin, his eyes blazing. "Come on, fellows--and
be sure not to recognize that comrade!"

In a moment the fight was somewhat more equal. Darrin, Dalzell and Joyce
were all accomplished and disciplined boxers. They closed with the crowd
around the midshipman.

Crack! thump! bump! Midshipman blows landed heavily and rapidly. The
civilians were soon worsted and scattered.

"Whoever you are, comrade," muttered Dave in a low tone, wheeling the
unknown midshipman around, "don't look our way and don't give us any
chance to recognize you. Scoot!"

"Po-o-o-lice!" lustily yelled one of the crowd of defeated civilians.




CHAPTER XIII

HEPSON IS "SOME WILD"


"Police!" bawled others of the civilians, taking up the hue and cry.

That spelled serious trouble if Dave and his friends should tarry there.
Midshipmen are in no sense free from arrest by the civil authorities, and
it is likely to fare hard with Uncle Sam's young sailors if they are
taken in by the civil authorities.

"Come along," muttered Darrin, leading the way. He did not run, but he
certainly walked fast, and in a direction away from Main Street. His two
companions followed him. The "unknown midshipman," taking Darrin's shrewd
hint, had already made himself invisible.

After the prompt drubbing they had received, not one of the young
civilians felt any desire to follow these husky midshipmen.

The police in Annapolis are few in number, and so do not always hear a
street summons. In this instance Dave and his friends turned a corner and
were soon away from the scene of the late affair.

"Now, I hope you've had all the excitement you want, Joyce," Dave
remarked dryly.

"Like most good things, it didn't last long," complained Joyce.

"Oh, it isn't over yet, by any means. We've the O.C. and the com. to
face," grumbled Darrin. "But we couldn't stand by and see one of our own
punched by a whole gang."

"Of course we couldn't, but why fuss about the com, and his satellite,
the O.C.? They'll never hear of this."

"I think there's a big chance that we shall hear of it," retorted Dave.
"That's why I advised you not to look at the unknown midshipman closely
enough to be able to recognize him in the dark."

"I don't know who he was," admitted Dan candidly.

"Nor do I," supplemented Joyce.

"Then, whoever he is, the chap stands little chance of being caught
unless he voluntarily announces himself."

Presumably the police didn't answer the hail of the young civilians.
At any rate, Darrin and his friends heard nothing more of the matter
while in town.

But when they returned to Bancroft Hall the trio were met by this
announcement:

"The officer in charge wishes to see you in his office."

"It's coming," warned Dave, as he and his companions turned and went in
to report themselves.

"There has been a disturbance in Annapolis," stated Lieutenant-Commander
Denham. "Mr. Darrin, were you in it?"

"I was in one kind of disturbance, sir," Darrin answered at once.

"Of what kind?"

"Several civilians attacked a man in a midshipman's uniform. I went
to his aid."

"And attacked some civilians?"

"Yes, sir."

"Mr. Dalzell, Mr. Joyce, did you also take part in that affair?"
inquired the O.C.

"Yes, sir," answered both midshipmen.

"For what reason?"

"Because, sir," answered Joyce, "several civilians pounced upon one man
who wore a midshipman's uniform."

"And you three rushed in and pounded some civilians?" asked the
O.C. coolly.

"I'm afraid we did, sir," answered Dave, who found the
lieutenant-commander's gaze turned on him.

"Who was that other midshipman, Mr. Darrin?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Didn't you recognize him when you went to his aid?"

"I did not, sir."

"Did either of you gentlemen recognize the midshipman to whose rescue
you rushed?"

Dan and Joyce replied in the negative.

"Tell me the circumstances of the attack, Mr. Darrin. Take pains to make
your statement so exact that you will not have to amend the statement
afterwards."

Darrin told the affair as it had happened.

"Hm! And none of you recognized the fourth midshipman?" pursued the O.C.
"That, in itself, was strange, Mr. Darrin, was there any agreement among
you three that you would not recognize your comrade?"

"Not exactly an agreement, sir," Dave confessed candidly. "At the
distance that we were from the scene before we rushed in the darkness
prevented our seeing the face of the unknown midshipman. As we started
forward, I will admit that I warned Mr. Dalzell and Mr. Joyce not to look
at the other midshipman's face."

"So that you might answer truthfully, if asked, that you did not
know the man?"

"Yes, sir; that was my reason for so advising Mr. Dalzell and Mr. Joyce."

"That was what might be termed extraordinary foresight, Mr. Darrin,"
remarked Lieutenant-Commander Denham ironically.

"Thank you, sir," answered Dave as innocently as though he did not
understand that he had just been rebuked. The O.C. frowned.

"Mr. Darrin, since I assume you to have been the ringleader of your trio,
did you give that wonderful advice to your companions just so that you
might be able to refuse any aid to the Naval Academy authorities in
running this matter to the ground?"

"Yes, sir," Dave answered very frankly.

"You wished, then," demanded the O.C. sternly, "to hinder the course of
justice at the Naval Academy?"

"It, at least, sir, did not strike me at the time quite in that light."

"Yet something was happening on the streets of Annapolis that you knew
would be very thoroughly investigated if it were reported here, and so
you took precautions against being able to aid the authorities in the
investigation?"

"I admit the truth of that, sir."

"Mr. Darrin, why did you feel called upon to try to defeat the
investigation that you foresaw, and which is now under way?"

"Because, sir, it is contrary to the spirit of the brigade of midshipmen
to carry tales against each other. I did not care to act contrary to
that spirit."

"Perhaps it would be more accurate to say that you did not dare,"
observed the O.C. half sneeringly.

"That way of stating it would be true, sir. I do not care to turn
informer against my comrades."

"Yet you think you possess the courage to become one of our fighting
officers in the future, if the need arises?

"Of my courage as a fighting man, sir, I am unable to form any opinion
until that courage has been properly tested."

"But you are afraid to inform the authorities of the identity of comrades
who commit serious offenses?"

"As it is contrary to the spirit of the brigade, sir, I would be more
afraid of my own contempt than of any other punishment."

Lieutenant-Commander Denham appeared to lose some of his patience
presently.

"I wonder," he remarked brusquely, "why you midshipmen cannot learn to
accept some of your sense of honor from the officers who have seen so
much more service than you. I wonder why you will go on formulating your
own canons of honor, even when such beliefs sometimes result in the
dismissal of midshipmen from the service."

The three midshipmen, not being questioned, remained silent.

"And so not one of you has the slightest idea of the original nature of
the quarrel in which you so readily took part? And none of you has any
idea of the identity of the fourth midshipman concerned in this
evening's work?"

"I have not, sir," replied Midshipmen Darrin, Dalzell and Joyce in
one breath.

"Very good, gentlemen. The matter will be investigated further. You will
go to your quarters and remain there. You will take part in the meal
formations, but in no drills or recitations until you are further
advised. And you will not leave Bancroft Hall without direct orders from
competent authority."

The three midshipmen saluted, turned and left the office, going to their
own rooms.

"Wow!" muttered Dan as soon as the chums had closed their door on
themselves.

"We shall surely have enough to think of," smiled Dave wearily.

"Oh, aye!" agreed Dalzell.

"Oh, well, if we're going to skip some recitations we'll need all the
more study," sighed Dave, seating himself at his study table and drawing
his books toward him.

But he was not permitted to study long in peace. Word of the affair had
spread, and Hepson presented himself at Darrin's quarters in great
consternation.

"Great!" mocked Hepson. "Just when we've discovered that the Navy has a
dub team without you two, or next door to one, then you two go and get
ordered to quarters. You'll not turn out with us Monday; you may not
practice with us through the week or play in our next game. Fine!"

"Perhaps," grinned Dan, "if we two are so important to Navy prestige as
you appear to imagine, we shall not be kept long from the gridiron."

"Dalzell," retorted Hepson impatiently, "you're a second classman, and
you've been here long enough to know that no considerations of discipline
will be made to stand aside in order that the Navy may have a better
athletic team of any kind. Nothing here is sacrificed to athletics, and
you surely must know it."

"Then I guess we're dished," confessed Dalzell mournfully.

"A fine way for you two to go and use the football squad! Great!"
insisted Hepson bitterly.

"Had you been with us, Hepson, you'd have done just as we did. I know
that," Dave replied.

"Well, you are calling me a bit," agreed Hepson. "After all, I don't know
just what it was that got you both into this scrape. Some kind of fight,
or row, in town, was all I heard."

"Then I'll tell you about it," Darrin went on quietly.

"Well, I really don't see how you could have helped it," agreed
Midshipman Hepson after he had listened. "But that doesn't save us any.
We're out our two best line players and our quarter-back."

"Oh, we'll be restored to the squad as soon as the sentence has been
pronounced," predicted Dan Dalzell.

"Even if you're bounced out of the Naval Academy?" demanded Hepson
savagely.

"It--it won't be as bad as that," faltered Dan.

"Perhaps not," agreed Hepson, "though you must understand that the charge
of assaulting civilians is not a light matter. You can be dismissed for
it, you know."

"Yes," nodded Dave Darrin, and then Danny boy went several shades
less ruddy.

"Here's hoping for the best," grumbled Hepson, holding out his hand to
each in turn. "And, for the love of Mike, keep out of all further
trouble! Don't look cross-eyed--once--until after November!"




CHAPTER XIV

TWO SIDES OF A STORY


One circumstance puzzled all of the midshipmen who first heard of the
affair. The fourth, and unknown, midshipman, who had waited outside of
the house and assaulted the first civilian, must have known the latter or
it was not likely that he would have committed the assault. That being
the case, it was just likely that the civilian knew and had recognized
the unknown midshipman who had knocked him down. Such an attack must have
followed some prior dispute.

Then, since the civilians had undoubtedly made complaint to the Naval
Academy authorities, how had they been able to get out of supplying the
name of the midshipman unknown to Dave and his friends?

Right after breakfast the next morning Dave Darrin and his friends of the
evening before were summoned before the commandant of midshipmen. By that
officer they were questioned very rigidly, but they had nothing to add to
their statement of the night before. They were therefore ordered back to
their quarters, with permission only to attend chapel that forenoon.

Just after chapel, however, the fourth midshipman discovered himself to
the officer in charge. He was Midshipman Totten, of fourth class.

Totten admitted that it was he who had waited outside of the house in
question, and who had knocked down the civilian. He further gave the name
of that civilian, who was the son of one of the prominent officials of
the state government.

"Why did you strike him, Mr. Totten?" demanded the officer in charge.

"Because, sir, the fellow had grossly insulted a young lady whom I felt
bound to avenge."

"Who is the young lady?"

"Am I obliged, sir, to give her name in the matter?"

"It will be better, Mr. Totten. You may be sure that your statement will
be treated with all the consideration and confidence possible."

Totten thereupon explained that the young woman in question was his
cousin. Totten, who was an orphan, had been brought up by an aunt who had
but one child of her own, the young woman in question. When Totten had
won an appointment to the Naval Academy, the aunt and cousin had decided
to move to Annapolis sooner than have their little family broken up.

"How did you come to be outside the Academy grounds last evening, Mr.
Totten? You were not on leave to go outside."

"I took the chances and Frenched it, sir," confessed Totten candidly. "I
knew that I could not get leave, and so did not ask it. But I felt that
the fellow had to be punished, no matter at what hazard to myself."

"Then you considered the avenging of the insult to your cousin as being a
matter of greater importance than your future career in the Navy?"

Midshipman Totten paled, but he answered bravely:

"Yes, sir; and at the same time a Naval career means nearly everything in
the world to me."

Lieutenant-Commander Morrill, the new officer in charge, felt that it was
difficult to rebuke a future Naval officer for defending from insult a
woman dear to him.

"I shall have to pass this matter on to the commandant of midshipmen,"
decided the O.C. "Mr. Totten, you will go to your quarters and remain
there, until further orders, save only for meal formations."

"Very good, sir," replied the fourth classman saluting.

"That is all, Mr. Totten."

"Very good, sir."

Within half an hour, Dave, Dan and Joyce knew that the unknown midshipman
had come forward and announced himself, but they did not hear the story
of the reason back of Totten's attack. They heard, however, that Totten
had not heard of their predicament until just after chapel call.

The commandant of midshipmen sent for Mr. Totten. That official, however,
after hearing the story, felt that the matter was one for the
superintendent. The superintendent did not send for Totten and question
him, but sent, instead, for the civilians who had lodged the complaint
the evening before. He sent also for young Crane the man Totten had
named, and who had not been among the complainants of the evening before.

"Mr. Crane," announced the superintendent, "you know, of course, the name
of the midshipman who assaulted and knocked you down before the other
three midshipmen interfered in the matter?"

"Er--er--possibly I do," confessed Crane, reddening.

"Mr. Crane, if you wish us to deal frankly with you, you must accord the
same treatment to the officials of the Naval Academy," replied the
superintendent coldly.

"I--I--personally do not desire to press any complaint," continued young
Crane. "I am sorry that my friends took such a step."

"Then you consider, Mr. Crane," pressed the superintendent, "that the
knock-down blow you received from a midshipman was in the nature of a
merited punishment?"

"I--I won't say that," cried Crane quickly. "No, sir! I won't admit it!"

"Then, as we know that Midshipman Totten was your assailant," continued
the superintendent, "we shall have to place that young man on trial. We
shall be obliged to summon you as a witness at that trial, Mr. Crane."

"But I have no intention, sir, of appearing as a witness," blustered that
young man.

"Mr. Crane, you can have no choice in the matter. If we summon you, you
can be brought here from any part of the United States."

"I--I--can't the matter be dropped, sir?" urged the young man anxiously.

"Not unless you confess yourself in the wrong, and exonerate Mr. Totten.
In any other event the case will have to come to trial before a
court-martial, and you, Mr. Crane, since we are certain that you possess
material evidence, will be forced to appear as a witness."

Mr. Crane looked almost as uncomfortable as he felt.

"Mr. Totten," continued the superintendent, "states that you grossly
insulted his cousin, a young woman, and that he met you on purpose to
avenge that insult."

"There--there--was some trouble about a young woman," admitted Crane.
"But I am a gentleman, sir."

"I am not expected to decide the last question that you have raised,"
replied the superintendent dryly. "All that concerns me in the matter is
whether you exonerate Mr. Totten, or whether you do not. If you do not,
the midshipman must state his case fully before a court-martial, at which
you will be one of the important witnesses."

"I exonerate Mr. Totten," replied Crane in a very low tone.

"Do you exonerate him completely?" "Ye-es, sir."

"Then Mr. Totten's offense will be reduced to one or two-simple breaches
of discipline," went on the superintendent.

"But see here, sir," interposed one of the other young men, "are your
midshipmen to be allowed to go about pounding whom they like? Are they to
be swashbucklers and bullies?"

"Very decidedly not, sir," replied the superintendent in a voice almost
thunderous. "The midshipmen of the United States Naval Academy must
conduct themselves as gentlemen at all times."

"Did they do that," urged the last speaker, "when they sailed into us as
they did?"

"Why did your friends go to the assistance of Mr. Crane?" asked the
superintendent.

"Be--because," stammered the spokesman, "your midshipman had knocked
Crane down and was misusing him."

"Did you, the friends of Mr. Crane, consider it the act of gentlemen for
several to rush in and attack one man?"

That left the callers rather breathless.

"Now, as to our other three midshipmen," pursued the superintendent, "at
most they only rushed in to see fair play. They did not make a hostile
move until they saw a whole crowd of you attacking one midshipman.
Gentlemen, I am quite ready to leave it to a jury of any intelligent
citizens as to whether the offending midshipmen or yourselves displayed
the more gallantry and honor. For you have all admitted doing something
that is not consistent with the highest standards of a gentleman, while
our accused midshipmen have no such reproach against them."

"Then your midshipmen are to get off, and to be encouraged to repeat such
conduct?" demanded the spokesman of the Crane party.

"No. On the contrary, they will be punished for whatever breaches of
Naval discipline they have committed. Considering what you gentlemen have
admitted, however, I do not believe you would have any standing as
witnesses before a court-martial. I therefore advise you all to drop your
complaint. Yet if you insist on a complaint, then I will see to it that
Midshipman Totten is brought to trial."

Crane and his associates felt, very quickly and keenly, that they would
cut but sorry figures in such a trial. They therefore begged to withdraw
their former complaint. When they had departed the superintendent smiled
at his reflection in the glass opposite.

Before supper all of the midshipmen involved knew their fate. They were
restored to full liberty. Darrin, Dalzell and Joyce were again rebuked
for having taken such elaborate pains to escape recognizing Totten at the
time of the encounter. Beyond the lecture by the commandant of
midshipmen, each of the trio was further punished by the imposition of
ten demerits.

In Frenching and in taking justice into his own hands Midshipman Totten
was held to have erred. However, the nature of his grievance and the fact
that he was only a new fourth classman were taken into consideration. For
Frenching he was punished with twenty-five demerits; for the assault on
a civilian, considering all the circumstances, he was let off with ten
additional demerits.

Yet, somehow, all of the midshipmen involved felt their punishment very
lightly. They could not escape the conviction that the Naval Academy
authorities did not regard them as especially guilty offenders.

"We've got you back on the gridiron, at any rate," exclaimed Hepson
exultantly. "We of the football squad wish that we might be permitted to
divide your demerits up among ourselves."

"You might suggest that little point to the commandant of midshipmen,"
grinned Dan.

"And get jolly well trounced for our impudence," grimaced Midshipman
Hepson. "No, thank you; though you criminals have our utmost sympathy, we
will let matters rest where they are at present. Only a fool tries to
change well enough into worse."




CHAPTER XV

THE NAVY GOAT WEEPS


"Did you hear that Ella had a bad tumble down three stories?" asked
Midshipman Dan.

"Ella who?" questioned Dave, looking up.

"Elevator!" grinned Dalzell.

"Ugh!" grunted Dave disgustedly. "Say, do you know how that would strike
the com.?"

"No," replied Dan innocently, looking away. "How would it strike him?"

"Hard!" Dave responded. Slam! The somewhat heavy book that Darrin, aimed
went straight to the mark, landing against Dan's nearer ear with all the
force of a sound boxing.

"I see you appreciate a good joke," muttered Dalzell grimly.

"Yes," Dave admitted. "Do you?"

"When I tell you another," growled Dan, "I'll be holding an axe hidden
behind my back."

"Say, did I show you that letter of Dick's?" Dave asked, looking up
presently.

"Appendix?" inquired Dan suspiciously.

"Oh, stow all that, little boy!" retorted Dave. "No; did I tell you that
I had a letter from Dick Prescott?"

"I think you mentioned something of the sort, last winter," Dalzell
admitted still suspicious.

"No; I got one this morning from good old Dick," Darrin went on.

"All right," Dan agreed. "What's the answer?"

"I haven't had time to read it yet," Darrin responded. "But here's the
letter. Maybe you'd like to look it over."

Across the study table Dan Dalzell received the envelope and its
enclosure rather gingerly. Dan didn't like to be caught "biting" at a
"sell," and he still expected some trick from his roommate.

It was, however, a letter written in Dick Prescott's well-remembered
handwriting.

"I understand that you are both on the Navy team, and that you made good
in the first game," wrote the West Point cadet. "I hope you'll both stay
in to the finish, and improve with every game. Greg and I are plugging
hard at the game in the little time that the West Point routine allows
us for practice. From what I have heard of your game, I think it likely
that you and good, but impish old Dan, are playing against the very
position that Greg and I hope to hold in the annual Army-Navy game.
Won't it be great?"

"Yes, it will be great, all right, if the Navy contrives to win," Dan
muttered, looking up at his chum.

"Either the Army or Navy must lose," replied Dave quietly.

"And just think!" Cadet Dick Prescott's letter ran on. "When we meet,
lined up for battle on Franklin Field, Philadelphia, it will be the first
time we four have met since we wound up the good old High School days at
Gridley. It seems an age to Greg and me. I wonder if the time seems as
long to you two?"

"It seems to me," remarked Dan, glancing across at his chum, "that you
and I, David, little giant, have been here at Annapolis almost ever since
we first donned trousers to please the family."

"It is a long time back to Gridley days," assented Darrin.

Then Dan went on reading.

"Of course you and Dan are bound that the Navy shall win this year," Dick
had written. "As for Greg and me, we are equally determined that the Army
shall win. As if the resolutions on either side had much of anything to
do with it! It will seem strange for us four, divided between the two
sides, to be fighting frantically for the victory. However, if Greg and I
go up against you two on the gridiron we won't show you any mercy, and
we know that we shall receive none from you. Each man must do all that's
possibly in him for the glory of his own side of the United Service!
Here's to the better eleven--Army or Navy!"

"I'll bet Dick and Greg will give us all the tussle they know how, if
they get near us in the fight," nodded Dan, passing the letter back.

"Well, they're bound to, aren't they?" demanded Darrin. "And now, Danny
boy, we simply must stow all gab and get busy with our lessons. We've a
recitation between now and the afternoon practice."

"And the game, to-morrow!" breathed Midshipman Dalzell fervently.

The morrow's game was to be against the University of Pennsylvania
eleven. The opposition team being an unusually good one that year, the
Navy's gridiron pets were preparing to strain every nerve in the hope
of victory.

In that afternoon's practice Dave and Dan showed up better than ever.
Farley and Page, too, were coming along splendidly, while Midshipman
Joyce was proving himself all but a joy to exacting Hepson.

But when the morrow came U.P. carried away the game to the tune of five
to nothing, and the Navy goat wept. Dave and Dan made several brilliant
plays, but the Navy average both of size and skill was somewhat below
that of the older, bigger college men.

Other games followed fast now, and the Navy eleven and its subs. had
plenty of work cut out for them. Up to the time of the Army-Navy game,
the middies had a bright slate of eighty per cent. of victories. Dave and
Dan had the pleasure of reading, in the "Army and Navy Journal," that
they were considered the strongest men on the left flank that the Navy
had been, able to show in ten years.

"When we go up against the Army," Hepson informed Dave and Dan, "I don't
know whether you'll play at left or right. It will all depend on where
the Army puts Prescott and Holmes. Friends of ours who have watched the
play at West Point tell me that Prescott and Holmes are armored terrors
on the gridiron."

"They are, if they've gone forward in the game, instead of backward,"
Darrin replied honestly.

"But you and Dalzell can hold 'em, can't you?" demanded Hepson anxiously.

"I don't dare brag," Dave answered. "The truth, if anything, is that
Danny boy and I can hardly hope to hold the Army pair back. You see, Hep,
I know Prescott and Holmes pretty well, from the fact that we played
together on the same High School eleven for two years. Prescott, in
fact, was the boy who trained us all."

"Well, don't let the Navy fellows get the idea that you're afraid of that
Army pair," begged Hepson. "It might get our men discouraged. Darry, we
simply must wipe up the field with the Army! There isn't--there can't be
any such word as 'defeat' for us."

As the time drew near for the greatest of all annual games the
instructors at the Naval Academy began to record lower marks for nearly
all of the men in the daily recitations. The midshipmen simply couldn't
keep their minds from wandering to the gridiron. It meant so much--to
beat the Army!

Then quickly enough the feverish day came. Early in the forenoon the
entire brigade of midshipmen, in uniform, was marched into town behind
the Naval Academy band. Scores of Navy officers, with their ladies, went
along. A lot of the townspeople followed in the big rush to Odenton and
Baltimore. From there two sections of a special train conveyed the
Annapolis host to Philadelphia.

Franklin Field was reached, and one of the most brilliant athletic and
social events of the year was on.

We shall not attempt to follow the course of the game here. The Navy
eleven hurled itself into the fray with undying heroism, but the Army
won the great game. It is all told in the third volume of "THE WEST
POINT SERIES," entitled "DICK PRESSCOTT'S THIRD YEAR AT WEST POINT." In
that volume, too, is described the meeting of the old-time High School
chums, their first meeting since the old-time days back in the tome town
of Gridley.

The game was over at last. The Navy was crestfallen, though not a sign of
sorrow or humiliation showed in the jaunty step of the men of the brigade
as they marched back to the railway station and took the train for the
first stage of the journey home--the run between Philadelphia and
Baltimore.

On the train Hepson hunted up Dave and Dan.

"You did your best, fellows, I know, that," murmured the defeated
football captain. "And you gave me, in advance, a fair estimate of that
Army pair, Prescott and Holmes. Say, but they're a pair of terrors! If we
had that pair on the Navy eleven, along with you two, no team that the
Army ever yet sent out could beat us. But we made a strong fight, at any
rate. All of our friends say that."

"I'm glad I didn't do any bragging in advance," Darrin smiled wistfully.
"We were fairly eaten up, Hep."

"Oh, well, we'll hope for better luck next year, with the Navy under
some other captain. Maybe you'll be captain next year, Darry."

"I don't want to be," Dave answered, with a shake of his head. "If you
couldn't carry our team to victory I don't dare try."

"Then I'll be captain--if I'm asked," promised Dan, with the grin that
always lurked close to the surface of his face. While hundreds of
midshipmen felt desperately blue on the homeward journey, Dalzell had
already nearly forgotten his disappointment.

"You'll never be asked," predicted Hepson good-humoredly. "Danny boy, the
trouble with you would be that the fellows would never know when you were
in earnest. As captain of the eleven, you might start to give an order,
and then nothing but a pun would come forth. You're too full of mischief
to win victories."

"I hope that won't be true if I ever have the luck to command a
battleship in war time," sighed Dalzell, becoming serious for four or
five seconds. Then he bent forward and dropped a cold nickel inside of
Joyce's collar. The cold coin coursed down Joyce's spine? causing that
tired and discouraged midshipman to jump up with a yell.

"Why does the com. ever allow that five-year-old imp to travel with men?"
grunted Joyce disgustedly, as he sat down again and now realized that
the nickel was under him next to the skin.

"Danny boy," groaned Dave, "will you ever grow up? Why do you go on
making a pest of yourself?"

"Why, the fellows need some cheering up, don't they?" Dan inquired.

"If you don't look out, Danny boy, you'll rouse them to such a pitch of
cheerfulness that they'll raise one of the car windows and drop you
outside for sheer joy."

The joy that had been manifest in Annapolis that morning was utterly
stilled when the brigade reached the home town once more. True, the band
played as a matter of duty, but as the midshipmen marched down Maryland
Avenue in brigade formation they passed many a heap of faggots and many a
tar-barrel that had been placed there by the boys of the town to kindle
into bonfires with which to welcome the returning victors. But to-night
the faggot-piles and the tar-barrels lay unlighted. In the dark this
material for bonfires that never were lighted looked like so many
spectral reminders of their recent defeat.

It hurt! It always hurts--either the cadets or the midshipmen--to lose
the Army-Navy game.

Once back at quarters in Bancroft Hall, it seemed to many of the
midshipmen as though it would have been a relief to have to go to study
tables to work. Yet, since no work was actually required on this night,
none was done.

Midshipmen wandered about in their own rooms and visited. The more they
realized the defeat, the bluer they became. From some rooms came sounds
of laughter, but it was hollow.

Farley got out a banjo, breaking into a lively darky reel. Yet, somehow,
the sound was mournful.

"Please stop that dirge and play something cheerful!" begged the voice of
a passing midshipman.

"Put the lyre away, Farl," advised Page. "Nothing sounds happy to-night."

"We love to sing and dance. We're happy all the day--ha, ha!" wailed Dan
Dalzell. He wasn't so very blue himself, but he was trying to keep in
sympathy with the general tone of feeling.

"Well, Hep, you made as good a showing, after all, as could be expected
with a dub team," spoke Joyce consolingly, when they met in a corridor.

"It wasn't a dub team," retorted Hepson dismally. "The eleven was all
right. The only trouble lay in having a dub for a captain."

It was a relief to hundreds that night when taps sounded at last, and
the master switch turned off the lights in midshipmen quarters. At least
the young men were healthy and did not waste hours in wooing sleep and
forgetfulness.

Then Sunday morning came, and the football season was over until the
next year.

"From now on it's going to be like starting life all over again, after a
fire," was the way Dan put it that Sunday morning, in an effort to make
some of his comrades feel that all was not lost.

Had Dan been able to foresee events which he and Dave must soon
encounter, even that grinning midshipman wouldn't have been happy.




CHAPTER XVI

THE MAN WITH A SCOWL ON TAP


"I wish we lived in Annapolis, that we might be here at every hop!"
sighed Belle Meade, as the waltz finished and she and Dave, flushed and
happy, sought seats at the side of the ballroom.

They had hardly seated themselves when they were joined by Dan and
Laura Bentley.

"I was just saying, Laura," Belle went on, "that it would be splendid if
we lived here all through the winter. Then we'd have a chance to come to
every hop."

"Wouldn't we want to put in a part of the winter near West Point?" asked
Miss Bentley, smiling, though with a wistful look in her eyes.

"Perhaps that would be fairer, to you," Belle agreed.

"You'd soon get tired of the hops," ventured Dave.

"Can one ever weary of dancing?" Belle demanded. "Well, perhaps one
might, though never on the small amount that has come to me so far in
life. And this Navy orchestra plays so divinely!"

"Our number's next, I believe, ladies," called Midshipman Farley, as he
and Page came up, eager for their chances with these two very charming
belles of the hop.

"Hang you, Farl!" muttered Dave.

"That's just like Darrin, Miss Meade," laughed Farley. "He's always a
monopolist at heart. Though in this instance I am far from wondering at
his desire to be."

It was the first hop after the semi-annual exams. A host of fourth
classmen and some from the upper classes had been dropped immediately
after the examinations, but Dave and Dan and all their more intimate
friends in the brigade had pulled through. Darrin and Dalzell had come
out of the ordeal with the highest markings they had yet achieved at the
Naval Academy.

Mrs. Meade had come down to Annapolis to chaperon Belle and Laura, but
this evening Mrs. Meade was chatting with a middle-aged Naval officer and
so did not see much of the young people.

As the music struck up, Farley and Page claimed consideration, Dave and
Dan were left without partners.

"Nothing more doing for two dances, David, little giant," murmured
Midshipman Dalzell. "Suppose we slip into our overcoats and walk
around outside."

"I'd rather," assented Darrin. "It's dull in here when a fellow
isn't dancing."

It was a night of unusually light attendance on the part of the fair sex,
with a rather larger attendance than usual of midshipmen, for which
reason Dave found many other midshipmen outside, strolling up and down.

"What we need, fellows," called Joyce, coming up to the chums, "is a new
regulation that no midshipman may attend a hop unless he drags a femme."

"That would have shut you out of every hop so far this year,"
laughed Dave.

"I know it," Joyce admitted. "But I'm going to cut all hops after this,
unless some real queen will favor me as her escort and agree to dance at
least half the numbers with me. I've had only two dances this evening.
It's too tame. I'm going back to Bancroft Hall and stand ready to turn in
at the first signal. What's the use of hanging around at a hop when
there's only one girl to every five fellows?"

"You have suffered the just fate of the free lance," remarked Dan Dalzell
virtuously. "As for me, I never think of attending a hop unless I squire
some femme thither."

"There used to be girls enough last year," complained Joyce. "Well, I'm
off for home and bed."

"We'll stroll along up with you," proposed Darrin.

"No girls for you, either?"

"Not for two numbers. Then we return to the young ladies that we
escorted here."

"Just to think," grunted Joyce, sniffing in the salt air that reached
them from the waterfront, "a good deal more than a year more here before
we get regularly at sea."

"It seems as though we'd been here a long time," sighed Dave. "But I
don't suppose there was ever a midshipman yet who didn't long to get away
from Annapolis and into the real, permanent life on the wave. A West
Point man must feel some of the same longing."

"But he's on the land at West Point," objected Joyce, "and he's still on
land after he graduates and goes to some post. The Army cadet has no such
glorious future to look forward to as has a midshipman."

"Hello, here's Jet," called Dave as a midshipman enveloped in his
overcoat approached them. "Going to the hop, Jet?"

"Will you do me a great favor?" asked Midshipman Jetson.

"Certainly, if possible," agreed Dave cordially.

"Then mind your own business," snapped the other midshipman.

Darrin, who had made it a point to forget the brief unpleasantness of
the football season, received this rebuke with about the same feelings
that a slap in the face would have given him.

The sulky midshipman had stepped past the trio, but Dave, after
swallowing hard, wheeled about and hailed:

"Hold on, there, Mr. Jetson!"

"Well?" demanded Jetson, halting and looking back.

"I don't like your tone, sir."

"And I don't like your face, sir," retorted Jetson. "Nor your cheek,
either, for that matter."

"I tried to treat you pleasantly," Dave went on, hurt and offended.

"Oh! It required an effort, did it?" sneered Jetson.

"Something may have happened that I don't know anything about," Darrin
continued. "It may be that you have some real reason for treating me as
you have just done. If you have any good reason I wish you'd tell me, for
in that case I must have done something that put me in wrong. If that's
the case, I want to make amends."

"Oh--bosh!" grumbled the other midshipman.

"Come on, now!" urged Dave. "Be a man!"

"Then you imply that I am not?" demanded Jetson aggressively.

"Not necessarily," Dave contended. "I just want to make sure, in my own
mind, and I should think you'd be similarly interested."

"If you want to insult me, Mr. Darrin," flared back Jetson, "I'll remain
here long enough to hear you and to arrange for resenting the insult.
Otherwise--"

"Well?" insisted Dave quietly, though his anger was rising. "Otherwise?"

"Otherwise," retorted Midshipman Jetson, "I'll pursue my way and seek
company that pleases me better."

"Look out, Jet, old hot-plate!" laughed Joyce. "You'll soon be insulting
all three of us."

"I don't intend to," Jetson rejoined quickly. "My quarrel concerns only
Mr. Darrin."

"Oho!" murmured Dave. "There is a quarrel, then?"

"If you choose to pick one."

"But I don't, Mr. Jetson. Quarreling is out of my line. If I've done you
any harm or any injustice I'm ready to make good by apologies and
otherwise. And, if I haven't wronged you in any way, you should be
equally manly and apologize for your treatment of me just now."

"Oh, bosh!" snapped Mr. Jetson once more.

"This is none of my quarrel," interposed Midshipman Joyce, "and I'm not
intentionally a promoter of hard feeling. But it seems to me, Jet, that
Darry has spoken as fairly as any fellow could. Now, it seems to me that
it's up to you to be equally manly."

"So you, too, are asserting that I'm not manly," bristled Mr. Jetson
haughtily. "You all seem bound to force trouble on me to-night."

"Not I, then," retorted Joyce, his spirit rising. "I'm finding myself
forced to the belief that you're hardly worth having trouble with."

Jetson clenched his fists, taking a step forward, his dark eyes flashing.
Then he halted, as though implying that he was not thus easily to be
driven into forgetting himself.

"Come along, fellows," urged Dan Dalzell in a low voice. "Mr. Jetson
seems to have no intention either of explaining or of affording other
satisfaction."

"Hold on, Mr. Jetson, you needn't answer him," interposed Darrin quickly,
as Jetson opened his mouth. "First of all this affair seems to concern
me. You've intimated that I'm no friend of yours and not worthy to be
ranked as such. Now, I ask you, fairly and flatly, what has brought your
mind to this pitch? What have I done, or what haven't I done?"

"Search your conscience," jeered Jetson.

"I've been doing so ever since this foolish conversation started, and I
haven't found the answer yet. All I recall, Jetson, is that, at the
outset of my football practice, there was some little unpleasantness
between us. You injured me, twice, in practice play, and I admit that I
was somewhat angry about it at the time. But you gave your word that you
hadn't intended any tricks against me. I believed you to be a man of
honor, and I accepted your word that you were innocent of evil intention
against me. Having accepted your word, I held no further grudge in the
matter, and I have as nearly forgotten the whole business as a man with a
memory can."

"Then tell me why I didn't play on the football eleven?" flamed up
Midshipman Jetson.

"Principally, I imagine, because Captain Hepson, after consultation with
the coaches, didn't call you to the Navy eleven."

"And why didn't Hepson call me?" followed up Jetson, all his pent-up
sulkiness boiling over now.

"I don't know, particularly. Probably, I imagine, for the same reason
that he didn't call a lot of other men to the eleven--because he believed
he could make a better choice."

"Darrin, you know well enough that you so influenced Hepson to keep me
off the team!"

"Jetson, are you mad?"

"No; but I'm naturally angry."

"I give you my word that I didn't do anything to prevent your making
the team."

"And you expect me, Mr. Darrin, to believe that?"

"If you decline to do so, it amounts to passing the lie. But I'll
overlook that for a moment. Joyce, I think Hepson is not dancing at
present. Will you return to the hop, and, if he is not dancing, will you
bring him out here?"

"I don't want to see Hepson," cried Midshipman Jetson. "You're the only
one I'm interested in in this matter, Mr. Darrin."

"You've virtually refused to accept my word."

"I do so refuse."

"Then you call me--"

"A liar, if you like!" snapped back Midshipman Jetson.

"Sir, do you realize--"

"I realize that you're still talking!" sneered Jetson.

"Then I won't talk any longer," replied Dave Darrin in a quiet but
dangerous voice. "Since you refuse to listen even to Hepson--"

"Who's taking my name in vain?" demanded a laughing voice as a burly
figure moved in between Dave and his enemy.

The new comer was Hepson, who had come upon the group unnoticed.

"Perhaps you're just in time, Hep," murmured Dave, fighting to cool down
his temper. "I wanted you to prove--"

"Stop!" ejaculated Jetson angrily. In his extreme passion he threw all
restraint and courtesy to the winds. "I wouldn't take the word of
Hepson, or of any man in the entire brigade in this matter. Darrin has
lied, and--"

"Step aside, Hep, please," urged Dave, giving the late football captain a
gentle shove. "This matter can't go any further in words. Mr. Jetson, you
have insulted me, and grossly. Are you capable of cooling down? Do you
wish to retract?--to apologize?"

"Apologize to you--you--"

Whatever the word was, it didn't get out, for in the same instant Darrin
cried warningly:

"Guard yourself!"

Midshipman Jetson threw up his hands, but Darrin's right fist landed
across his offending mouth with such force as to fell the sulky
midshipman flat to the earth.




CHAPTER XVII

AN AFFAIR OF SULKS


Having struck the blow, Midshipman Darrin stepped back, to give his
opponent an unobstructed chance to rise to his feet.

"What's this all about?" demanded Midshipman Hepson wonderingly.

"It's gone too far for talk, now," replied Dan Dalzell. "Wait until Darry
has put a new head on this idiot."

Jetson took his time about getting to his feet When he did rise he didn't
assume his guard at once.

"Well," asked Darrin coolly, but mockingly, "have you had all you can
stand, or are you going to back up your wild, crazy statements?"

Suddenly Jetson raised one of his feet quickly, as though to kick Dave in
the belt line.

"Here, stop that!" cried Hepson and Joyce in the same breath, as they
sprang forward. Darrin, seeing others interfere, didn't attempt to strike
back, but merely stepped aside.

That was the chance for which Jetson had been watching. His kick didn't
land; he hadn't intended that it should, but Dave's surprised recoil
gave the other the chance that he really wanted. Both of Jetson's fists
struck on Dave's nose, drawing a flood of the crimson.

"You coward! You cur!" gasped amazed Dalzell.

"Silence, all!" ordered Hepson, speaking by virtue of being a first
classman. "Jet is crazy, but he can't be expected to take up more than
one affair at a time. Darry, take your time to stop the flow of blood.
Then you can demand an accounting of Jetson."

"I've nothing more to say," remarked Jetson. "I was struck and I've
returned the blow with interest. That ends my concern in the affair. Good
night, all."

"Hold on!" ordered Hepson, bounding forward and laying a strong,
detaining hand on Jetson's shoulder. "You can't slip away like that.
Matters have gone so far that they'll simply have to go further. You'd
put yourself wholly in the wrong by withdrawing now--especially after the
slimy trick that you've played a fair opponent."

"Slimy, eh?" cried Jetson angrily. "Mr. Hepson, you and I will have to
have an accounting, too!"

"Oh, just as you like," responded the first classman, shrugging his
shoulders. "You'll find it a better rule, however, to stick to one affair
at a time. Darry, are you in shape, now, to attend to this matter from
your point of view?"

"Quite," nodded Dave, who had about succeeded in stanching the flow of
blood from his injured nose. "Does Mr. Jetson desire to take his coat
off or not?"

"Yes!" cried Jetson tempestuously, unbuttoning his own overcoat and
tossing it to the ground. "Now, take yours off, Mr. Darrin!"

"It's off," responded Dave, tossing the garment aside. "Now, look to
yourself, sir!"

The two second classmen closed in furiously. It was give and take, for a
few moments. In the clinches, however, Jetson succeeded in tearing
Darrin's dress coat, and also in starting the blood again so that the
crimson dripped down on Dave's white shirt front.

At the end of a full minute, however, Darrin had sent his enemy to the
ground, stopped in a knock-out. Both of Jetson's eyes were also closed
and badly swollen.

"Joyce," asked Hepson, "will you kindly remain with Jetson and see that
he is assisted to the hospital, if he needs it? It won't do for too
many of us, especially Darry, to be found here by any officer who may
be passing."

"I'll attend to it," nodded Midshipman Joyce, "though I'd rather perform
the service for any other fellow in the brigade."

Now that the affair was over, and Dave, after inspecting the damage to
his dress coat, was pulling on his overcoat, he was suddenly recalled to
other responsibilities.

"Danny boy," he said ruefully, as Hepson walked away with them, "I can't
very well get back to the hop soon--perhaps not at all tonight. I can't
go back in this torn coat, and I may not be able to borrow another that
will fit me well. Will you be good enough to hurry back and explain to
Belle why I am delayed--perhaps prevented from seeing her again tonight?"

"Certainly," nodded Dalzell, turning and hastening back.

"Now, what was it all about, Darry?" asked Hepson, as he walked along
with Dave.

Midshipman Darrin explained the trouble as well as he could.

"So the idiot accused you of keeping him off the football eleven!"
demanded Hepson in astonishment.

"Yes; and I offered to prove, by you, that I had nothing to do with his
exclusion from the team."

"Why the sole and whole reason why Jetson wasn't called to the Navy
team," declared Hepson, "was because he was believed to be too awkward
and too dangerous to other players. Whew, but I'm certainly sorry this
thing has happened!"

"So am I," Dave confessed candidly.

"And Jet made the further fool mistake of declaring that he wouldn't
accept the word of any midshipman in the brigade."

"Something of the sort."

"Why, that's a wholesale, blanket insult to the whole brigade. Darry,
your class will have to take action over such a remark as that."

"Oh, Jetson uttered the remark in the heat of an exceptional temper."

"That won't save him," predicted Hepson sagely. "The insult is there and
it will stick. Your class, Darry, would lose caste with the fellows here
if it allowed such an insult to go."

"Well, if it gets around, I suppose some sort of action will have to
be taken."

"The second class, under the circumstances, can't do much less than send
Jetson to Coventry."

"Oh, that would be too much!" Dave protested generously. "Jetson has
always been an honorable, square fellow in the past."

"He has always been infernally sulky and high-handed," growled
Midshipman Hepson.

"A bad temper is not such an uncommon failing," smiled Dave.

"No; but there are limits to the amount of temper that a gentleman may
display and still be worthy to associate with gentlemen," contended
Hepson stubbornly. "It's the insult to the whole brigade that I'm
thinking of. Darry, I'll wager that your class won't and can't do less
than give Jetson a trip to Coventry."

[Illustration: "Take Off Your Overcoat, Mr. Darrin."]

"Oh, that would be too much--unjust!" protested Dave.

"The class will do it just the same."

"If the class mixes up in my affair, and carries it so far as to send
Jetson to Coventry, I'll be hanged if I don't go there with him!" cried
Darrin impulsively.

The words were out. A man of Darrin's honest nature would feel bound to
stand by even that heated utterance.

"Oh, come, now, Darry, don't be so foolish over a fellow who has treated
you in such fashion."

"I've said it, haven't I?" asked Dave grimly. "It would be an utter
injustice, and I'm not going to see something that is my own affair
distorted into an injustice that would be altogether out of proportion to
Jetson's offense."

By this time the strolling pair of midshipmen had reached the entrance to
Bancroft Hall.

"What are you going to try to do about your dress coat, Darry?" asked
Hepson in an undertone. "Borrow one?"

"If I can find one that fits."

"Take my advice, then. Don't just borrow, and thereby run a chance of
getting both yourself and the lender in trouble. For of course you know
that one can never tell when an inspection may be made, and the man whose
dress coat was gone would have to account for it. So go to the O. C.,
state that your coat was accidentally torn, and ask permission to borrow
one in order that you may return and escort your ladies back to the
hotel. Your O. C. won't raise any objection to that."

"But he might want to see the coat that I have on," grimaced Dave. "Then
the O. C. would be sure to see the blood-drips on my shirt front, or the
collar, at least. Then talk of a mere accident might lead to questions as
to the nature of the accident."

"True," nodded Hepson. "Then get back to your room. Get out clean linen
and get into it. While you're doing that I'll negotiate the loan of a
dress coat that will fit. Then you can go to the O. C., after you've
changed the telltale linen."

This course, accordingly, was followed. Dave changed his linen as quickly
as he could, while Hepson appeared with three borrowed dress coats for a
try-on. One was found to fill the bill. Resting it over a chair, Darrin
slipped on his service blouse and reported to the O.C. Permission was
granted to borrow a dress coat. If the officer in charge felt any
suspicion or curiosity as to the nature of the accident he cleverly
concealed the fact.

A good deal of time, however, had been consumed. By the time that
Midshipman Dave Darrin returned to the hop the orchestra was just
breaking into the strains of "Home, Sweet Home."

Dave's quick glance roved the floor and the seats. He beheld Belle Meade,
seated at the side, while Farley bent over her in an inviting attitude.
Darrin quickly reached the scene. Belle saw him coming, just in time to
refrain from taking Farley's arm.

"You won't mind this time, will you, Farl?" Dave asked, smiling.

"I had given you up," said Belle, as they moved away together in
the dance.

"Of course Dan told you what had delayed me."

"He told me you would return as soon as you could," replied Miss Meade,
"but he was provokingly mysterious as to the cause of your absence."

"There was a little trouble," Dave whispered.

"Are you in trouble?" asked Belle quickly, her cheeks paling.

"No; I think not. By trouble I mean that I just took part in a fight."

"So you took the time when I am here as the most suitable occasion for a
fight?" asked Belle, her color coming back and heightening.

"It isn't wise for me to explain it now, Belle," Dave told her quickly.
"You won't blame me when you know. But I'd rather save it for telling
when we are out of the Academy grounds."

"Oh, just as you like. Dave, we mustn't let anything spoil what's left of
this last short dance of the night."

"Thank you, Belle. These dances together don't happen any too
frequently."

It was when the young people were walking back to the Maryland Hotel, and
Mrs. Meade had joined Dan and Laura, that Belle again asked the nature of
the trouble that had deprived Darrin of three of his dances with her.

Dave told the story, briefly, adding:

"Under the midshipmen's code, the blow had to be struck when the lie
was passed."

"I don't blame you for knocking the fellow down," Belle agreed
indignantly. "What a worthless fellow that Mr. Jetson must be!"

"Do you know, Belle, I can't quite bring myself to believe that he is
worthless?"

"His conduct shows it," argued the girl.

"At first thought it would appear so but Jetson, I believe, is only the
victim of an unhappy temper that makes him suspicious and resentful. He's
brave enough, and he's never been caught in a dishonorable trick."

"Except the tricks he played on you at the football practice."

"He passed his word that he intended no trick, and I have been wholly
inclined to take his word in the matter."

"Dave, you must look out for this man Jetson! He's going to get you into
some trouble before you're through with him," exclaimed Belle earnestly.
All her instinct was aroused in the matter, for Dave Darrin's success was
dearer to Belle Meade than was anything else in the world.

"There are two things that I regret very much to-night," Dave went on.
"One was that Jetson should provoke such a senseless dispute, and the
other that I should be obliged to miss so much of your company here at
Annapolis."

"I wouldn't mind anything," Belle answered, "if I could feel sure that no
more trouble would come out of this affair with Jetson."

"I don't believe there will be any disturbing outcome," Dave assured her;
"unless, possibly, another fight."

"A fight is nothing," declared Belle with spirit. "You're in training to
become a fighting man, and a bout or two at fistcuffs is nothing more or
less than so much valuable experience. Dave, promise me something?"

"Of course, if it's anything promisable."

"You'll write me--"

"Can you doubt that, Belle?"

"And let me know exactly and truthfully if anything further comes of
this," she finished.

"I'll write and tell you anything that a midshipman is at liberty to make
known concerning the conduct of the brigade."

"Just what does that cover?" asked Belle.

"I can't easily answer until the something or other happens to turn up."

"At any rate, Dave, if I get a suspicion that you're withholding from me
anything that I ought to know, I shall be dreadfully worried. You can't
have any idea how worried I have been about you sometimes in the past."

Not much time was there for the two midshipmen to remain at the foot of
the steps of the hotel Then, after hearty good nights, Dave and Dan left
the ladies, whom they would not see again until the next visit.

"From one or two things that I couldn't help overhearing, I judge that
Belle is greatly worried over the possibility of trouble arising from
the Jetson affair," remarked Dan on the way back to the Naval Academy
and quarters.

"Yes," Dave admitted.

"Pooh! How can any trouble come to you out of the matter? With Jetson
it's different He declared that he wouldn't take the word of any
midshipman in the brigade."

"That was spoken in the heat of temper. Jetson didn't mean it."

"Just the same, some of the fellows have heard of it already, and I
shan't be surprised if our class holds a meeting and sends Jetson to
Coventry--where the fellow belongs."

"If they send Jetson to Coventry," spoke Dave quietly though bluntly, "I
shall go along to Coventry with him."

Dalzell halted, staring at his chum in open-mouthed wonder.

"You idiot!" blazed Dan in wrathful disgust.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE CLASS MEETING SITS AS JURY


Three days later the class meeting was held.

Jetson was especially impressed with the notion that he must attend,
since he must appear as the accused. With one of his disposition it was
quite natural that the young man should go before the class in a highly
resentful mood.

After a few introductory remarks, Jetson was summoned by the class
president to rise.

"Mr. Jetson," asked the class president, "do you intend to deny having
made the remark imputed to you--that you would not take the word of any
midshipman in the brigade!"

"I made the remark, after a measure, sir," Jetson replied. "What I said
was that in a certain matter I would not take the word of any midshipman
in the brigade if it went counter to my fixed belief."

"Mr. Jetson, don't you consider that, under the circumstances, that
amounted to a statement of your unwillingness to accept the word of
members of the brigade?"

"I should be sorry to have that construction placed on my remark, Mr.
President, for I know that nearly all the men of the brigade are men with
a fine sense of honor."

"Then how do you reconcile this statement with your other one?"

"Mr. President, I meant, and I still mean, that I am so certain of the
truth of the charge that I made to one Darrin, that, if members of the
brigade spoke differently, I would then know that they were not telling
the truth."

A storm of protests went up, while one hoarse voice bellowed:

"Throw him out!"

And another called:

"Coventry!"

"Order!" commanded the class president, rapping hard with his gavel.
"Mr. Jetson, it is a most serious matter to impugn the good faith and
honor of the brigade. It is hardly mitigated by the fact that the words
were uttered in the heat of passion, especially when, in your cooler
moment, you are not inclined to retract your statement or to render it
harmless. I believe, therefore, that I am in accord with the sense of
this meeting of the class when I ask you if you have any retraction or
apology to offer."

"For the statement, in the form in which I offered it, Mr. President, I
have no retraction or apology to offer, and only such explanation as I
have lately given."

"Coventry! Coventry!" came the insistent call.

"Well, then, you can send me to Coventry, you friends of Darrin, if you
feel yourselves justified in doing it!" quivered Midshipman Jetson,
tossing his head and glaring defiantly around the room.

"Mr. President!"

"Mr. Wentworth."

"In view of the charge, and the subsequent statements of Mr. Jetson, I
feel that we have an unpleasant duty to perform. The brigade is founded
and based on honor. We, the members, cannot allow that honor to be
impugned by one who would otherwise be fitted to be a member of the
brigade. As Mr. Jetson refuses to retract his words, and as some one must
take the initiative, it is my disagreeable duty to move you, sir, that
the second class decide that Mr. Jetson is no longer worthy to be of our
number, and that he accordingly be sent to Coventry."

"Mr. President!"

"Mr. Page."

"Mr. President, I desire to second the motion, and this I do as
regretfully as it was moved."

"Oh, go ahead and send me to Coventry, then!" Jetson blazed forth
angrily. "This class appears to have been hypnotized by Darrin. But, even
if you do send me to Coventry, we shall see whether your action will be
potent enough to drive me from the Naval Academy!"

Waving his arms wildly in the heat of his anger, Midshipman Jetson
hurried from the room, midshipmen moving aside to favor his swift exit.

Hardly had the door banged when from all parts of the room the cry went
up:

"Question! question! Put the motion."

"Mr. President!"

"Mr. Darrin."

"I arise, sir, to discuss the motion. I ask the gentlemen of the class to
bear with me patiently while I set forth some of the aspects of this
matter as I see them.

"At the very outset, sir, I wish to make it as plain as possible that I
do not seek to stand here as the apologist for Mr. Jetson. I feel very
certain that he would not authorize me to take that position. What I
state I am stating on my own authority purely, and therein I am only
exercising my right as a member of the second class.

"I would remind you, sir, that you all know, as well as I do, that Mr.
Jetson has always borne an honorable reputation in this class and in the
brigade. You all know his leading traits as well as I do. Mr. Jetson is
a man of quick temper and rather lasting resentments. There is a good
deal of sullenness in his nature--"

"And they're not the best qualities in a man who is being trained to
command!" broke in a midshipman at the rear of the room.

"As to whether Mr. Jetson will be, by graduation time, well fitted to
command men," Dave answered, "is not a question that this class is called
upon to pass on. That question rests with the faculty of the Naval
Academy. I am trying to get you to look at this matter only from the
personal and the class point of view. Doubtless you all feel that Mr.
Jetson is the victim of an unhappy temper. You would punish this frame of
mind. Yet I ask you, bluntly, who among you have ever tried to aid Mr.
Jetson in overcoming his own peculiar style of temper? If there is one
among you who has made such attempt at aid, I ask that gentleman to stand
until he can be recognized."

Dave made a pause, glancing around him, but no midshipman rose.

"Now, sir," continued Dave Darrin, "if we, as a class, take hasty and
unwise action, it is quite possible that we may be depriving the United
States Navy of a future officer who would be most valuable to his country
in time of need. Have we the right to punish when we are forced to admit
that none of us has ever attempted to help Mr. Jetson to escape from the
fruits of his temperament? Mr. President, how would you attempt to
extinguish a fire? By fanning it? Yet, when a member of this class is
smouldering in his own wrath, it is proposed to meet his sullenness by
casting him out of our friendship. Do we not owe some duty to our country
in this matter? Mr. Jetson is one of our capable students in this
brigade, and if he be given a fair chance to graduate, he is likely to
become a Naval officer of merit. Do we desire to take upon ourselves the
probable smothering of such a Naval career? Mr. President, and you,
gentlemen of the second class, I trust sincerely that the motion of
Coventry in this case will not prevail. I feel, as I believe many of you
now present feel, that we should be taking too much upon ourselves, and
that we should be making a grave mistake. If the motion now before the
class should be defeated, I shall then be delighted to second any other
motion that has for its object the finding of some way to make Mr. Jetson
feel more fully that he is one of us, that he has our full sympathy, and
that we hope to see him mould his character into a form that will enable
him to become a credit to the United States Navy."

As Darrin sat down there was a ripple of applause. There were many
present, however, who took a sterner view of the affair. These wanted to
see Jetson, and all others who might similarly offend the brigade, forced
to quit the Naval service.

"Question! question!" called a score of voices at once.

"Any further remarks?" inquired the class president, glancing about.

"Mr. President!"

"Mr. Jerould."

"Mr. President," said Midshipman Jerould, "I am certain that we all
appreciate the remarks of Mr. Darrin. The remarks were prompted by a
generous heart, and we respect Mr. Darrin and his motives alike. But I
am certain, sir, that the majority of us feel that this is an ugly
business and that only stern treatment can meet the situation. I
therefore trust that the motion will be at once put and passed." (Loud
cries of "hear! hear!")

"Any further--"

"Mr. President!"

"Mr. Darrin."

"Mr. President, I wish I could throw my whole being and soul into this
problem, in order to make it clearer, as I see it. I would even appeal,
as a favor, to the class to quash this Coventry resolution, and perhaps
I might be considered to have some right to ask the favor, since the
whole trouble grew out of an affair between Mr. Jetson and myself. I beg
of you all, classmates, to quash the motion now before the class."

"No, no, no!" came the hearty response.

"Then, Mr. President and gentlemen," went on Dave Darrin in a voice slow
and grave, "speaking for myself, as an individual member, I beg to state
that I cannot respect a Coventry ordered under such circumstances. In
this matter I would find myself unable to respect the mandates of the
class. Therefore. I beg you to send me to Coventry with Mr. Jetson!"

Blank astonishment fell over the second class. Utter indignation seized
some of the midshipmen. In another moment the feeling boiled up so that a
few hisses rose.

Dave Darrin was pallid, but he had no desire to recede. He had acted
according to the dictates of his conscience and he had kept his word.

In that pained instant Midshipman Farley sought to save the situation. He
leaped to his feet, shouting:

"Mr. President, I move that this meeting adjourn!"

"Second the motion," called Page promptly, and now there was uproar on
all sides.




CHAPTER XIX

DAVE STANDS ON PRINCIPLE


A motion to adjourn being always "in order," the class president put it.

"Aye!" came a thundering response.

"Contrary minded?"

"No."

The ayes appeared to have it, but the chair called for a showing of
hands. Then the chair declared the class meeting adjourned.

"Hustle along with us, Darry. I want to talk with you!" sputtered Farley.
He thrust an arm inside of Dave's and carried him along, Dalzell and Page
following. Straight to Darrin's quarters they went.

"Now, then," demanded Farley, almost savagely, "what's the meaning of the
very remarkable exhibition that you gave the class?"

"How was it remarkable?" questioned Dave.

"In your asking the class to send you to Coventry along with Jetson."

"It wasn't just to Jetson, just because he made a slip, that he should be
shunned by the whole class."

"Couldn't the class decide that better than one man?" insisted Farley,
his eyes gleaming.

"Without a doubt," Dave admitted. "I didn't attempt to do the
deciding for the class. All I did was to try to throw my personal
weight against it."

"And you compelled the class to adjourn without attending to
Jetson's case."

"You're wrong, there, Farl"

"Didn't you?"

"I certainly didn't."

"Darry, you knew the class wouldn't vote to send you to Coventry just
because you had ventured to give your opinion. Now, the only way the
class could escape from the consequences of your action was to adjourn
without action on Jetson."

"It was you, Farl, who moved to adjourn."

"Just to save a lot of hot-bloods from jumping on you, Darry. They'd have
done it in another minute. The motion to adjourn was the only thing we
could do."

"That's just it," nodded Midshipman Page.

"But there'll have to be another meeting called right away," Farley went
on. "The brigade will expect it--will have a right to demand it. A member
of our class has insulted the whole brigade, and under our old traditions
only the second class can administer discipline."

"Well, then," pursued Darrin calmly, "when the new meeting is held Jetson
and myself can be punished, if that be the wish of the entire class."

"Darry," stormed Farley, "you've simply got to withdraw your fool remarks
when the class comes together again."

"Do you expect that I'll do that?" Dave inquired.

"If you don't," retorted Farley warmly, "you won't be worth the further
concern of your friends. What do you say, Danny boy?"

"From what I know of Dave Darrin," replied Dalzell, "the class will be
wasting its time if it expects Darry to retract."

"But what do you want to be sent to Coventry for?" demanded Farley.

"I don't," Dave answered. "I know how it hurts. I wouldn't see any
midshipman here sent to Coventry for anything except positive and
undeniable dishonor. Jetson hasn't been guilty of anything worse than a
mean, quick temper and a fit of sulks afterwards. That's why, with my
experience here at Annapolis, if Jetson is to be sent to Coventry, I
decline to be bound by the class action."

"But you can't refuse to be bound by class action," retorted
Farley aghast.

"Try me and see," smiled Dave stubbornly.

"Don't be an idiot, Darry!"

"It would be a contemptible thing," Dave went on, as calmly as before.
"Coventry would mean the chasing of Jetson out of the brigade. You would
ruin a man for a defect of temper that some of you others don't possess
in quite the same degree. Is it fair to ruin any man because he has the
misfortune to have a fit of sulks? That's why I won't heed the class
action if it cuts Jetson. I'll bow to him whenever I meet him. I'll talk
to him if he'll let me."

"But he won't," insisted Farley triumphantly. "No such sulky fellow as
Jetson will let you make up to him."

"If he refuses," Dave contended, "then I can't help it. But I won't be a
party to ruining the man. It would be far more to the purpose if the
fellows would help the fellow to see that his sulkiness is his worst
barrier here. Then a good student and naturally honorable fellow would
develop into a capable Naval officer.

"That's the kind of talk for the padre" (chaplain), sniffed Farley.

"Glad you mentioned the padre," Dave retorted. "He's just the man to
settle the case. Farley, I'll go with you to the padre at any time. You
state one side of the case, and I'll state the other. If the padre
doesn't back me, then I'll retract all I've said in open class meeting,
and abide by whatever action the class may take."

"Oh, bother the padre!" snorted Farley angrily.

"All right, then," answered Dave good-humoredly. "If the class has a
matter of ethics and morals that it doesn't dare submit to an expert in
morals, then the class action is weak and wrong."

"There's no use talking to you, I'm afraid," sighed Farley ruefully.
"But if you--"

Here the call to study interrupted further discussion. Farley, shaking
his head gravely, left the room, followed by Page, who was shaking his
head with equal force.

"If you think you're all right, David, little giant, go ahead," remarked
Dalzell as he passed to his study desk.

"I think I'm right," Dave answered. "If not, I can be made to see the
light. I don't claim to know everything, but what I've done I did in an
effort to see and do the right thing."

When release from study came Dalzell expected to see several members of
the class drop in. To his astonishment the minutes sped by without any
knock at the door.

"You've gotten yourself in badly, Dave," Dan remarked at last. "The
fellows don't even think it worth while to come here and remonstrate
with you."

"For which I'm thankful," Darrin smiled. "Danny boy, I'm going to bed
without waiting for taps."

By morning the news of Dave's action at the class meeting was known
throughout the brigade. As he strolled about for a few minutes, after
breakfast, while Dan went back to his room to do some hurried study,
Darrin noted that many once friendly faces were turned away from him.

"Good morning, Hepson," was Dave's greeting as his friend went by.

"Good morning," muttered Hepson, and was gone.

"Good morning, Watson," said Dave to one of his own classmates.

"'Morning,' replied that midshipman briefly, and turned away. Joyce, Page
and several other second classmen were standing in a group when Dave
strolled in their direction.

"Good morning, fellows," from Dave. Joyce and Page answered; some of the
others merely nodded coldly. Presently all had strolled away except
Joyce and Page.

"You see how it is, Darry," murmured Joyce. "You've hurt the fellows."

"Are they going to cut me after this?" Dave asked. His smile was
friendly, though the look in his eyes was cool.

"No-o-o," hesitated Midshipman Joyce. "I don't believe the fellows will
exactly cut you; at least, not unless the situation grows more acute. But
many of the fellows are sore on you for your words last night."

"My words were only my words. My opinion doesn't have to govern anyone
else, Joyce."

"But, hang it, Darry, the class doesn't want to cut you out! Can't you
get that through your head?"

"The class doesn't have to cut me."

"But it will, if it puts Jetson in Coventry and you break the Coventry.
That's what the fellows hate to do to you, and that's why they're all so
sore at you."

"I see," nodded Dave.

"Come, now, Darry, you're going to be reasonable, aren't you?" begged
Joyce. "Don't break your friends all up with your stubbornness."

"I note that two of the fellows are talking with Jetson," continued Dave,
letting his glance wander to another group.

"They have a right to," contended Joyce. "The class hasn't yet committed
itself as to Jetson."

"Darry, if you don't look out," warned Page, "you'll precipitate matters.
You may bring the storm down on Jetson if you test the temper and
stubbornness of an offended class."

"I see that I was wrong in at least one particular," nodded Dave
thoughtfully. "I shouldn't have made any remark about my intentions. I
should have confined myself to a plea for Jetson. Then, if the class had
gone against my view I could have ignored the class action and have taken
the consequences just the same."

"Oh, hang you!" cried Page impulsively.

"Barry," begged Midshipman Joyce, resting a hand on his friend's arm,
"don't do any more talking about this. Just let things quiet down."

"I'm perfectly willing to stop talking about it," agreed Dave. "In fact,
since the class adjourned its meeting I haven't said a word on the
subject except in answer to some other fellow's remarks."

Page and Joyce strolled away, leaving Dave by himself to think matters
over. As it happened, the two second classmen with whom Jetson had been
talking had now left the sulky midshipman, who, at this moment, was
coming down the walk in Dave's direction.

"Good morning, Jetson," nodded Dave pleasantly, though not too cordially.

Midshipman Jetson paused a moment, looked Darrin full in the eyes, and
then passed on.

"Not promising material to work with, at first," Dave told himself,
laughingly.

There was no time for further thought, for it was within two or three
minutes for the first formation for morning recitations. Dave ran back to
his room, picked up a book and a writing pad.

"How have the fellows been treating you, chum?" asked Dalzell, looking up
anxiously.

"To a most liberal dose of advice," laughed Darrin.

Dan sighed.

"Do you wish I'd take some of the advice, old fellow?"

"I don't know that I do," Dan answered slowly and with unwonted
gravity for him. "I'm not one of the padre's star young men, and I
don't often discourse on morality. Yet I'm inclined to believe that,
when a fellow goes contrary to the spirit of the crowd, and is
satisfied that he is doing so from generous and manly motives, he is
pretty likely to be pursuing the right course. After a fellow has made
a real effort to listen to his conscience, I don't believe he is ever
wrong in following it."

"Thank you, Danny boy. That's always been the way it has struck me. I
don't want to do any injustice to Jetson--or to the class, either."

"If you have to go to Coventry," announced Dalzell, giving a final
brushing to his hair and fitting on his cap, "I'm going with you."

"But you don't have to, Dan! A fellow's roommate doesn't have to observe
a Coventry."

"If it comes to Coventry," muttered Dalzell, "I shall invite it by
speaking to Jetson, too."

Dave Darrin was aghast. He hadn't contemplated dragging Dan into
such a scrape.

"There's formation now," announced Dan.

Out in front of the entrance, and along the terrace the many sections
were falling in. Dan had occasion to pass the now very unpopular Jetson.

"Good morning, Jetson," was Dan's greeting.

Jetson started slightly, then replied, with a sulky frown:

"Good morning, Dalzell."

"Glad he'll speak to me," thought Dan with an inward grimace, "for I'm
afraid that, before long, I'll be in the way of feeling mighty lonely a
good deal of the time."

In another moment or two the sections were marching away, with the
steady, rhythmic, tread peculiar to bodies of military in motion.

"I wonder how it is all going to come out?" sighed Dan, as he seated
himself at his desk in the section room in the Academic Building.

"I wonder what sort of crazy or calculating grandstand play Darrin is
trying to make just now?" pondered Midshipman Jetson, when informed of
Dave's action at the meeting.




CHAPTER XX

"DON'T BE A FOOL, DARRY!"


A week went by without another class meeting.

For that reason Midshipman Jetson was still nominally in good fellowship.

The delay in action was by no means due to lack of class interest. The
class seethed with interest in the affair, but with many of the
midshipmen there was a belief that here was a case where slow and
thoughtful consideration would be best for all concerned.

Darry was too good a fellow, and far too popular to be forced out of
fellowship if it didn't have to be done to preserve the present feeling
of ruffled class dignity.

Knowing that the matter hadn't been dropped, the first and third classes
waited--in curiosity. The fourth class really had no standing in such
weighty matters of the internal discipline of the brigade.

Every time that Dave Darrin passed Jetson he spoke pleasantly to the
latter. The sulky one, however, did not respond.

"Some day, Darry, you'll tumble that you've been played for a fool,"
grumbled Farley.

"Then I'll have the satisfaction, won't I, of knowing that it's all my
own fault?" smiled Dave Darrin.

"Yes; but I hate to see you go to pieces for a fellow like Jetson."

The following Saturday afternoon Darrin came in from a brisk walk, to
find Dan poring over his books at the study desk.

"Letter there for you," said Dan, without looking up, as Dave, after
glancing into the room, had turned with the intention of calling on
Farley and Page.

"Thank you." Darrin crossed the room, picking up the letter. "From
Belle," he remarked. "The second from her this week, and I haven't
written her. Answering letters should be part of a man's honor, so
instead of cruising about on the deck, I reckon I'd better sit down and
write Belle."

"What are you going to tell her?" asked Dan quietly, without looking up.

"Hang it all!" grumbled Dave. "This is where the situation begins to be
tough. Of course you understand how things are, Danny boy, and you are
aware that I have asked Belle to take upon herself the right to be
equally interested with me in my career."

"It is tough," assented Dan, with ready sympathy, and laying aside his
book for the moment. "If my memory serves, Belle asked particularly,
when she was here, that you let her know how the Jetson row turned out."

"Yes; she did."

"And now you've got to tell her--what?"

"Have I got to tell her?" wondered Darrin aloud. "Yes; any other course
would be unfair. But another question is, have I a right to tell her just
what took place in a class meeting?"

"I think so," spoke up Dalzell. "Of course, you needn't attempt to report
the speeches, or anything like that, but it's rather clear to me that you
have a right to tell Belle the exact news so far as it affects you--and
therefore her."

"Thank you." Dave drew out stationery, picked up a pen and began to
write. Dalzell returned to his text-book. When Dave had written the
letter, he read to Dan the portion that related to a description of the
Jetson matter before the class.

"I think it's all right to send that much of a statement," nodded Dan.

"Then I'm going to mail the letter at once, and it will go out to-night.
Belle tells me that she is extremely anxious to know the outcome of the
matter. Poor girl, I'm afraid my letter may be even worse than no news."

"Belle didn't betroth herself to the uniform or the Navy, if I know
her," returned Dan quietly.

Dave went out and mailed the letter. It would not reach Belle until
Monday morning. Wednesday afternoon, on returning from the last
recitation, Dave found her answer on his study table.

"Want to hear a part of it, Dan?" questioned Midshipman Darrin.

"Of course I do," admitted that young man.

"Listen, then," and Dave read from Belle's letter as follows:

"'I won't attempt to say that I am not in the least worried or bothered
over the turn the Jetson matter has taken,'" ran Belle's letter. "'I
can't help feeling vitally interested in anything that concerns you. But
you tell me that you have followed your own sense of honor and your own
conscience in the matter. The best man that ever lived couldn't do better
than that. I hope--oh, I _do_ hope--that the whole affair will turn out
in some way that will not be disagreeable to you. But remember, Dave,
that the lightheaded little High School girl who plighted her faith to
you is interested in you--not particularly in a future Naval officer,
necessarily. If the affair should go to the worst ending, and you find it
advisable to resign from the Naval Academy on account of any class
feeling, there are plenty of bright prospects in life for an honorable
and capable man. Don't ever imagine that I shall be disappointed over
anything that you do, as long as you remain true to yourself and your
manhood. And I will add, if you care to know it, that I approve of what
you have done and am proud of you for your grit to do the right thing,'"

"A great girl!" cried Dan admiringly. "Just the kind of girl, too, that I
was sure she is."

"Just the same," commented Dave musingly, "I know quite well that Belle
has set her heart on seeing me serve in the Navy with credit."

"She wanted that because she knew you wanted it," Dan assured him.

Darrin was in the middle of his week's studies, where every minute's work
counted, but he took the time to write an intense, if short, answer to
Belle's letter. That finished, and dropped in the mail-box, he went back
to his room and began to study.

Rap-tap! Farley slipped into the room.

"Thought I'd better come right away, Darry," explained the caller. "The
news won't keep. A class meeting is called for Friday night right after
supper. You know what that means, don't you?"

"Yes," Dave answered steadily.

"Old fellow, we all hope to see you come back to yourself at the
meeting," went on Farley earnestly, resting a hand on Dave's blue sleeve.

"Meaning that I should desert my convictions and bow to the class?"

"Yes; if you put it that way. Darry, old friend, don't feel that you know
more than the entire brigade."

"I don't," Dave answered.

"Then you'll drop the line of talk you started the other night?"

"No."

"Darry, old friend!"

"I haven't changed my mind. Then, if I changed my attitude, wouldn't I be
acting a false part?"

"Don't be, a prig, Darry!"

"Be a knave instead, eh?"

"Darry, you ought to have been born a Puritan!"

"I'm glad I wasn't," Dave smiled.

"And are you enjoying yourself?"

"No," Dave answered seriously. "I'm not. Neither is Jetson. It is likely
that the class may do a great injustice to us both."

"Why are you so struck on a fellow like Jetson?" pursued the other
midshipman.

"I'm not," Dave rejoined. "But I think, if he could be awakened, he has
qualities that would make us all like him."

"And you're going to throw yourself away on such thankless missionary
work, Darry?"

"Not at all. I'm acting on my best lights, as I see them for myself."

"I'm sorry," sighed Farley honestly.

"And so am I. Don't believe that I enjoy the situation that has
been created."

"That you've created for yourself, you mean!"

"I see that you can't or you won't, understand it, Farley."

"I wish I could understand it!" quivered Farley, who felt far more
unhappy than he was willing that Dave should see. In the end, Farley
returned to his own room, pondering deeply and trying to think out some
plan of speech or of action that would save Midshipman Dave Darrin from
the class anger that seemed certain to come.

After supper and just before study time was due, Dave went to Jetson's
door and knocked. As he entered he found Warner, the other midshipman
quartered there, as well as Jetson.

"Good evening, gentlemen," began Dave, after he had stepped into the room
and closed the door.

"Good evening, Darrin," responded Warner, while Jetson merely scowled and
picked up a book.

"Warner," went on Dave, "I came here to have a brief talk with Mr.
Jetson. Would it be asking too much to ask you to step outside--unless
Mr. Jetson feels that he would prefer that you remain?"

"Mr. Jetson prefers that Mr. Warner remain, and that Mr. Darrin take
himself away with great expedition," broke in Jetson decisively.

But Warner thought differently, and, with a murmured "certainly, Darrin,"
he left the room.

"I won't ask you to take a seat, Mr. Darrin," said Jetson, "because I'll
be candid enough to say that I hope you won't remain long."

"I don't need a seat," laughed Dave easily, "for I've heard that the best
Americans transact their business on their feet. Mr. Jetson, I've come on
a somewhat embarrassing mission."

"Yes?"--sneeringly.

"You know quite well the snarl that is to be untied before the class
meeting Friday evening."

"Quite well," replied Jetson sulkily. "It is a situation that I owe to
the fact of having been acquainted with yourself, Mr. Darrin."

"Jetson," resumed Dave, dropping the formal "Mr.", "the situation is one
that menaces you and your standing here. It menaces me equally. I could
get myself out of the scrape quite easily by withdrawing from the stand
that I took the other night."

"I either fail or refuse to understand why you went to the risk that you
did the other night, Mr. Darrin."

"If I were to retract what I said," Darrin added, "it would cause me to
violate whatever respect I may have for right and justice. On the other
hand, Jetson, surely you do not consider yourself right in refusing an
apology for a remark in which you thoughtlessly cast an unjust reflection
upon the whole body of midshipmen."

"To what is this leading, Mr. Darrin?"

"Jetson, your own sense of honor and justice surely tells you that you
owe it to yourself to go before the meeting Friday evening--"

"I shall not attend, Mr. Darrin. The class may take whatever action it
chooses in my absence."

"Jetson, you owe it to yourself, as well as to the class, to offer your
apology for a remark that reflected upon the whole brigade. You can
violate no feeling of honor or proper pride by such an apology. In fact,
I do not see how you can justify yourself in withholding such apology for
having expressed a sentiment which you know you did not mean in the way
that the brigade has taken it."

"My feelings on questions of honor cannot possibly concern you,
Mr. Darrin."

"On the contrary, your conduct does vitally concern me, Jetson. If
you do not make your apology the class will--well, you know what
will happen."

"Yes, I know," Jetson assented, his brow darkening.

"And possibly you know what it means to me. By my own statement--and I
cannot, in honor retract it, I shall be compelled to share Coventry
with you."

"No, you won't sir!" retorted Jetson, rising, his face ablaze with sulky
anger. "You may go to Coventry, Mr. Darrin, and welcome, but you shall
not share mine with me. You shall not share anything whatever with
me--not even the air of this room if I can prevail upon you to take
yourself out of a room where you are not wanted. Mr. Darrin, I indulge
myself in the honor of wishing you--good evening!"

Jetson crossed the room, threw open the door and bowed low. Flushing,
breathing quickly, Dave Darrin stepped out into the corridor and the door
closed smartly behind him.




CHAPTER XXI

MIDSHIPMAN JETSON HAS THE FLOOR


It was Friday afternoon, and the last sections had been dismissed
in front of Bancroft Hall. The balance of the afternoon belonged to
the midshipmen, though most of them found it necessary to give the
time to study.

Jetson was not one of the latter. Always well up in his studies, he had
no occasion to worry about daily markings or semi-annual examinations.

He had not grown less sulky, but he found himself a victim of unusual
restlessness. So he decided upon remaining out in the open air for
the present.

Though actuated by a very different class of feelings, Darrin, also, felt
disinclined for books. He tried to study, for a few minutes, but gave it
up and caught up his cap. The winter day being mild, he did not trouble
himself to don his uniform overcoat.

"Going to slip your cable?" inquired Dan, who was moored fast to a
text-book.

"Yes; I feel the need of fresh air."

"Shove off, then!"

Dave went out quietly, Dan gazing curiously after his friend until the
door had closed behind him.

"Poor chap," muttered Dan. "I reckon he has need enough of something to
stop that restless feeling. The class meets to-night!"

Jetson, after some fifteen minutes of aimless wandering, felt himself
attracted to the gymnasium. Going inside, he went to his locker, where,
with feverish energy, he changed to gym costume.

For a few minutes the sulky one performed on the flying rings. He was an
adept at this work, and something in the rapid motion soothed his
troubled mind.

Tiring of the rings at last, Jetson stood with folded arms, looking about
him, until his eyes lighted with interest on the trapezes. One was up
higher than the rest. Drawn toward this one, Jetson took hold of the
climbing rope and drew himself up, hand over hand. Seating himself on the
bar, he sat looking about at the few other midshipmen who were exercising
at that hour.

"There comes that Darrin fellow," thought Jetson, with a sudden burst of
rage. "Wonder if he's going to work this afternoon? If he does, I'll put
it all over him, even if I break my neck in the trying."

Back and forth swung Jetson, getting up speed on the trapeze. Then,
suddenly, he threw his head downward, hanging on by his knees. An
intentional slip, and he hung fully downward his ankles holding at the
ends of the crossbar.

Folding his arms, Jetson again began to swing as he hung head downward.
Among the midshipmen there were not so very many who were skillful at
this form of exercise. Jetson was, and he was secretly proud of it.

"This will put the fellow Darrin to the bad if he came in with any notion
of showing off," thought the sulky one exultantly.

Now the other midshipmen turned to leave the gym. In a moment more the
only two left were Darrin and the man on the trapeze. In addition to the
midshipmen there were two gym. attendants at some little distance.

"Who's doing that fine work?" wondered Dave, stepping closer. "Why, it's
Jetson! Well, he has one accomplishment that I really envy him!"

Midshipman Jetson was now going through some rapid evolutions, first
hanging head downward, and then, after developing speed, raising himself
and turning over the crossbar. It was really work of which any athlete
might have been proud.

"Say, Jim," muttered one attendant to the other, "that middie has me
nervous for fair."

"Forget it," advised the other attendant, "It's the middie's neck,
not yours."

"But we took the net down that goes with that bar. Suppose the young
man should fall. He'd break his neck, and what could we say with the
net gone?"

"He's no business up there at this late hour in the afternoon," grumbled
the other man.

"That talk won't save us, either, if anything happens."

Jetson, filled with the desire to show off before the comrade he hated,
had increased the speed of his brilliant flying movements.

But suddenly he slipped. There was no regaining his grip. With a howl of
fright he felt himself plunging head downward more than thirty feet to
the hard floor of the gym. He was in a fair way of landing on his head,
cracking his skull and breaking his neck. Worse, in his sudden dread, he
seemed to have lost control of his muscles.

"Turn! Land on your feet!" called Dave.

It all happened in a second. Dave, brief as the instant was, realized
that the other midshipman was not going to land on his feet. In the same
fleeting moment that Darrin called he hurled himself into position.

Straight down shot Jetson. Dave waited, with outstretched arms, ready to
risk his own neck in the effort to save his sulky comrade.

From their end of the gym. the two startled attendants had watched the
impending disaster, but there was no time for them to do anything.

From the way that Jetson fell it looked as though he had made a straight
dive for Dave Darrin's head. At all events, their heads met in sharp
collision.

Down went Dave, as though shot, and Jetson went with him, but Darrin's
outstretched arms had grasped the other's body, and Jetson was saved the
worst of his fall.

Now the two midshipmen lay where they had fallen, Jetson lying somewhat
across Dave's motionless body.

"They're killed!" yelled the attendant Jim hoarsely.

"We'll look 'em over first, before we give up," retorted the other
attendant, stooping and gently rolling Jetson over on his back.

"Sure they're killed, Bob," protested Jim huskily. "They met head on.
You'll find that both middies have their skulls broken."

"Bring two pails of water, you chump," ordered Bob. "I tell you, we won't
raise a row until we've done the best we can for 'em."

[Illustration: Straight Down Shot Jetson.]

The water was brought. Under liberal dashes of it over his face and neck
Jetson soon opened his eyes.

"I--I had a bad fall, didn't I?" he asked of the man nearest him.

"You'd have broken your neck, sir, if Mr. Darrin hadn't jumped forward
and broken the force of your fall."

"I'd rather any other man had saved me," muttered the sullen one, slowly
aiding himself to sit up. "How did Mr. Darrin do it?"

"Well, sir," responded Bob, "he stopped you partly with his head, and it
would have been broken, only he had his hands out and gripped you at the
shoulders or trunk. It may be that his head was split as it was, but I
hardly think so."

Two more liberal douses of water, and Dave, too, opened his eyes.

"Is Jetson all right?" was Darrin's first question.

"Yes," muttered Midshipman Jetson, "and thanks to you, as I
understand it."

"Oh, if you're all right, then I'm glad," responded Dave. "Bob, have you
time to help me to stand up?"

"How do you feel, sir?" asked Bob, after he had complied and stood
supporting Midshipman Darrin on his feet.

"Just a bit dizzy, Bob; but that'll pass off in a moment. Jetson, I'm
glad to see you alive. Not badly jolted, I hope?"

Jim was now aiding Jetson to his feet.

"Do you want a surgeon, either of you?" asked Bob.

Both midshipmen shook their heads.

"I think I'll go over to one of the side seats," remarked Darrin, and
Bob piloted him there, while Jim aided Jetson out to the shower room
and locker.

Dave Darrin soon conquered the dizzy feeling enough to stand up and walk
without assistance.

"I think I'll go, now," he told Bob. "I don't believe there is anything
that I can do for Mr. Jetson."

"There is, sir, if you don't mind," interposed Jim, striding up. "Mr.
Jetson has just asked if you mind waiting for him."

"My compliments to Mr. Jetson, and I shall be glad to wait for him."

The sulky midshipman soon hove in sight, having donned his uniform. He
came up to Dave looking decidedly embarrassed.

"Mr. Darrin, I fear I must thank you for having stopped my course to the
floor," admitted Jetson, with a sheepish grin.

"I won't make it too hard to thank me," replied Dave, with a smile.
"I'll just say that you're wholly welcome."

"But if you hadn't caught me in just the way that you did, your skull
would have been smashed by the impact with my head. You risked your life
for me, Mr. Darrin."

"I didn't stop to think of that, at the time. At any rate, risking one's
life goes with the Naval service, doesn't it?"

"It was a splendid thing for you to do, Mr. Darrin! May I walk along
with you?"

Dave nodded. It was dark, now, and that portion of the yard appeared
clear of any moving beings but themselves.

"Darrin," continued Jetson, "when you risked Coventry in the effort to
save me from it, I thought you were posing, though for the life of me I
couldn't fathom your motive. But the risk that you took this afternoon
wasn't in the line of posing. Do you mind telling me why you did it?"

"I'd have done as much for any man in the brigade," Dave answered
frankly.

"Just the same it has touched me--touched me deeply."

"I'm glad of that, Jetson," Dave answered heartily. "And now I hope that
we can bury the hatchet and be friends, as men in the brigade should
always be."

"But why do you want to be friends with a fellow like me?"

"Because I want to know the real Jetson--not the one that you
present outside of a sulky exterior. Jetson, I know there's gold in
you, and I want to see it brought to the surface. I want your
friendship because--well, it may be a selfish reason, but I think
it's worth having."

"That's a funny notion to take," laughed Midshipman Jetson uneasily.
"I have never been conceited enough to fancy that my friendship was
worth having."

"Let yourself out and be natural, man!"

"How?"

Then indeed did Dave Darrin plunge into his subject. There was a lot
to be said, but Dave said it briefly, tersely, candidly. Jetson
listened with a flushing face, it is true, but at last he stopped and
held out his hand.

"Will you take it, Darrin?"

"With all my heart!"

There was chance for but little more talk, as now the slowly moving
midshipmen were close to the entrance to Bancroft Hall.

"You'll be at the class meeting this evening, won't you?" asked
Dave Darrin.

"You may be very sure that I shall!"

Then they entered the lobby of Bancroft Hall, parting and going their
different ways.

In Darrin's eyes there was a strange flash as he turned down the "deck"
on which he lived. But Dan, still absorbed in study, did not pay especial
heed to his roommate.

Immediately after supper in the mess-hall, Dalzell caught his chum's arm.

"Let's get in early at the meeting, David, little giant. I'm afraid
there's big trouble brewing, and we must both be on hand early. We may
have some chance to talk a bit before the meeting is called to order."

"I don't believe I shall care to talk any, Danny boy, before the
president raps."

"Don't be too stubborn, Davy! Your future will very likely be at stake
to-night. Your most dependable friends will be on hand and under arms for
you. Back 'em up!"

At least half of the class was gathered when the chums entered. Darrin
looked about him, then took a seat. He watched the door until he saw
Midshipman Jetson enter.

Rap, rap, rap! went the gavel at last.

"Gentlemen," announced the president, "there is some unfinished business
before the meeting. At the last class meeting a motion was made and
seconded that Midshipman Jetson be sent to Coventry. Any remarks that may
be offered on that resolution will be in order now."

Dave Darrin was on his feet in an instant. Three or four men hissed, but
Dave appeared not to notice.

"Mr. President," Dave began in a slow, steady voice, "this motion more
closely affects Mr. Jetson than it does any other member of the class. I
understand that Mr. Jetson has a few remarks to make."

There was a murmur that ran around the room as Jetson rose to his feet,
claiming the chair's recognition.

"Mr. President and gentlemen," began Jetson, his face pale and his words
coming with effort, "I am not going to discuss the question of whether
the class will or will not be justified in sending me to Coventry. I have
a duty to perform to-night, and I assure you that it comes hard, for my
temper and pride have been beyond my control for a long time. I wish to
make a most earnest apology for remarks of mine that were construed as
being insulting to the members of the brigade. I further desire to make
any statement, or any admission that will most quickly banish any sense
of wrong coming from me. In doing so, I am moved to this proper course by
my friend, Mr. Darrin!"




CHAPTER XXII

THE BIRTH OF A GENTLEMAN


It wasn't a real bombshell that hit the class, of course, but the effect
was almost as startling. First, there were murmurs, then a hubbub of
voices, last of all a rousing cheer.

In the midst of the excitement Midshipman Farley leaped to his feet.

"Mr. President!" he bellowed.

But his voice did not carry ten feet from where he stood.

"Mr. President!" he yelled, louder than ever before.

Still the hubbub continued. Farley leaped to the seat of his chair,
turning and waving both arms frantically. Any midshipman who had glanced
toward the chair would have discovered that the occupant of the class
chair was rapping hard with his gavel, though no sound of it was heard
above the tumult.

Presently, however, Farley's antics produced their effect. The noise
gradually lessened.

"Mr. President!" essayed Farley once more.

"Mr. Farley has the floor!" shouted the class president hoarsely.

"Mr. President," went on Farley, at the top of his voice, "class honor
and that of the brigade have been satisfied by the direct, manly
statement of Mr. Jetson. I move you, sir, that the motion now before this
body be tabled, all further action dropped and the class meeting
adjourned subject to call."

"Second the motion!" yelled Page.

"The motion to adjourn must follow the disposal of the first part of the
motion," ruled the chair.

"I accept the amendment," called Farley.

"I, also," assented Page.

"Question! question!"

"Before putting the motion," continued the chair, "I desire to ask Mr.
Jetson if he has fully considered his statement and the revised position
that he has taken? Since the matter affects the entire brigade, and not
this single class, I feel that there should be no doubt, or any question
to be raised later."

"Mr. President," announced Jetson, when he had secured recognition,
"I have retracted any offensive words that I may have uttered. I
have attempted no justification of any of my words, but have made
flat apology."

"Three cheers for Jet!" shouted one impulsive midshipman.

"Any remarks?" questioned the chair.

"Mr. President!"

"Mr. Darrin."

"I do not see how Mr. Jetson's retraction or apology could be made any
more explicit. I trust to see Mr. Farley's motion, seconded by Mr. Page,
put to the vote and carried at once. I am wholly aware that I have
incurred the class's displeasure (cries of 'no! no!') but I urge that
whatever action may be taken regarding myself be deferred until after Mr.
Jetson has been restored to the fullest measure of class and brigade
fellowship."

"Any further remarks?" questioned the class president, when Darrin had
seated himself. "If not, I will state the motion."

A few "nays" succeeded the great chorus of "ayes," and the motion of
Coventry for Jetson was declared tabled.

"Any further action?" demanded the chair.

"Move we adjourn!" called Farley.

"Second the motion!" seconded Page.

The motion was put and carried without dissent Then, amid the greatest
jollity, the meeting was declared adjourned.

There was a rush of at least twenty men to shake hands with Jetson, who,
with flushed but pleased face, bore his honors as modestly as he could.

"What on earth came over you, Jet?" demanded Joyce bluntly.

"It would be a long story about Darrin," replied Midshipman Jetson. "He
had the grace to show me that I was a constitutional ass, with perhaps
some slight chance of being reborn. To make it short, Darrin persuaded me
to come before the class, eat humble pie and set myself right with
myself, even if I couldn't with the class."

"It was beautifully done, Jet," murmured Page, who was tremendously
grateful at seeing Dave Darrin rescued from sacrificing himself to a
principle.

"If any of you fellows catch me in the sulks hereafter," spoke up Jetson,
though he winced as he said it, "I hope the man who catches me will do me
the very great favor of passing me a few sound kicks before others have a
chance to catch me to the bad."

"Bully for you--you're all right, Jet!" called several warmly.

Fully half of the class members had left the room by this time. Dan
Dalzell, who had been thunderstruck, and who was now full of questions,
was being urged out of the room by Dave.

"So Darry converted you, did he?" laughed Joyce. "Bully for Darry. Why,
that great and good fellow dared the class to send him to Coventry after
it got through with you. He accused the class of kicking a man without
giving that man a chance to get up on his feet."

"It's a good deal like Darrin," remarked Jetson, his eyes a trifle
misty, "though it took me a thundering long time to realize that Darrin
was really of that kind."

"How did it happen, any way?" insisted Farley.

"You've heard nothing about it?"

"Not a word--not a hint," protested Page eagerly.

There were less than twenty of the midshipmen now remaining in the
room, so Jetson did not feel as embarrassed as he might have done had
he been called upon to give the recital before a class meeting. He
told his listeners the story of Dave's splendid conduct in the gym.
that afternoon, and of the talk that had followed the reconciliation
of the enemies.

"That was like good old Darry again," remarked Farley proudly. "No fellow
has a warmer temper than Darry when he's aroused to righteous anger, but
no fellow has a more generous temper at all times."

"Let's go down and jump in on Darry, all hands!" proposed Joyce.

"Listen!" warned Farley.

Study call! That took the young men hastily to their regular
academic duties.

"One thing this business has done," remarked Midshipman Farley, looking
up from his books.

"I'll be the goat," murmured Page.

"Darry has always been somewhat the leader of the class, ever since the
fellows began to find him out, back in the first year here. But this last
business has boosted Dave Darrin unmistakably and solidly now into the
post of leader of the class."

"We're safe, then!" retorted Page. "Darry won't lead us into any
trouble!"

The realization that Midshipman Dave Darrin was assured leader of
the second class was not long in coming to most of the other men of
the class.

Yet Dave did not seek the post, nor did he attempt to do any actual
leading. He still considered himself as possessing one voice, and one
only, in the class councils.

If Dave was leader, Dan Dalzell, both by reflected glory and by virtue of
his own sterling merits as well, shared the leadership with Dave to a
great extent. Dan's power might have gone further than it did had it not
been for the fact that he was so full of mischief as to leave his
comrades often in doubt as to whether he were really serious in what he
said and did.




CHAPTER XXIII

"BAGGED," AND NO MISTAKE


"Plebes Flint and Austin are having a good many callers," remarked Dave
Darrin, halting by the door of quarters before he and Dan entered.

"Sure! Aren't you wise?" inquired Dan, with a wink.

"I think so," murmured Dave. "The callers all seem to be third classmen."

"Of course; they're putting the rookies through their paces."

"Surest thing!" murmured Dalzell without excitement.

"But this is March. Isn't it a rather late time in the year to be still
hounding the poor new men?"

"I don't know," mused Dalzell. "It may be that Mr. Flint and Mr. Austin
are unusually touge."

"Touge" is Annapolis slang for "fresh." It corresponds closely to the "b
j" of West Point.

A sound as of protest came from behind a closed door at the further end
of the deck.

"I hope our youngsters aren't going too far," Dave remarked, "youngster"
being the accepted term for the third classmen, and the same as
"yearling" at West Point.

"Well, it's none of our business," replied Dan, with a shrug of his
shoulders. "Study call will be along in fifteen minutes. Going to get an
early start with the books to-night?"

"I guess that will be wise," Darrin nodded.

"It surely will."

The rest of the winter had gone along rather uneventfully, save for the
inevitable, overpowering amount of grind through which a midshipman must
pass. It was now spring, and midshipmen thoughts were divided between two
topics--annual exams, and summer cruise.

Dan had started into the room, and Dave was about to follow, when he
heard an unusually loud thud at the further end of the deck.

"Danny boy, the plebes must be getting it hard to-night."

"I'd like to see the fun," muttered Dalzell, his eyes snapping with
mischief. "But it doesn't seem to be any of our business. Hazing work is
left in charge of the youngster crowd."

"Yes; a second classman shouldn't interfere," assented Dave. "Well, study
for ours."

"I'm afraid I'm not as studious as I was a minute ago," contended Dan,
with a grin.

Dave looked almost startled as he seized his chum by the arm.

"Inside with you, Danny boy!"

"Not under compulsion," laughed Midshipman Dalzell.

"I'll condescend to coaxing, then. But don't anger the youngsters by
butting in."

"And why not? An upper classman has a right to step in, if he wishes."

"It is, at least, against the rules of good taste to interfere,"
argued Darrin.

"Well, hang you, I don't want to interfere. All I want to do is to look
on. Can't an upper classman do that?"

"I won't," returned Dave.

Yet almost immediately he changed his mind, for two hard bumps and a gust
of laughter swept up the deck.

"They're making so much racket," murmured Dave, lingering by his own
door, "that, the first thing we know, a duty officer will swoop down and
rag the bunch."

"Let's go in, then, as grave and dignified second classmen, and warn the
youngsters like daddies," proposed Dan, but his eyes were twinkling with
the spirit of mischief.

A good deal against his own inclination Darrin allowed himself to be
coaxed into the thing.

Nine youngsters were found in Midshipmen Flint and Austin's room when
Dave and Dan entered after rapping.

"We're not intruding, I hope?" inquired Dalzell, with his most
inviting grin.

"Not at all, gentlemen," responded Midshipman Eaton, of the third class.

"These fourth classmen seemed unwontedly popular to-night,"
insinuated Dan.

"They've been most uncommonly touge all through the year, sir," replied
Eaton, tacking on the "sir" in order to impress Midshipmen Flint and
Austin with the tremendous dignity or all upper classmen.

"What form does their tougeness take?" Dan wanted to know.

"They have not yet learned the respect that is due to upper
classmen, sir."

"And especially to third classmen?" inquired Dan, now without the flicker
of a smile.

"They are especially touge, sir, with third classmen."

"And you are showing them the error of their ways?"

"We are trying to do so, sir."

"I thought so, from the noise we heard," pursued Dalzell.

"If you have any better ways, Mr. Dalzell, we shall be glad to profit
from your riper experience, sir," suggested Midshipman Eaton.

"No; I've forgotten almost everything that I ever knew in that line,"
remarked Dan.

"Mr. Darrin, sir?" suggested Eaton, turning to the other second
classman present.

"I have nothing to suggest," replied Dave slowly, "unless--" Then
he paused.

"Unless--sir?" followed up Midshipman Eaton.

"No; I won't say it. It might give offense," Darrin responded.

"Have no fear of that, Mr. Darrin," urged Eaton.

"All I was going to suggest, Eaton, was that this is the month of March."

"Yes, sir?" inquired Eaton wonderingly.

"When Dalzell and I were fourth classmen we weren't troubled at all by
the youngsters after Christmas. Last year, Eaton, our class didn't bother
yours at any later date, either."

Some of the youngsters present began to look embarrassed, though Dave's
tone had been quiet and free from rebuke.

"But, sir, don't imagine that we're doing anything to the plebes for our
own amusement," protested Eaton. "This is the only pair of the fourth
class left that need any attention from our class. These two young
misters are the tougest lot we've had to deal with. In fact, sir,
they're ratey!"

"Still," rejoined Dan Dalzell, "I think you are keeping it up pretty
late in the year, even if they are ratey."

A midshipman who is "ratey," as has been explained in an earlier volume,
is a much greater offender than a midshipman who is merely touge. For a
ratey fourth classman makes the foolish blunder of considering himself as
good as an upper classman.

"Of course," suggested Dan, making haste to smooth over any astonishment
that his own and his chum's remarks might have caused, "we don't propose
to instruct the members of the third class in the way they shall perform
their duties toward the members of the fourth. Don't let us interfere
with you, Mr. Eaton."

"By no means," murmured Dave Darrin, smiling. "We don't wish to intrude."

"But wait just one moment gentlemen," begged Eaton. "We want you to see
for yourselves how effectively we are smoothing the touge creases out of
these baby midshipmen."

During the discussion Flint and Austin had been standing at one side of
the room, looking decidedly sheepish. Both had their blouses off, though
neither had been required to take off his collar. The trousers of the two
fourth classmen were rather liberally overlaid with dust, showing that
they must have been performing some rough stunts on the floor.

"Step over to that, basin, mister," ordered Youngster Eaton, eyeing
Flint, who promptly obeyed.

"Now, mister, stand on your head in that bowl," commanded
Midshipman Eaton.

Looking doubly red and uncomfortable, with these two grave-looking second
classmen present, Flint bent down, attempting to stand on his head in the
bowl of water, while he tried, at the same time to push his feet up the
wall, thus standing on his head. Twice Flint essayed the feat and failed,
splashing a good deal of water over the floor. Then, for the third time,
Flint tried the performance. This time he succeeded, but his two previous
failures had provoked such a storm of laughter that no man present heard
a cautious rap on the door. The next instant that door was flung open and
Lieutenant Preston stepped into the room.

With the entrance of that discipline officer half of the midshipmen
present wheeled about, then, startled as they were, did not forget to
come to attention.

"Hm!" said Lieutenant Preston, at which the other half heard and
came to attention. Flint, whether too scared, or perhaps enjoying
the discomfiture of his tormentors, made no effort to return to
normal position.

"What's your name, sir?" thundered the discipline officer, glaring
fiercely at Midshipman Flint.

"Flint, sir," replied the fourth classman in a gasp.

"Bring your feet down and come to attention, sir!"

Flint obeyed.

During this time Lieutenant Preston had stood so that no midshipman in
the room could slip by him into the corridor.

"I will now take the names of the gentlemen present," went on the
discipline officer, drawing a notebook and pencil from an inner pocket
and commencing to write.

"All except the fourth classmen present will at once fall in by twos
outside," commanded Lieutenant Preston, closing the notebook and slipping
it away. "Midshipmen Flint and Austin will mend their appearances as
speedily as possible and then form the last file outside."

"Wow!" whispered Dan in his chum's ear outside. "Talk about the
fifty-seven varieties! We're in all the pickles!"

"Yes," murmured Dave.

"What are you going to do about it, Davy?"

"Take my medicine," Dave replied.

"But we weren't really in the thing."

"Danny boy, never get out of a thing, or try to, by playing cry baby!"

"No danger," retorted Dalzell. "David, little giant, we'll just console
ourselves with the realization that we're in the worst scrape we ever
struck yet."

"Yes," nodded Dave.

Fourth classmen Flint and Austin were not long in making themselves
presentable. Then they fell in at the rear of the line.

"Squad, forward march!" commanded the discipline officer dryly.

Through the corridor and off that deck the little squad of thirteen
midshipmen marched. Never had thirteen been more unlucky, for the present
superintendent was known to be a man determined to stamp out hazing.

Nor did the affair remain a secret for more than a moment Midshipmen
returning to their own decks stepped to the wall to let the squad pass.
Nor was more than a look at the two rear fourth classmen needed to enable
any wondering midshipmen to guess the nature of the offense with which
the remaining eleven upper classmen were to be charged.

"Our Darry in that!" gasped Farley, as the squad went by. "Did you see
him?"

"Yes," Page mournfully admitted.

"Then my eyes didn't play me any trick, as I had hoped. Darry and
Dalzell! What evil spirit tempted them to be in that scrape?"

In the meantime Lieutenant Preston was arraigning the captured
delinquents before the officer in charge, and the commandant of
midshipmen had already been telephoned for and was on the way.

Study call cut short a good deal of excited discussion on the different
decks. The commandant of midshipmen arrived, heard the evidence of the
discipline officer, looked over the offenders, entered their names on his
own record, and then spoke briefly, but in the voice of fate itself:

"The accused midshipmen will go to their rooms. They will, until further
orders, remain in their quarters, except for recitations and meal
formation. They will forego all privileges until the superintendent or
higher authority has acted finally in this matter. That is all, young
gentlemen. Go to your rooms, except Midshipmen Flint and Austin, who
will remain."

As soon as the upper classmen had departed, the commandant took Flint and
Austin in hand, questioning them keenly and making notes of the more
important answers.

Back in their own rooms, Midshipman Dan Dalzell was at first overwhelmed
with horror.

"We're dished, Davy! We walk the plank! The super won't forgive a single
man who is caught at the royal pastime of hazing! I'm going to write,
now, for the money to get home with. You know, in the last two affairs,
the hazers have been dismissed from the Naval Academy."

"Yes," Dave nodded. "It looks black for us. But keep a stiff tipper lip,
Danny boy."

"It's all my own miserable fault!" uttered Dalzell, clenching his fists,
while tears tried to get into his eyes. "You've got me to blame for this,
Davy! It was all my doing. I insisted on dragging you down to that room,
and now you've got to walk the plank, all because of my foolishness! Oh,
I'm a hoodoo!"

"Stop that, Danny!" warned Dave, resting a hand on his chum's arm. "I
didn't have to go, and you couldn't have made me do it. I wouldn't have
gone if I hadn't wanted to. I'm not going to let even you rest the blame
for my conduct on your shoulders."

Finally the chums went to study table.

"What's the use!" demanded Dan, closing a book after he had opened it.
"We don't need to study. We've got to walk the plank, at any rate, and
all the study we do here for the next day or two is so much time wasted!"

"We may walk the plank," retorted Dave. "In fact, I feel rather certain
that we shall. But it hasn't happened yet Danny boy, open that book
again, and open it at the right page. Study until recall, and work
harder than you ever did before. You know all about that old-time Navy
man who said, 'Don't give up the ship!'"

They studied, or manfully pretended to, until release sounded. How
much they learned from their books that night may have been a
different matter.




CHAPTER XXIV

CONCLUSION


By the next day it was generally conceded among the midshipmen that the
ranks of the brigade were about to be thinned as a result of the last
hazing episode. Nor did the third class generally uphold Eaton and his
youngster associates in the affair of the night before.

"They were out for trouble, and they got it," declared one third
classman. "The rest of us let up on all hazing before Christmas."

In some underground way Farley and Page heard the straight story
concerning Dave and Dan; how the two upper classmen had gone to the room
and Darrin had entered a mild protest against the hazing.

Though it was against regulations to visit them confined to their
quarters, Farley took the chance and got a few words with Dave.

"Darry, don't let anyone trim you for what you didn't do," begged
Midshipman Farley. "Go straight to the com.; tell him that you and Dan
had just entered the room to see what was going on, and that you had just
made a protest against the hazing."

"Nothing doing there, Farl," Dave gently assured his friend. "We were
present and we really had no business to be. We wouldn't make ourselves
look any more manly by crying when the medicine is held out to us."

"But you did protest," urged Farley anxiously. "Stand up for your own
rights, Darry. Remember, I'm not counseling you to lie, or to make any
stretched claims. That would be unworthy of you. But tell the full truth
in your own defense."

"Dan and I will truthfully answer all questions put to us by competent
officers," Dave replied gravely. "Farl, that is about all we can do and
keep our self-respect. For, you understand, we were there, and we knew
just about what we were going to look in on before we crossed the
threshold of that room."

"But we can't lose you from the brigade, Darry," pleaded Farley hoarsely.
"Nor can the people of this country spare you from the Navy of the
future. Stick up for all your rights. That's all your friends ask of you.
Remember, man, you're nearly three fourths of the way through to
graduation! Don't let your fine chances be sacrificed."

Dave, however, still maintained that he was not going to play baby. In
dismay some forty members of the second class held an unofficial outdoor
meeting at which ways and means were suggested. In the end Joyce, Farley
and Page were appointed a committee of three to think the matter over
solemnly, and then to go to the commandant of midshipmen with whatever
statement they felt justified in making.

At the earliest possible moment the three waited outside the door of the
commandant's office, after having sent in their cards and a message as to
why they desired to see the commandant.

"Well, gentlemen," began the commandant briskly, "I understand that
you want to see me in reference to the last hazing outrage. What have
you to say?"

"We come in behalf of two members of our own class, sir," spoke up
Farley.

"Hm! What do you expect to be able to say for Midshipmen Darrin and
Dalzell? They do not attempt to deny the fact that they were present at
the hazing, and that they were at least looking on when Lieutenant
Preston entered the room."

"May I inquire, sir," replied Farley very respectfully, "whether either
Mr. Darrin or Mr. Dalzell have stated that Mr. Darrin had just entered a
protest against the hazing, and that they had made the protest just
before Lieutenant Preston went into the room?"

"No; such a statement has not been made by either Mr. Darrin or
Mr. Dalzell," admitted the commandant. "Are you sure that Mr.
Darrin did protest?"

"I can only say, sir," replied Farley, "that I have been so informed. I
also know, from Mr. Darrin's own lips, that he has refused to inform you
that he made such a protest."

"Why?" shot out the commandant, eyeing Mr. Farley keenly.

"Because, sir, Mr. Darrin feels that he would be doing the baby act to
enter such a defense."

"And so has commissioned you to appear for him?"

"No, sir," returned Farley almost hotly. "In fact, sir, I believe Mr.
Darrin would be very angry if he knew what I am doing and saying at this
moment. This committee, sir, was appointed by some forty members of the
second class, sir, who are familiar with the facts. We have been sent to
you, sir, by our classmates, who are frantic at the thought of losing the
finest fellow in the class."

"I thank you, gentlemen," said the commandant, in a tone which signified
the polite dismissal of the committee. "I will keep in mind what you
have told me."

The investigation was being carried on daily. All of the third class
offenders were put on carpet more than once. At the next session with
the youngsters the commandant questioned them as to the truth of the
statement that Darrin had tried to protest against the hazing.

"Why, yes, sir," Eaton admitted, "Mr. Darrin did say something against
what we were doing."

"As an upper classman, did Mr. Darrin order you to stop?"

"No, sir," Eaton admitted; "he didn't command us to stop."

"What did Mr. Darrin say?"

"I can't state with accuracy, now, sir, just what Mr. Darrin did
say to us."

"Did he disapprove of your acts?"

"Yes, sir. I am very certain that he made every third classman present
feel uncomfortable."

"Then whatever Mr. Darrin's words were, they had the effect, if not the
exact form, of a rebuke against your conduct?" pressed the commandant.

"Yes, sir," replied Midshipman Eaton with great positiveness.

Eaton's companions in the hazing all bore him out in the statement. The
commandant of midshipmen then took up the matter of their testimony with
the superintendent of the Naval Academy.

After six days of confinement to quarters, Darrin and Dalzell were
ordered to report before the commandant. With that officer they found the
superintendent also. It was the latter officer who spoke.

"Mr. Darrin and Mr. Dalzell, on the testimony of others, not of
yourselves, we have learned that Mr. Darrin had just entered a rebuke
against the hazing before Lieutenant Preston entered the room in which
the hazing was taking place. We have this on such general assurance that
both the commandant and myself feel warranted in restoring you to full
duty and privileges. At the same time, Mr. Darrin, I desire to thank you
for your manliness and attention to duty in entering a protest against
the hazing."

"I thank you very much, sir," Dave Darrin answered. "However, much as I
long to remain in the Navy, I do not want to hide behind a
misunderstanding. While I spoke against the hazing, candor compels me to
admit that I did not protest so vigorously but that more hazing went on
immediately."

"That I can quite understand," nodded the superintendent. "I am aware of
the disinclination of the members of one upper class to interfere with
the members of another upper class. The fact that you made a protest at
all is what has convinced me that yourself and Mr. Dalzell were in the
room at the time with a worthy instead of an unworthy motive. Worthy
motives are not punished at the Naval Academy, Mr. Darrin. For that
reason yourself and Mr. Dalzell are restored to full duty and privileges.
That is all, gentlemen."

Thus dismissed, Dave and Dan could not, without impertinence, remain
longer in the room.

There was wild joy in the second class when it was found that the class
leaders, Darrin and Dalzell, had escaped from the worst scrape they had
been in at Annapolis.

Eaton, Hough and Paulson, of the third class, proved to have been the
ringleaders in the hazing. They were summarily dismissed from the Naval
Academy, while the other six youngsters implicated in the affair all came
in for severe punishments that fell short of dismissal.

After that matters went on smoothly enough for the balance of the term.
Dave, Dan, Joyce, Farley, Page, Jetson and all their closest intimates in
the class succeeded in passing their annual examinations. Jetson, in
addition, had made good in his new role of amiable fellow.

As these young men, now new first classmen, stood on the deck of a
battleship, watching the Naval Academy fade astern, at the beginning of
the summer cruise, Dave Darrin turned to his friends, remarking
wistfully:

"Fellows, if we get through one more year of it without falling down, we
shall then be putting to sea once more, and then as graduated midshipmen,
afloat in our effort to win our ensign's commissions!"

How did they come out?

The answer must be deferred to the next and last volume of this series,
which is published under the title, "DAVE DARRIN'S FOURTH YEAR AT
ANNAPOLIS; Or, Headed for Graduation and the Big Cruise."


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dave Darrin's Third Year at Annapolis
by H. Irving Hancock

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVE DARRIN ***

***** This file should be named 10319.txt or 10319.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/3/1/10319/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

