The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dotty Dimple at Play, by Sophie May

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Dotty Dimple at Play

Author: Sophie May

Release Date: November 27, 2003 [EBook #10320]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOTTY DIMPLE AT PLAY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.







                         _DOTTY DIMPLE STORIES_

                          DOTTY DIMPLE AT PLAY

                             BY SOPHIE MAY

                   AUTHOR OF "LITTLE PRUDY STORIES"

                                 1868




_Illustrated_

TO THE _LITTLE "BLIND-EYED CHILDREN"_ IN THE ASYLUM FOR THE BLIND AT
INDIANAPOLIS.

[Illustration: DOTTY AND KATIE VISITING THE BLIND GIRLS.]




CONTENTS.

CHAPTER

   I. "THE BLIND-EYED CHILDREN"

  II. EMILY'S TRIALS

 III. PLAYING SHIP

  IV. A SPOILED DINNER

   V. PLAYING TRUANT

  VI. A STRANGE VISIT

 VII. PLAYING PRISONER

VIII. PLAYING THIEF

  IX. THANKSGIVING DAY

   X. GRANDMA'S OLD TIMES

  XI. THE CRYSTAL WEDDING




DOTTY DIMPLE AT PLAY.




CHAPTER I.

"THE BLIND-EYED CHILDREN."


"You is goin' off, Dotty Dimpwil."

"Yes, dear, and you must kiss me."

"No, not now; you isn't gone yet. You's goin' nex' day after this day."

Miss Dimple and Horace exchanged glances, for they had an important
secret between them.

"Dotty, does you want to hear me crow like Bantie? 'Cause," added Katie,
with a pitying glance at her cousin, "'cause you can't bear me bimeby,
when you didn't be to my house."

"That will do, you blessed little Topknot," cried Horace, as the shrill
crowing died on the air, and the pink bud of a mouth took its own shape
again. "Now I just mean to tell you something nice, for you might as well
know it and be happy a day longer: mother and you and I are going to
Indianapolis to-morrow with Dotty--going in the cars."

"O!" exclaimed the child, whirling about like a leaf in a breeze. "Going
to 'Naplis, yidin' in the cars! O my shole!"

"Yes, and you'll be good all day--won't you, darling, and not hide
mamma's spools?"

"Yes, I won't if I don't 'member. We for salt, salt, salt," sang Flyaway
(meaning mi, fa, sol). Then she ran to the bureau, perched herself before
it on an ottoman, and talked to herself in the glass.

"Now you be good gell all day, Katie Clifford--not dishbey your mamma,
not hide her freds o' spools, say fank you please. O my shole!"

So Katie was made happy for twenty-four hours.

"After we sleep one more time," said she, "then we shall go."

She wished to sleep that "one more time" with Dotty; but her little head
was so full of the journey that she aroused her bedfellow in the middle
of the night, calling out,--

"We's goin' to 'Naplis,--we for salt, salt, salt,--yidin' in the cars,
Dotty Dimpwil."

It was some time before Dotty could come out of dreamland, and understand
what Katie said.

"Won't you please to hush?" she whispered faintly, and turned away her
face, for the new moon was shining into her eyes.

"Let's we get up," cried Katie, shaking her by the shoulders; "don't you
see the sun's all corned up bwight?"

"O, that's nothing but just the moon, Katie Clifford."

"O ho! is um the moon? Who cutted im in two?" said Flyaway, and dropped
to sleep again.

Dotty was really sorry to leave aunt Maria's pleasant house, and the
charming novelties of Out West.

"Phebe," said she, with a quiver in her voice, when she received the
tomato pincushion, "I like you just as well as if you wasn't black. And,
Katinka, I like you just as well as if you wasn't Dutch. You can cook
better things than Norah, if your hair _isn't_ so nice."

This speech pleased Katinka so much that she patted the letter O's on
each side of her head with great satisfaction, and was very sorry she
had not made some chocolate cakes for Dotty to eat in the cars.

Uncle Henry did not like to part with his bright little niece. She had
been so docile and affectionate during her visit, that he began to
think her very lovely, and to wonder he had ever supposed she had a
wayward temper.

The ride to Indianapolis was a very pleasant one. Katie thought she had
the care of the whole party, and her little face was full of anxiety.

"Don't you tubble yourself, mamma," said She; "_I_'ll look out the
winner, and tell you when we get there."

"Don't let her fall out, Horace," said Mrs. Clifford; "I have a headache,
and you must watch her."

"Has you got a headache, mamma? I's solly. Lean 'gainst ME, mamma."

Horace wished the conductor had been in that car, so he could have seen
Miss Flyaway trying to prop her mother's head against her own morsel of a
shoulder--about as secure a resting-place as a piece of thistle-down.

"When _was_ it be dinner-time?" said she at last, growing very tired of
so much care, and beginning to think "'Naplis" was a long way off.

But they arrived there at last, and found Mr. Parlin waiting for them at
the depot. After they had all been refreshed by a nice dinner, and
Flyaway had caught a nap, which took her about as long as it takes a fly
to eat his breakfast, then Mr. Parlin suggested that they should visit
the Blind Asylum.

"Is it where they make blinds?" asked Dotty.

"O, no," replied Mr. Parlin; "it is a school where blind children
are taught."

"What is they when they is blind, uncle Eddard?"

"They don't see, my dear."

Flyaway shut her eyes, just to give herself an idea of their condition,
and ran against Horace, who saved her from falling.

"I was velly blind, then, Hollis," said she, "and that's what is it."

"I don't see," queried Dotty,--"I don't see how people that can't see can
see to read; so what's the use to go to school?"

"They read by the sense of feeling; the letters are raised," said Mr.
Parlin. "But here we are at the Institute."

They were in the pleasantest part of the city, standing before some
beautiful grounds which occupied an entire square, and were enclosed by
an iron fence. In front of the building grew trees and shrubs, and on
each side was a play-ground for the children.

"Why, that house has windows," cried Dotty. "I don't see what people want
of windows when they can't see."

"Nor me needer," echoed Katie. "What um wants winners, can't see out of?"

They went up a flight of stone steps, and were met at the door by a blind
waiting-girl, who ushered them into the visitors' parlor.

"Is _she_ blind-eyed?" whispered Flyaway, gazing at her earnestly. "Her
eyes isn't shut up; where is the _see_ gone to?"

Mrs. Clifford sent up her card, and the superintendent, who knew her
well, came down to meet her. He was also "blind-eyed," but the children
did not suspect it. They were much interested in the specimens of
bead-work which were to be seen In the show-cases. Mr. Parlin bought
some flowers, baskets, and other toys, to carry home to Susy and Prudy.
Horace said,--

"These beads are strung on wires, and it would be easy enough to do that
with one's eyes shut; but it always did puzzle me to see how blind people
can tell one color from another with the ends of their fingers."

The superintendent smiled.

"That would be strange indeed if it were true," said he; "but it is a
mistake. The colors are put into separate boxes, and that is the way the
children distinguish them."

"I suppose they are much happier for being busy," said Mr. Parlin. "It
is a beautiful thing that they can be made useful."

"So it is," said the superintendent. "I am blind myself, and I know how
necessary employment is to MY happiness."

The children looked up at the noble face of the speaker with surprise.
Was _he_ blind?

"Why does he wear glasses, then?" whispered Dotty. "Grandma wears 'em
because she can see a little, and wants to see more."

The superintendent was amused. As he could not see, Dotty had
unconsciously supposed his hearing must be rather dull; but, on the
contrary, it was very quick, and he had caught every word.

"I suppose, my child," remarked he, playfully, "these spectacles of mine
may be called the gravestones for my dead eyes."

Dotty did not understand this; but she was very sorry she had
spoken so loud.

After looking at the show-cases as long as they liked, the visitors went
across the hall into the little ones' school-room. This was a very
pleasant place, furnished with nice desks; and at one end were book-cases
containing "blind books" with raised letters. Horace soon discovered
that the Old Testament was in six volumes, each volume as large as a
family Bible.

In this cheerful room were twenty or thirty boys and girls. They looked
very much like other children, only they did not appear to notice that
any one was entering, and scarcely turned their heads as the door
softly opened.

Dotty had a great many new thoughts. These unfortunate little ones were
very neatly dressed, yet they had never seen themselves in the glass; and
how did they know whether their hair was rough or smooth, or parted in
the middle? How could they tell when they dropped grease-spots on those
nice clothes?

"I don't see," thought Dotty, "how they know when to go to bed! O, dear!
I should get up in the night and think 'twas morning; only I should
s'pose 'twas night all the whole time, and not any stars either! When my
father spoke to me, I should think it was my mother, and say, 'Yes'm.'
And p'rhaps I should think Prudy was a beggar-man with a wig on. And
never saw a flower nor a tree! O, dear!"

While she was musing in this way, and gazing about her with eager eyes
which saw everything, the children were reading aloud from their
odd-looking books. It was strange to see their small fingers fly so
rapidly over the pages. Horace said it was "a touching sight."

"I wonder," went on Dotty to herself, "if they should tease God very
hard, would he let their eyes come again? No, I s'pose not."

Then she reflected further that perhaps they were glad to be blind; she
hoped so. The teacher now called out a class in geography, and began to
ask questions.

"What can you tell me about the inhabitants of Utah?" said she.

"I know," spoke up a little boy with black hair, and eyes which would
have been bright if the lids had not shut them out of sight,--"I know;
Utah is inhabited by a religious INSECT called Mormons."

The superintendent and visitors knew that he meant _sect_ and they
laughed at the mistake; all but Dotty and Flyaway, who did not consider
it funny at all. Flyaway was seated in a chair, busily engaged in picking
dirt out of the heels of her boots with a pin.

Horace was much interested in the atlases and globes, upon the surface of
which the land rose up higher than the water, and the deserts were
powdered with sand. These blind children could travel all about the
world with their fingers as well as he could with eyes and a pointer.

The teacher--a kind-looking young lady--was quite pleased when Mr. Parlin
said to her,--

"I see very little difference between this and the Portland schools for
small children."

She wished, and so did the teachers in the other three divisions, to have
the pupils almost forget they were blind.

She allowed them to sing and recite poetry for the entertainment of their
visitors. Some of them had very sweet voices, and Mrs. Clifford listened
with tears. Their singing recalled to her mind the memory of beautiful
things, as music always does; and then she remembered that through their
whole lives these children must grope in darkness. She felt more
sorrowful for them than they felt for themselves. These dear little
souls, who would never see the sun, were very happy, and some of them
really supposed it was delightful to be blind.

Their teacher desired them to come forward, if they chose, and repeat
sentences of their own composing. Some things they said were very odd.
One bright little girl remarked very gravely,--

"Happy are the blind, for they see no ghosts."

This made her companions all laugh. "Yes, that's true," thought Dotty.
"If people should come in here with ever so many pumpkins and candles
inside, these blind children wouldn't know it; they couldn't be
frightened. I wonder where they ever heard of ghosts. There must have
been some naughty girl here, like Angeline."




CHAPTER II.

EMILY'S TRIALS.


At three o'clock the little blind girls all went out to play in one yard,
and the little blind boys in the other.

"Goin' out to take their air," said Katie. Then she and Dotty followed
the girls in respectful silence.

Almost every one had a particular friend; and it was wonderful to see how
certain any two friends were to find one another by the sense of feeling,
and walk off together, arm in arm. It was strange, too, that they could
move so fast without hitting things and falling down.

"When I am blindfolded," thought Dotty, "it makes me dizzy, and I don't
know where I am. When I think anything isn't there, the next I know I
come against it, and make my nose bleed."

She was not aware that while the most of these children were blind, there
were others who had a little glimmering of eyesight. The world was night
to some of them; to others, twilight.

They did not know Dotty and Katie were following them, and they chatted
away as if they were quite by themselves.

"Emily, have you seen my Lilly Viola?" said one little girl to another.
"Miss Percival has dressed her all over new with a red dressing-gown and
a black hat."

The speaker was a lovely little girl with curly hair; but her eyes were
closed, and Dotty wondered what made her talk of "seeing" a doll.

Emily took "Lilly Viola," and travelled all over her hat and dress and
kid boots with her fingers.

"Yes, Octavia," said she, "she is very pretty--ever so much prettier than
my Victoria Josephine."

Then both the little girls talked sweet nothings to their rag babies,
just like any other little girls.

"Is the dollies blind-eyed, too?" asked Katie, making a dash forward, and
peeping into the cloth face of a baby.

The little mamma, whose name was Octavia, smiled, and taking Katie by the
shoulders, began to touch her all over with her fingers.

"Dear little thing!" said she; "what soft hair!"

"Yes," replied Katie; "velly soft. Don't you wish, though, you could see
my new dress? It's got little blue yoses all over it."

[Illustration: DOTTY AND KATIE VISITING THE BLIND GIRLS.]

"I know your dress is pretty," said Octavia, gently, "and I know you are
pretty, too, your voice is so sweet."

"Well, I eat canny," said Katie, "and that makes my voice sweet. I'se got
'most a hunnerd bushels o' canny to my house."

"Have you truly?" asked the children, gathering about Flyaway, and
kissing her.

"Yes, and I'se got a sweet place in my neck, too; but my papa's kissed it
all out o' me."

"Isn't she a darling?" said Octavia, with delight.

"Yes," answered Dotty, very glad to say a word to such remarkable
children as these; "yes, she is a darling; and she has on a white dress
with blue spots, and a hat trimmed with blue; and her hair is straw
color. They call her Flyaway, because she can't keep still a minute."

"Yes, I does; I keeps still two, free, five, _all_ the minutes," cried
Katie; and to prove it, she flew across the yard, and began to pry into
one of the play-houses.

"She doesn't mean to be naughty; you must scuse her," spoke up Dotty,
very loud; for she still held unconsciously to the idea that blind people
must have dull ears. "She is a nice baby; but I s'pose you don't know
there are some play-houses in this yard, and she'll get into mischief if
I don't watch her."

"Why, all these play-houses are ours," said little curly-haired Emily;
"whose did you think they were?"

"Yours?" asked Dotty, in surprise; "can you play?"

Emily laughed merrily.

"Why not? Did you think we were sick?"

Dotty did not answer.

"I am Mrs. Holiday," added Emily; "that is, I generally am; but
sometimes I'm Jane. Didn't you ever read Rollo on the Atlantic?"

Dotty, who could only stammer over the First Reader at her mother's knee,
was obliged to confess that she had never made Rollo's acquaintance.

"We have books read to us," said Emily. "In the work-hour we go into
the sitting-room, and there we sit with the bead-boxes in our laps,
making baskets, and then our teacher reads to us out of a book, or
tells us a story."

"That is very nice," said Dotty; "people don't read to me much."

"No, of course not, because you can see. People are kinder to blind
children--didn't you know it? I'm glad I had my eyes put out, for if they
hadn't been put out I shouldn't have come here."

"Where should you have gone, then?"

"I shouldn't have gone anywhere; I should just have staid at home."

"Don't you like to stay at home?"

Emily shrugged her shoulders.

"My paw killed a man."

"I don't know what a paw is," said Dotty.

"O, Flyaway Clifford, you've broken a teapot!"

"No matter," said Emily, kindly; "'twas made out of a gone-to-seed poppy.
Don't you know what a paw is? Why, it's a _paw_"

In spite of this clear explanation, Dotty did not understand any better
than before.

"It was the man that married my maw, only maw died, and then there was
another one, and she scolded and shook me."

"O, I s'pose you mean a father 'n mother; now I know."

"I want to tell you," pursued Emily, who loved to talk to strangers.
"She didn't care if I was blind; she used to shake me just the same. And
my paw had fits."

The other children, who had often heard this story, did not listen to it
with great interest, but went on with their various plays, leaving Emily
and Dotty standing together before Emily's baby-house.

"Yes, my paw had fits. I knew when they were coming, for I could smell
them in the bottle."

"Fits in a bottle!"

"It was something he drank out of a bottle that made him have the fits.
You are so little that you couldn't understand. And then he was cross.
And once he killed a man; but he didn't go to."

"Then he was guilty," said Dotty, in a solemn tone. "Did they take him to
the court-house and hang him?"

"No, of course they wouldn't hang _him_. They said it was the third
degree, and they sent him to the State's Prison."

"O, is your father in the State's Prison?"

Dotty thought if her father were in such, a dreadful place, and she
herself were blind, she should not wish to live; but here was Emily
looking just as happy as anybody else. Indeed, the little girl was rather
proud of being the daughter of such a wicked man. She had been pitied so
much for her misfortunes that she had come to regard herself as quite a
remarkable person. She could not see the horror in Dotty's face, but she
could detect it in her voice; so she went on, well satisfied.

"There isn't any other little girl in this school that has had so much
trouble as I have. A lady told me it was because God wanted to make a
good woman of me, and that was why it was."

"Does it make people good to have trouble?" asked Dotty, trying to
remember what dreadful trials had happened to herself. "Our house was
burnt all up, and I felt dreadfully. I lost a tea-set, too, with gold
rims. I didn't know I was any better for that."

"O, you see, it isn't very awful to have a house burnt up," said Emily;
"not half so awful as it is to have your eyes put out."

"But then, Emily, I've been sick, and had the sore throat, and almost
drowned--and--and--the whooping-cough when I was a baby."

"What is your name?" asked Emily; "and how old are you?"

"My name is Alice Parlin, and I am six years old."

"Why, I am nine; and see--your head! only comes under my chin."

"Of course it doesn't," replied Dotty, with some spirit. "I wouldn't be
as tall as you are for anything, and me only six--going on seven."

"I suppose your paw is rich, and good to you, and you have everything you
want--don't you, Alice?"

"No, my father isn't rich at all, Emily, and I don't have many
things--no, indeed," replied Miss Dimple, with a desire to plume herself
on her poverty and privations. "My aunt 'Ria has two girls, but we don't,
only our Norah; and mother never lets me put any nightly-blue sirreup on
my hangerjif 'cept Sundays. I think we're pretty poor."

Dotty meant all she said. She had now become a traveller; had seen a
great many elegant things; and when she thought of her home in
Portland, it seemed to her plainer and less attractive than it had
ever seemed before.

"I don't know what you would think," said Emily, counting over her trials
on her fingers as if they had been so many diamond rings, "if you didn't
have anything to eat but brown bread and molasses. I guess you'd think
_that_ was pretty poor! And got the molasses all over your face, because
you couldn't see to put it in your mouth. And had that woman shake you
every time you spoke. And your paw in State's Prison because he killed a
man. O, no," repeated she, with triumph, "there isn't any other little
girl in this school that's had so much trouble as I have."

"No, I s'pose not," responded Dotty, giving up the attempt to compare
trials with such a wretched being; "but then I may be blind, some time,
too. P'rhaps a chicken will pick my eyes out. A cross hen flew right up
and did so to a boy."

Emily paid no attention to this foolish remark.

"My paw writes me letters," said she. "Here is one in my pocket; would
you like to read it?"

Dotty took the letter, which was badly written and worse spelled.

"Can you read it?" asked Emily, after Dotty had turned it over for some
moments in silence.

"No, I cannot," replied Dotty, very much ashamed; "but I'm going to
school by and by, and then I shall learn everything."

"O, no matter if you can't read it to me; my teacher has read it ever so
many times. At the end of it, it says, 'Your unhappy and unfortunate
paw.' That is what he always says at the end of all his letters; and he
wants me to go to the prison to see him."

"Why, you _couldn't_ see him."

"No," replied Emily, not understanding that Dotty referred to her
blindness; "no, I couldn't see him. The superintendent Wouldn't let me
go; he says it's no place for little girls."

"I shouldn't think it was," said Dotty, looking around for Flyaway, who
was riding in a lady's chair made by two admiring little girls.

"There was one thing I didn't tell," said Emily, who felt obliged to pour
her whole history into her new friend's ears; "I was sick last spring,
and had a fever. If it had been scarlet fever I should have died; but it
was _imitation_ of scarlet fever, and I got well."

"I'm glad you got well," said Dotty, rather tired of Emily's troubles;
"but don't you want to play with the other girls? I do."

"Yes; let us play Rollo on the Ocean," cried Octavia, who was Emily's
bosom friend, and was seldom away from her long at a time, but had just
now been devoting herself to Katie. "Here is the ship. All aboard!"




CHAPTER III.

PLAYING SHIP.


Now this ship was an old wagon-body, and had never been in water deeper
than a mud puddle. A dozen little girls climbed in with great bustle and
confusion, pretending they were walking a plank and climbing up some
steps. After they were fairly on board they waved their handkerchiefs for
a good by to their friends on shore. Then Octavia fired peas out of a
little popgun twice, and this was meant as a long farewell to the land.
Now they were fairly out on the ocean, and began to rock back and forth,
as if tossed by a heavy sea.

"See how the waves rise!" said Emily, and threw up her hands with an
undulating motion. "I can see them," she cried, an intent look coming
into her closed eyes; "they are green, with white bubbles like soap suds.
And the sun shines on them so! O, 'tis as beautiful as flowers!"

"Booful as flowers!" echoed Flyaway, who was one of the passengers; while
Dotty wondered how Octavia knew the difference between green and white.
She did not know; and what sort of a picture she painted in her mind of
the mysterious sea I am sure I cannot tell.

"Now," said Miriam Lake, the prettiest of the children, "it is time to
strike the bells."

So she struck a tea-bell with a stick eight times.

"That is eight bells," explained she to Dotty, "and it means four
o'clock. But, Jennie Holiday, where is the kitten? Why, we are not
half ready."

The children never thought they could play "ship" without a kitten, a
gray and white one which they put into a cage just as Jennie Holiday
did, when she and Rollo travelled by themselves from New York to
Liverpool. When the kitten had been brought, they had got as far as Long
Island Sound, and they said the kitten was sent by a ship of war which
had to be "spoken."

"This is a funny way to play," said Miriam. "Here we are at Halifax, and
nobody has heaved the log yet."

"No," said Octavia; "so we can't tell how many knots an hour we
are going."

"_I'm_ going a great many knocks," cried Katie, whose exertions in
rocking from side to side had thrown her overboard once.

"We never'll get to Liverpool in this world," said Emily, "unless Miss
Percival comes and steers the ship."

It happened at that very moment that Miss Percival came into the yard
with aunt Maria.

"If you will excuse me, Mrs. Clifford," said she, laughing, "I will take
command of this ship."

"No apologies are necessary," replied Mrs. Clifford. "I should be very
glad to watch your proceedings. Is it possible, Miss Percival, that you
are capable of guiding a vessel across the Atlantic?"

"I have often tried it," said Miss Percival, going on board; "but we
sometimes have a shipwreck."

"Emily," said she, "you may heave the log." So Emily rose, and taking a
large spool of crochet-cotton which Miss Percival gave her, held it
above her head, turning it slowly, till a tatting shuttle, which was
fastened at the end of the thread, fell to the ground. This was supposed
to be the "log;" and Octavia, with one or two other girls, pretended to
tug with much force in order to draw it in, for the ship was going so
fast that the friction against the cord was very great. Knots had been
made in the cotton, over which Emily ran her quick fingers.

"Ten knots an hour," said she.

"Very good speed," returned the captain. "I do not think we shall be able
to take an observation to-day, as it is rather cloudy."

Sailors "take observations" at noon, if the sun is out, by means of a
sextant, with which they measure the distance from the sun to the
southern horizon. In this way the captain can tell the exact latitude of
the ship; but Miss Percival made believe there was a storm coming up; so
it was not possible to take an observation.

"It is two bells," said she: "the wind is out; there will be a fearful
storm. I would advise the passengers to turn into their berths."

The children lay down upon the floor. "There, there," said Miriam Lake,
who was playing Jennie Holiday; "my poor little kitty is just as
seasick! Her head keeps going round and round."

"_My_ head has did it too," chimed in Katie, rolling herself into a ball;
"it keeps yocking yound and yound."

"I pitch about so in my berth," said Octavia, who was Rollo, "that next
thing I shall be out on the floor. Hark! How the water is pouring in! I'm
afraid the ship has sprung a leak; and if it has I must call the
chambermaid."

Mrs. Clifford, who stood looking on, was quite amused at the idea of
calling the chambermaid to stop a leak in the ship.

"Man the pumps!" said the captain. The girls tugged away at a pole in one
end of the wagon, moving it up and down like a churn-dash.

"I do hope this wind will go down," sighed Emily.

"Well, it will," said simple Flyaway; "I _hear_ it going."

"It is head wind and a heavy sea," remarked the captain; "but never fear;
we shall weather the storm. We are now on the southern coast of Ireland.
I don't think," added she, in a different tone, "it is best to be
shipwrecked, children--do you? We will hurry into Liverpool, and then I
think it likely your little visitors may enjoy keeping house with your
dolls, or having a nice swing."

"I wish I could eat something," said Dotty, with a solemn face; "but I'm
too sick."

"So'm I," groaned Flyaway. "I couldn't eat noffin'--'cept cake."

"If you are in such a condition as that," said the captain, "it is
certainly high time we landed. And here comes a pilot boat with a signal
flying. We will take the pilot on board," added she; drawing in another
little girl. "And look! here we are now in Liverpool."

"We must go to the Adelphi," said Octavia; "that is where Rollo went, and
found his father, and mother, and Thannie. But the kitten didn't ever get
there--did it, Miss Percival?"

The voyage being ended, and with it the fearful seasickness, the children
went to swinging, with their teacher to push them.

"Miss Percival," said aunt Maria, shaking hands with that excellent
young lady, "I wish you joy of your noble employment. It is a blessed
thing to be able to give so much pleasure to these dear little children."

"So it seems to me," replied Miss Percival. "They are always grateful,
too, for every little kindness."

"They look very good and obedient," said Mrs. Clifford, in a low voice.

"So they are. Sometimes I think they are better than children who have
eyes; perhaps because they cannot see to get into so much mischief,"
added Miss Percival, pinching Emily's cheek.

"Aunt 'Ria," said Dotty, in raptures, "_don't_ they have good
times here?"

"Yelly good times," said little Flyaway, clutching at her mother's dress.
"Mamma, I wish _I_ was blind-eyed, too."

"You, my darling baby! Mother hopes that will never be. But if you
cannot be blind-eyed yourself, perhaps you may make some of these little
ones happy. Is there anything you would like to give away?"

Flyaway winked slowly, trying to think what she had at home that she no
longer wished to keep.

"Yes, mamma," said she at last, with a smile of satisfaction, "I've got
a old hat."

"O, fie, Katie! I dare say you would be very glad to part with that, for
I remember you cried the other day when I asked you to wear it. Your old
hat would not be a pretty present."

"Then I can't fink of noffin' else," said Katie, shaking her head; at the
same time having a guilty recollection of several beautiful toys, and
"'most a hunnerd bushels of canny;" that is to say, a small box of
confectionery her uncle Edward had given her.

Mrs. Clifford had observed of late that her little daughter was not as
generous as she could wish. Both Katie and Dotty were peculiarly liable
to become selfish, as they were much petted at home, and had no younger
brothers or sisters with whom to share their treasures. Mrs. Clifford did
not insist upon Katie's making any sacrifice. The little one did not pity
the blind children at all. They seemed so happy that she almost envied
them. So did Miss Dimple. It was not, after all, very grievous to be
blind, she thought, if one could live at this Institute and have such
nice plays.

"Aunt 'Ria thinks I ought to give them something, I s'pose. When I get
home I mean to ask mamma and grandma to dress a beautiful doll, and I'll
send it to Emily. She'll keep it to remember me by; and it won't cost
any of _my_ money if papa buys the head."

"Good by, Emily," said she, as she parted from her. "I hope there won't
any more bad things happen to you."

"But I s'pose there will," replied Emily, cheerfully.

Mr. Parlin and Horace were waiting in the hall, and the latter was
impatiently watching the tall clock. They had been in the greenhouse,
looking at the flowers, and in the shop, where the blind boys learn to
make brooms and brushes.

"Well, ladies, are you ready to go?" asked Mr. Parlin, taking Flyaway
by the hand.

"Yes, we ladies is ready," replied she. So this was the end of their
visit at the Institute.

After they had gone away, the little blind girls said to one another,--

"What nice children those are! Which is the prettiest, Alice or Katie?"

For they always spoke of people and things exactly as if they
could see them.




CHAPTER IV.

A SPOILED DINNER.


Next morning, Dotty Dimple and her father started for Maine. Flyaway did
not like this at all. Her cousin had been so pleasant and so entertaining
that she wished to keep her always.

"What _for_ you can't stay, Dotty Dimpwil?"

"O," said Dotty, tearing herself away from the little clinging arms, "I
must go home and get ready for Christmas."

"No, you musser," persisted Katie; "we've got a Santa Claw in _our_
chimley; you musser go home."

"It isn't for Santa Claus at all, darling it is for my papa and mamma's
wedding. To stand up, so they can be married over again. Now kiss me, and
let me go."

"Her's goin' home to Kismus pie," remarked Katie, as she took her
mournful way with her mamma to the house where they were visiting. She
did not know what a wedding might be, but was sure it had pies in it.

"There goes a right smart little girl," said Horace, with a sweep of his
thumb towards the Cleveland cars. "If it wasn't for Prudy, I should like
her better than any other cousin I have in the world."

"She is an engaging child," replied his mother, "and really seems to be
outgrowing her naughty ways."

Thus, you see, Dotty Dimple, in coming away from Indiana, had left in the
minds of her friends only "golden opinions." Perhaps she was rather
overrated. Everything had gone well with her during her visit; why should
she not be pleasant and happy? I am inclined to think there was the same
old naughtiness in her heart, only just now it was asleep. We shall see.

Nothing remarkable occurred on the homeward journey, except that Mr.
Parlin bought some gold-fishes in Boston, and carried them home as a
present to Mrs. Read. They travelled one night in a sleeping-car, and by
that means reached Portland a day earlier than they were expected.

Dotty hardly knew whether to be glad or sorry for this. There was a great
deal to be said on both sides of the question. She had anticipated the
pleasure of being met at the depot by Susy and Prudy, and now that was
not to be thought of; but it would be delightful to give the family a
surprise. On the whole, she was very well satisfied.

As they drove up to the new home, however, what was their astonishment to
find it closed! There was not even a window open, or any other sign that
the house was inhabited. Dotty ran to every door, and shook it.

"Why, papa, papa, do you s'pose there's anybody dead?"

"The probability is, Alice, that they have gone away. I will run over to
Mrs. Prosser's, and see if she knows anything about it."

Mrs. Prosser was the nearest neighbor on the left. Her little
daughter came to the door in tears, having hurt herself against a
trunk in the hall.

"Miss Carrie," said Mr. Parlin, "can you tell me where Mrs. Parlin and
the rest of the family are gone?"

"Yes, Caddy Prosser, the house is shut up," added Dotty, "and I'm afraid
they're dead."

"I don't know where they're gone, nor anything," sobbed Carrie. "I
didn't know the trunk was in the entry, and I came so fast I fell
right over it."

"I am very sorry you are hurt," said Mr. Parlin. "Is your mother at
home?"

"No, sir, she isn't; her trunk came, but she didn't."

There was no information to be obtained at the Prossers'; so Mr. Parlin
went to Mr. Lawrence's, the nearest neighbor on the right, making the
same inquiries; but all he learned was, that a carriage had been seen
standing at Mr. Parlin's door; who had gone away in it nobody could tell.

Dotty paced the pavement with restless steps, her mind agitated by a
thousand wild fancies: Grandma Read never went anywhere; perhaps she was
locked up in the house, and Zip too. Norah was at Cape Elizabeth; she had
walked out to see her friend Bridget, the girl with red hair; and, just
as likely as not, she didn't ever mean to come back again. Mother, and
Susy, and Prudy had gone to Willowbrook, to grandpa Parlin's--of course
they had,--and left grandma Bead all alone in the house, with nothing to
eat. How strange! How unkind!

"Grandma!" she called out under Mrs. Read's window.

There was no answer. Dotty fancied the white curtain moved just a little;
but that was because a fly was balancing himself on its folds. Grandma
was not there, or, if she was, she must be very sound asleep. O, dear,
dear! And here were Dotty and her father come home a day earlier than
they were expected; and instead of giving the family a joyful surprise,
they had a surprise themselves, only not a joyful one, by any means. How
impolite it was in everybody, how unkind, to go away! At first, Dotty had
been alarmed; but now her indignation got the better of her fears. When
she _did_ see Prudy again,--the sister who pretended to love her so
much,--she wouldn't take the presents out of her trunk for ever so long,
just to tease the naughty girl!

Meanwhile her father did not appear to be at all disturbed.

"Perhaps they have gone to the Islands, or somewhere else not far away,
to spend the day. It is now nearly two o'clock. You may go to the
Preble House with me, and take-your dinner, and then I will unlock the
house, and find some one to stay with you till night. Would you like
that? Or would you prefer to go at once to your aunt Eastman's? You may
have your choice."

Dotty reflected about half a minute. "I will go to aunt Eastman's, if you
please, papa."

This appeared to her decidedly the most dignified course. She would go to
aunt Eastman's, and she would not be in the least haste about coming back
again. She would teach her sisters, especially Prudy, that it is best to
be hospitable towards one's friends when they have been away on a long
journey. Her anger may seem very absurd; but you must remember, little
friends, that Dotty Dimple had now become a travelled young lady; she had
seen the world, and her self-esteem had grown every day she had been
away. Her heart was all aglow with love towards the dear ones at home,
and it was very chilling to find the door locked in her face. She did not
stop to reflect that no unkindness had been intended.

As they drove to aunt Eastman's, her father observed that her bright
little face was very downcast, but supposed her sadness arose from the
disappointment. There are depths of foolishness in children's hearts
which even their parents cannot fathom.

Strange to say, neither Mr. Parlin nor Dotty had thought that the family
might be visiting at Mr. Eastman's; but such was the case. It was
Johnny's birthday, and his father had sent the carriage into the city
that morning for Mrs. Parlin, grandma Read, and the children. As for
Norah, Dotty was right with regard to her; she _had_ walked out to the
Cape to see the auburn-haired Bridget.

"I'm glad Johnny was born to-day instead of to-morrow," said Prudy, "for
to-morrow we wouldn't go out of the house for anything, auntie."

"I can seem to see cousin Dimple," said Percy; "she'll carry her head
higher than ever."

Prudy cast upon the youth as strong a look of disapproval as her gentle
face could express.

"Percy, you mustn't talk so about Dotty. She is my sister. She isn't so
very proud; but if I was as handsome as she is, I should be proud too."

"O, no; she is very meek--Dimple is; just like a little lamb. Don't you
remember that verse she used to repeat?--

'But, chillens, you should never let
  Your naughty _ankles_ rise;
Your little hands were never made
  To tear each uzzer's eyes--out.'"

"If she's cross, it's because you and Johnny tease her so," said Prudy.
"I think it's a shame."

Percy only laughed. He and Prudy were sitting in the doorway, arranging
bouquets for the dinner-table. Susy joined them, bearing in her hands
some dahlias and tuberoses.

"Why, Prudy," said she, "what makes your face all aflame?"

"She has been fighting for your little dove of a sister," replied Percy;
"the one that went West to finish her education."

This speech only deepened the color in Prudy's face, though she tried
hard to subdue her anger, and closed her lips with the firm resolve not
to open them again till she could speak pleasantly.

"Look!" exclaimed Percy; "there's a carriage turning the corner. Why,
it's Dimple herself and uncle Edward!"

"It can't be!"

"It is!"

Both little girls ran to the gate.

"O, father! O, Dotty! Why, when did you get home?"

By this time Mrs. Parlin had come out: also Mrs. Eastman and Johnny.
Everybody was as surprised and delighted as possible; and even Miss
Dimple, sitting in state in the coach, was perfectly satisfied, and
condescended to alight, instead of riding through the carriage gateway.

"O, Dotty Dimple, I'm so glad to see you!" cried Prudy.

"It is my sister Alice,
  And she is grown so dear, so dear,
That I would be the jewel
  That trembles at her ear,--

only you don't wear ear-rings, you know."

"Are you glad to see me, though, Prudy? Then what made you go off and
shut the house up?"

"O, we didn't expect you till to-morrow; and it's Johnny's birthday.
Dinner is almost ready; aren't you glad? Such a dinner, too!"

"Any bill of fare?" asked Dotty, with a sudden recollection of
past grandeur.

"A bill of fare? O, no; those are for hotels. But there's almost
everything else. Now you can go up stairs with me, and wash your face."

Dotty appeared at table with smooth hair and a fresh ruffle which Prudy
had basted in the neck of her dress. She looked very neat and prim, and,
as Percy had predicted, carried her head higher than ever.

"I suppose," said aunt Eastman, "you will have a great many
wonderful things to tell us, Dotty, for I am sure you travelled with
your eyes open."

"Yes'm; I hardly ever went to sleep in the cars. But when you said
'eyes,' auntie, it made me think of the blind children. We went to the
'Sylum to see them."

"How do they look?" asked Johnny.

"They don't _look_ at all; they are blind."

"Astonishing! I'd open my eyes if I were they."

"Why, Percy, they are blind--stone-blind!"

"How is that? How blind is a stone?"

Dotty busied herself with her turkey. Her Eastman cousins all had a way
of rendering her very uncomfortable. They made remarks which were
intended to be witty, but were only pert. They were not really
kind-hearted, or they would have been more thoughtful of the feelings
of others.

"Alice," said dear Mrs. Read, trying to turn the conversation, "I see
thee wears a very pretty ring."

Dotty took it off her finger, and passed it around for inspection.

"I never had a ring before," said she, with animation. "I never had
anything to wear--'cept _clothes_"

Percy laughed.

"I found the pearl in an oyster stew, grandma. It is such a very funny
place Out West"

"Yes, it is really a pearl," said Percy, "only spoiled by boiling. Look
her, Toddlekins; oysters don't grow Out West; they grow here on the
coast. You'd better study astronomy."

Dotty took refuge in silence again, like an oyster withdrawing into
his shell.

"O, Dotty," said Susy, presently, "tell me what you saw Out West. I want
to hear all about it."

"Well, I saw a pandrammer," replied Dotty, briefly.

"What in the world is that?" said Johnny.

"It is a long picture, and they keep pulling it out like India rubber."

"She means a _panorama_" cried Johnny. "Why, I went to one last night. We
can see as much as you can, without going Out West, either."

Here was another sensation. Dotty might as well have been eating ashes as
the delirious dinner before her.

"Don't you like your pudding, dear?" asked aunt Eastman.

"O, yes'm; I always like _coker-whacker"_ replied the unfortunate Dotty,
stumbling over the word _tapioca_.

In spite of their mother's warning frown, the three young Eastmans
laughed, while Susy and Prudy, who had kinder hearts and better manners,
drew down their mouths with the greatest solemnity.

"I ain't going to speak another word," cried the persecuted little
traveller, setting down her goblet, and hitting it against her plate till
it rang again.

"_Error!_" called out Florence from the other side of the table; "there's
no such word as _ain't_."

This was too much. Dotty had smarted under these cruel blows long enough.
She hastily arose from the table, and rushed out of the room.

"Florence and Percy, you are both very thoughtless," said Mrs. Eastman,
reprovingly.

Mrs. Parlin looked deeply pained, as she always did when her little
daughter gave way to her temper; but she made no allusion to the subject,
and tried to go on with her dinner as if nothing had happened.

Dotty ran into the front yard, threw herself on the ground, and buried
her face in a verbena bed.

There! it wasn't of any use; she couldn't be good; it wouldn't last! When
she had just come home, and had so many things to tell, and supposed
everybody would be glad to see her and hear her talk,--why, Percy and
Florence must just spoil it all by laughing. O, it was too bad!

"I wish I hadn't come! I wish I'd been switched off!" sighed Dotty,
meaning, if she meant anything, that she wished the cars had whirled her
away to the ends of the earth, instead of bringing her home, where people
were all ready with one accord to trample her into the dust.

"Here I've been 'way off, and know how to travel, and keep my ticket in
my glove. Six years old, going on seven. Been down in a coal mine,--Prudy
never'd dare to. Had a jigger cut out of my side. Been to the 'Sylum.
One of the conductors said, 'That's a fine little daughter of yours,
sir.' I heard him. Aunt 'Ria washed all those grease-spots out of my
dress, and I had on a clean ruffle. And then, just 'cause I couldn't say
_coker-whacker_--"

"There, there, don't feel so bad, you precious sister," said a
soothing voice; and a soft cheek was pressed to Dotty's, and a pair of
loving arms clasped her close. "Percy was real too-bad, and so was
Flossy--so there!"

"O, Prudy, I wish they were every one of 'em in the penitential, locked
in, and Johnny too! Me just got home, and never did a single thing to
them! And there they laughed right in my face!"

"But you know, dear, they don't think," said Prudy, who found it unsafe
to sympathize too much with her angry sister; "they never do think; they
don't mean any harm."

"I'll make 'em think!" cried Dotty, fiercely. "I'll scare 'em so they'll
think! I'll take a pumpkin, and I'll take a watermelon, and I'll take--"

"Dear me, Dotty, that is a beautiful ring on your finger. I wish I had
one just like it."

Dotty cast a suspicious glance at her sister.

"Don't you try to pacify ME, Prudy Parlin."

Prudy held a handful of southernwood to her nose, and smiled behind it.

"This isn't _temper_, Prudy Parlin, 'cause you said your own self they
'bused me."

"Such a cunning little pearl!" remarked Prudy, still admiring the ring;
"how glad I should be if you'd wish it on to my finger, Dotty!"

"They 'bused me, Prudy Parlin, and you know it."

"Only till night, Dotty Dimple. Just wish it on till night."

"Well, there," exclaimed Dotty, at last; "hold out your finger if you
can't stop teasing. But I _haven't_ any temper, and you needn't act
just's if you's trying to pacify me."

"O, thank you, Dotty; on my third finger."

"Now I've wished it on, Prudy; and its a good-enough wish for you, when
you won't pity me; but now I'm going up in the bathing-room to stay, and
you can't make me come down--not a single step."

"I shan't want you to come down, Dotty. There's the very place I'm going
to myself. We'll carry up the needle-gun; it's the nicest thing to play
with. Come, let's hurry up stairs the back way, little sister, for
they'll be out from dinner, and see us."

Dotty needed no second hint. In half an hour she was so far recovered
from the _megrims_ as to be hungry; when Prudy secretly begged some
pudding for her of the willing Angeline.

Then the same little peacemaker went to her cousins, and made them each
and all promise to be more careful of her sister's feelings; after which
there was nut-cracking in the wood-shed, and a loud call for Miss Dimple,
who consented to go down after much urging, and was the merriest one of
the whole party.




CHAPTER V.

PLAYING TRUANT.


For several days after her return Dotty Dimple was in a state of jubilee.
She had a great deal to tell, and the whole household was ready to
listen. Norah would stand with a dish or a rolling-pin in her hand, and
almost forget what she had intended to do in her desire to hear every
word Miss Dotty was saying.

Once, when she related her adventure with the pigeon-pie, grandma Read,
who was clear-starching her caps, let the starch boil over on the stove;
and at another time Mrs. Parlin was so much absorbed in a description of
Phebe, that she almost spiced a custard with cayenne pepper.

All these evidences of interest were very flattering to Dotty. Sometimes
she took Prudy one side, and told her the same story twice over, to which
Prudy always listened with unfailing politeness. As I said before, while
this excitement lasted Miss Dimple was in a state of jubilee. But by and
by the novelty wore off; she had told the family everything she could
possibly think of, and now longed for a few pairs of fresh ears into
which to pour her stories. Everybody else was working for Christmas;
Dotty alone was idle; for no one had time to give her a daily stint, and
see that she accomplished it.

"After the holidays I shall have to go to school; so now is my time to
play," said she to herself, "and I ought to play every minute, as tight
as I can spring."

But she tried so hard to be happy that the effort was really very
tiresome. If she had only had something to do, I am almost sure she would
not have fallen into the misfortune which I am about to record.

One day her mother sent her to a worsted store to pattern some worsteds.
A girl behind the counter gave her the right shades, and she slowly
started for home. It was about four o'clock of a November day. Dotty,
glancing idly at the sky, saw that the sun was already getting low.

"How queer it is!" thought she; "it seems as if the sun grows sleepy very
early nowadays, and goes to bed right in the middle of the afternoon.
Well, I declare, if there isn't Lina Rosenberg!"

The beautiful little Jewess was just turning an opposite corner, and, as
usual, the sight of her face bewitched Dotty in a minute.

[Illustration: LINA ROSENBERG INVITES DOTTY TO HER HOUSE.]

"O, Lina Rosenberg, come over here! How do you do?"

"I'm very well, Dotty: how do YOU do? Only I wish you wouldn't call
me a BUG!"

"Well, then, Lina, you mustn't have bugs in your name if you don't want
to be called by 'em. Did you know I'd been Out West?"

"No; you haven't, Dotty Dimple!"

"Yes, I have; you may ask my father. I kept my own ticket right in my
glove, and took 'most the whole care of myself. Went to the Blind 'Sylum;
found a pearl in an oyster; been 'way down in a coal mine; and--and--"

"Come to my house, won't you, and tell me all about it?" said Lina
Rosenberg, looking as beguiling as possible, and taking Dotty's
unresisting hand.

Dotty knew very well that her mother would never allow her to go to
Lina's house; but she did not like to say that, and she only replied,--

"I've matched my worsteds, and now I must go home."

"O, you can go home afterwards. My mother said to me to-day, 'Do you
bring Dotty Dimple home to supper this very night. She'll be so glad to
see you!'"

Dotty gave another glance at the sky, then one at the city clock.

"What time do you drink tea, Lina?"

"At five, 'most always."

Dotty had long felt a great curiosity about the domestic affairs of the
Jews; and here was an unexpected opportunity to sit down at the very
table with them. She had an invitation from the head of the family, and
that was something which did not happen every day. She could go home any
time afterwards; for their own tea-hour was not till half past six.

"I'll walk along with you a little way, Lina, and think it over."

It was true Mrs. Parlin did not approve of Mandoline or any of her
family; but Dotty thought she would forget that, just for once.

"O, dear! I keep thinking how my mamma said, 'I do not wish you to
play with Lina Rosenberg!' Now I can 'most always forget easy enough;
but when I TRY to forget, it says itself over and over--and I remember
just as hard!"

As they turned another corner they met Susy, who had been sent to the
dye-house.

"Why, Dotty," said she, "what are you doing on that street?"

Lina spoke up very boldly,--

"She's going to the doctor's with me, Susy Parlin, to get a plaster for
my mother."

At this wicked speech Dotty's heart almost sank into her boots; for she
had never known before that Lina would tell a deliberate lie.

Lina lived in a little grocery store. Her father was gone away to-day,>
and her mother had just served a customer with a pound of damp brown
sugar, saying, as she clipped the string,--

"It's very cheap sweetening at that price; we are going to rise on it
to-morrow."

After that she stood a minute in front of the store, and shook her
head at Jacob, a little boy, some three years old, who was trying to
balance a patent washboard against a tree which grew out of the brick
pavement. It was a large, scrawny tree, which looked as if it was
obliged to live there, but didn't want to, and had tried in vain to
get burnt up in the Portland fire. From the lower branches of the
tree depended a couple of dun-colored hams, and a painted board, with
the words, "Good Family Butter."

"Come in, Jacob, you naughty boy!" said Mrs. Rosenberg, this time shaking
him, because she was afraid he would injure the patent wash-board. Then
Jacob, who had been waiting for the shaking, and would not stir without
it, went in at the side door crying; for the family lived in one end of
the store.

Mrs. Rosenberg had a great many children, and was obliged to work very
hard at various employments. Just now she went to spreading pumpkin-seeds
to dry under the stove. She was not expecting company; and when Mandoline
entered with Dotty, she looked up from her work with a frown.

"Who've you brought home with you this time, Mandoline Rosenberg?" said
she. "Take off your hat and hang it over them tommatuses; but mind yer
don't drop it into that dish of lard."

"Mother," pleaded Mandoline, "we want to go up chamber to see my pretty
things; her mother sent her a-purpose."

"No, she didn't; no such a thing! You're a master hand to pick up
children and fetch 'em home here, and then crawl out of it by lying!
Besides, you've got to knit. I must have those socks done by to-morrow
noon, Mandy, or I'll know the reason why."

As Mrs. Rosenberg spoke, she pushed a waiter full of seeds under the
stove as if she hated the very sight of them; and when she stood up
again, Dotty observed that her dirty calico dress did not come anywhere
near the tops of her calf-skin shoes.

"But, mother," said Mandoline, with a winning smile, "this is Dotty
Dimple, the little girl that gave me the needle-book."

This was partly true. Dotty had given Mandoline an old needle-book; but
it had been in return for some maple sugar, which the little Jewess had
pilfered from her father's store.

"Dotty Dimple, is it?" said Mrs. Rosenberg, with a sharp look at the
little guest.

"I don't know now any better than I did before. That's a name for a
doll-baby; I should say."

"Alice Parlin, mother."

"Is it? O, well; you may take her up stairs out of my way; but mind, you
must knit every minute you're gone."

Dotty was greatly abashed by this reception, and would have rushed out of
the house, but Mandoline held her fast.

"You shan't go a step," said she, "I'll hide your hat."

So Dotty, under peril of going home bareheaded, was obliged to creep up
the rickety staircase with Mandoline. She likened her feelings on the
occasion to those of a person whom "the mayor is putting in the lockup."
Indeed, the "lock-up" was Dotty's dream of all the horrors, and she had
no doubt it was the mayor himself who always stood with his hands
outstretched, ready to thrust wicked people into it.

The chamber which the little girls entered was an unfinished one, and
from the rafters hung paper bags of dried herbs; for, besides being a
housekeeper and clerk, Mrs. Rosenberg was something of a doctress withal,
and made "bitters" for her particular friends.

"Sit down here on the bed, Dotty Dimple, and look at my paper dolls,"
said Lina, producing from under a disjointed chair, an old cigar box full
of paper heroes and heroines. Mandoline was an artist in he! way, and
these figures were clad in the most brilliant costumes of silver and
gold. Dotty was dazzled. Never before had it been her lot to see such
magnificent dolls,--dolls which shone so in the sun; every one of them a
king or a queen, and fit to wear a crown.

"O, Lina," sighed she, in ecstasy, "where _do_ you get your silver
and gold?"

"Tease for it," replied the little Jewess.

Dotty knew, to her own sorrow, that Lina was capable of teasing. It was
hard to keep so much as an apple or a peppermint away from her if she
happened to set her heart on it.

"I'll give you twenty dolls," said Lina, "if you'll let me have your
ring; and it isn't a very pretty ring, either; looks like brass."

Dotty locked her fingers together.

"You can't tease away my owny dony pearl, Lina, if it _is_ brass; so you
needn't try."

"Mandoline!" called out Mrs. Rosenberg's sharp voice from down stairs,
"are you at work?"

"O, dear!" said Lina, sauntering along to an old chest, and taking her
knitting from the top of it; "that's always the way. I thought if you
came, mother'd let me play."

Dotty understood from this remark why Lina had asked her to go home with
her. It was not because she wished to hear any of Dotty's brilliant
stories, for she had not asked a single question about Out West; it was
because she hoped for a reprieve from the dreaded knitting.

"She's a real naughty little girl," thought Miss Dimple; "and if she
hadn't hided my hat, I'd go right home."

There was a heavy tread on the stairs. Mrs. Rosenberg was coming up,
partly to see if her daughter was knitting, and partly to hang a paper
bag on the long pole overhead. Mandoline was dreadfully afraid of her
mother, and, in her eagerness to be found hard at work, she rattled her
needles very fast, while her fingers wandered aimlessly about among the
stitches. Mrs. Rosenberg detected the cheat at once; and, as she was
needing the money for the socks, she scolded Mandoline soundly, and
pelted her pretty little hands, rat, tat, tat, with a steel thimble.

Dotty was a little startled, and peeped out at Lina from the corners of
her eyes. Mrs. Rosenberg scolded so hard that the paper bags overhead
seemed to rattle, and some yellow pollen dropped out of one of them like
shooting stars.

Dotty had never known that there are such cruel people in the world; but
let me tell you, little reader, every mother is not like the gentle,
low-voiced woman who takes you in her lap, and kindly reproves you when
you have done wrong. No; there are very different mothers; hard-working,
ignorant ones, who do not know how to treat their children any more than
you know how to build a brick house.

Mrs. Rosenberg was so severe and unreasonable, that her little daughter,
through fear of her, had learned to deceive. Still Mrs. Rosenberg loved
Mandoline, and would have been a better mother, perhaps, if she had only
known how, and had not had so much work to do.

Presently she went down stairs, and left the little girls together.

"Good!" said Lina, in a low voice. "She's gone; now we'll play."

"But you can't knit if you play, Lina. Tell me where you hided my hat,
'cause I want to go home."

"You shan't go home till after supper, you little darling Dotty Dimple."

"O, but I must go, for my mother doesn't know where I am," said Dotty, in
a dreary tone. She had no longer any curiosity regarding Jewish suppers;
all she wanted was the liberty to get away. But it is always easier to
fall into a trap than to get out of it. Mandoline would not produce the
missing hat, and it was no light matter for Dotty to go down stairs,
among the noisy, quarrelsome children, and beg the severe Mrs. Rosenberg
to take her part. If she did so, perhaps the woman would pelt her with
the steel thimble. Perhaps, too, she would say Mandoline might keep the
hat. So Dotty played "synagogue," and all the while the sun was dropping
down, down the sky, as if it had a leaden weight attached to it, to make
it go faster.




CHAPTER VI.

A STRANGE VISIT.


The same warfare of words continued to come up from the kitchen, and
presently the odor of sausages stole up, too; Mrs. Rosenberg was
preparing supper. It seemed to the impatient Dotty that she was a long
while about it; but she worked as fast as she could, with so many
children clinging to her skirts, and impeding her movements.

"Supper, Mandoline!" called she at last, in a shrill voice; and the
little girls went down.

The supper was palatable enough, but very unwholesome, and the
table-cloth was dirty and wrinkled.

"You don't seem to like my cooking," said Mrs. Rosenberg, with a
displeased glance at Dotty's full plate.

"Yes'm," replied the little guest, faintly; "but I've eaten up my
appetite."

At the same time she swallowed a little oily gravy in desperation, and
looked slyly to see if Solly was watching her. Yes, he was, and so were
all the rest of the family, as if she had been a peculiar kind of animal,
just caught and caged.

"I suppose they are dreadful nice folks at your house," continued Mrs.
Rosenberg. "I almost wonder your mother let you come here to play with my
poor little girl. Mandy's just as good as you are, though,--you can tell
her so,--and she's got a sight prettier eyes."

Dotty's heart kept swelling and swelling, till presently it seemed as if
there wasn't room enough in her whole body to hold it. She thought of
the cheerful, orderly tea-table at home; she recalled her mother's gentle
ways, her lovely face, and longed to kiss her cheek, and whisper,
"Forgive me."

"Mamma'll be just as patient with me," thought Dotty; "she always is! But
if I once get home, I'll never make her patient any more. I'll never run
away again; not unless she _asks_ me to--I won't."

The children, as fast as they finished their suppers, jumped up and ran
away from the table--all but Solly, who had some faint idea that it was
not polite to do so before company. He was a natural gentleman; and it
was unfortunate that just at this time his mother was obliged to send
him to Munjoy of an errand. Otherwise he would have made his sister give
up Dotty's hat, and perhaps would have walked home with the unhappy
child himself.

As it was, Dotty did not seem to have a friend in the world. It was now
so dark that she hardly dared look out of doors; but even in the
brightest daylight she could not have found her way home.

"You've got to stay all night," said Mandoline. "Isn't that splendid?"

Mandoline did not mean to be cruel. She had observed that her mother
urged her own guests to stay, and sometimes kept them almost by force.
This she supposed was true politeness. More than that, she was anxious,
for private reasons, to hold Dotty, so she might not have to knit so
much. She knew, too, that her mother was proud to have such a well-bred
little girl in the house. So she would not give up Dotty's hat.

At eight o'clock, Dotty went to bed with Mandoline in the unfinished
chamber, sorely against her will; and Mandoline told her such dreadful
stories that she could not close her eyes for fright.

"This is the queerest house I was ever in," thought she, "and the
queerest bed. I s'pose it's made of pin-feathers, for they stick into
me awfully."

The bed was on the floor, and was founded upon woolsacks and buffalo
skins. The sleeping arrangements in this house were somewhat peculiar.
Mrs. Rosenberg was like the old woman in the shoe, and she stowed her
numerous family away for the night in as little space as possible. For
instance, the four youngest children slept together in one trundle-bed,
two at the top and two at the bottom, their feet coming together in the
middle. But Mandoline had left the trundle bed, and was lying on the
floor with her guest. The companion the trundle-bed--little Kosina--was
quite indignant at being deserted, and made a loud outcry, in the hope of
attracting her mother's attention.

"I don't want to sleep alone!" said she; "I don't want to sleep
_alo-o-one!_"

At another time Dotty would have laughed heartily. It was so absurd for a
child to be lonesome when there were three in the bed! But Dotty was too
low-spirited even to smile. Mrs. Rosenberg came up and boxed Rosina's
ears; and after that the trundle-bed subsided.

At last, when Dotty supposed it must be midnight, though it was only
nine o'clock, there came a loud knocking at the side door. She hid her
face under the coverlet, feeling sure it was either a wild Indian or a
highway robber.

"Don't be afraid," said Mandoline, rousing herself. "It is somebody
after beer, and mother has locked up the store."

No, it was Mr. Parlin's voice which spoke. Dotty's swollen heart gave a
great bound, and then sank heavier than ever.

"My little daughter Alice has run away." That was what he said. "Is she
in your house, Mrs. Rosenberg?"

"Yes," replied Mrs. Rosenberg, "I expect its likely she is; but she and
my Mandoline's been abed and asleep two hours."

"O, papa, I'm wide awake!" cried little Dotty, with an eager shriek,
which pierced the rafters.

"Good night, then," said Mr. Parlin, coldly.

"O, but, papa, I want to go home. What did my mamma say about me?"

"She said she had sent you of an errand. When you have finished your
errand, you may come home. Good night."

"O, NOT good night!" screamed Dotty, almost falling down stairs in her
haste, and fastening her dress as she ran. "It was 'cause Lina hid my
hat; and that was why--"

"By the way," said Mr. Parlin, without paying the slightest attention to
his half-frantic little daughter, who was clinging to his knees, and
pleading with her whole soul, "Mrs. Rosenberg, I'm sorry to trouble you,
but if you will be kind enough to keep this little runaway girl till I
send for her, I shall be very much obliged."

"O, certainly, Mr. Parlin; certainly, sir," replied the Jewess, smiling
very sweetly, and trying to pat Dotty's head, which was in such violent
motion that she only succeeded in touching the end of her nose. No one
who had looked at Mrs. Rosenberg at that moment would have suspected her
of being a vixen. She was sure Mr. Parlin would pay her handsomely if she
kept his daughter there for a day or two; and the prospect of a little
money always made the poor woman very amiable.

"Thank you, madam," said Mr. Parlin, gently disengaging himself from
Dotty. "When you are tired of my little daughter, will you please let me
know? Goodnight, Mrs. Rosenberg; good-night, Alice."

And, before Dotty had time to scream again, he was gone.

For a moment she stood quite still, gazing at the door-latch; then rushed
out into the darkness, calling, "Papa, papa!" But Mrs. Rosenberg laid her
strong hands upon her, and brought her back.

"So your mother didn't say you might come? I thought it was queer. Hush!
hush! Don't go into fits, child. There are no bears in this house, and
nothing will hurt you."

Mrs. Rosenberg's manner was much kinder than it had been before; and with
a child's quick insight, Dotty perceived that her father's coming had
wrought the change.

"I want to go home! I want to go home!" cried she, with another
passionate outburst. "O, take me--do! They won't send for me, never! Take
me, and I'll give you--O, Mrs. Rosenberg, I'll give you--"

For a little while there was quite a scene at the little grocery, and it
repented Mandoline that she had ever hidden Dotty's hat. The trundle-bed
waked up at both ends and screamed; the black and tan dog, who slept
under the counter in the store, barked lustily; the parrot in the blue
cage called out, "Quit that! quit that!" and Mrs. Rosenberg was afraid a
policeman would come in to inquire the cause of the uproar. She pattered
about in a pair of her husband's cotton-velvet slippers, and tucked all
her little ones into bed again, very much as if they had been clothes in
a boiler, which she was forcing down with a stick. She was a woman who
would be obeyed; and Dotty, finding it of no use to hold out against
fate, went up stairs at last, and lay down beside Mandoline on the
"pin-feathers."

This stolen visit had turned out quite, quite different from her
anticipations. Instead of a delightful supper of some mysterious Jewish
cookery, she had been drinking gall and wormwood. That Lina would not
let her go--THAT was the gall; that her father made her stay--THIS was
the wormwood.

"She is a tough piece," sighed Mrs. Rosenberg, as she laid her weary
limbs to repose; "I didn't know, one while, but she'd get away in spite
of me. I wonder what her father'll pay me. He seems to think this is a
house of correction. Her mother won't be likely to let her stay more than
one day. I'll have on the best table-cloth for breakfast; and along in
the forenoon I'll fetch out some macaroni cakes and lager beer; that'll
coax her up, I guess."

Just then Mrs. Rosenberg down stairs and Dotty Dimple up stairs both fell
asleep. One dreamed of running away and being chased by a dog with a hat
on his head, who barked "Good-night" as fiercely as a bite. The other
dreamed of money and brown sugar. And all the while the rats were
treating themselves to nibbles of wood; but nobody heard them. Be
careful, old rats! Your teeth have done mischief before now! The night
wore on to the wee small hours, when a loud noise like a cannon startled
Mrs. Rosenberg; or was she dreaming? The house was shaken to its very
foundation, as if by an earthquake, and the room was full of smoke. She
was just running for the children, when the building fell together with a
crash, the roof was blown off into the street, the windows were shivered
to atoms, and tongues of flame leaped madly up from the ruins.

What did it mean? She was so stunned by the shock that she scarcely cared
whether one of her children was spared or not; she only thought in her
stupor that Mr. Parlin would not pay her for Dotty's lodging if the child
was blown to pieces.

"I know how it happened," said she, twitching at her own hair to arouse
herself. "Just as Abraham always said; the rats have been nibbling
matches in the store; they've burned a hole through the floor, and set
fire to that keg of gunpowder. Yes, that's it!"




CHAPTER VII.

PLAYING PRISONER.


I know how it happened, too. It came of eating sausages. Mrs. Rosenberg,
after she was fairly awake, felt so uncomfortable and oppressed that she
went up stairs to see if the children were safe. Really, I do suppose
those little human souls were precious to her, after all.

There lay Mandoline and Dotty side by side on the buffalo skins; and the
Jewish mother stood in her short night-dress, with a tallow candle in
her hand, and gazed at them tenderly. That horrible dream had stirred
the fountain of love in her heart They made a beautiful picture, and
there was no stain of evil in their young faces. It seems as if the
angel of Sleep flies away with loads of naughtiness, for he always
leaves sleeping children looking very innocent. But, alas! he brings
back next morning all he carried away, for the little ones wake up with
just as bad hearts as ever.

"What sweet little creeters!" said Mrs. Rosenberg, bending over and
kissing them both; "just like seraphims right out of the clouds."

Softly, madam! If a drop of tallow should fall on them from that candle,
they might take to themselves wings and fly away. That was what Cupid did
in the fairy story, and you are in fairy-land yourself, Mrs. Rosenberg;
you are still half asleep.

She looked at Mandoline's perfect little hand, lying outside the
patchwork quilt.

"It doesn't seem, now," murmured the mother, with a tear in her eye,
"that I could ever whack them pretty fingers with a thimble. I do believe
if I wasn't pestered to death with everything under the sun to do, I
might be kind o' half-way decent."

Perhaps the poor woman told the truth; I think she did.

Then, as she stood there, she breathed a little prayer without any
words,--not for herself--for she did not suppose God would hear
_that_,--but for her children that she "banged about" every day of
their lives.

She was not really a Jewess, for she had no religion of any sort, and
never went to church; but I am sure of one thing: little overworked
Mandoline would have loved her mother better if she had known she ever
prayed for her at all.

In the morning, Mrs. Rosenberg was just as hard and sharp as ever; she
could not stop to be pleasant. Dotty longed to get away; but she was an
exile from her own dear home; whither could she turn?

It was a cold morning, and the children ran down stairs half dressed and
shivering. Dotty spread out her stiff, red fingers before the
cooking-stove like the sticks of a fan. "O, hum!" thought she, drearily,
"I wish I could see the red coals in our grate. My mamma wouldn't let me
go to the table with such hair as this. Prudy'd say 'twas 'harum scarum.'
But I can't brush it with a tooth-comb, 'thout any glass--so there!"

Dotty's curly hair looked quite as respectable as Mandoline's. Mrs.
Rosenberg was far too busy to attend to her children's heads. They might
be rough on the outside, and full of mischief inside; but she could not
stop to inquire.

"What a dreadful nice breakfast!" remarked Judith, rubbing her hands,
and accidentally hitting little Jacob, who forthwith spilled some
molasses on the clean table-cloth, and had his ears boxed in consequence.
It was very evident that this meal was a much better one than usual--a
sort of festival in honor of Dotty Dimple: Dutch cheese and pickles,
mince-pie and gingerbread, pepper-boxes and green and yellow dishes, were
mixed up together as if they had been stirred about with a spoon.

Dotty had not intended to eat a mouthful; but after her light supper
of the night before, she was really hungry, and, in spite of her
best resolves, the fish-hash and corncake gradually disappeared from
her plate.

After breakfast she felt more resigned, and armed herself to meet her
fate. Mrs. Rosenberg graciously allowed Mandoline to lay aside her
tedious knitting, and give her undivided attention to her guest. Dotty
had no heart for play.

"Seems as if I should choke in this house," said she; "let's go out
and breathe."

The air inside the house was rather stifling from a mixture of odors, and
soon the grocery began to fill with loud-talking men and boys; but not
the least of Dotty's troubles was the black and tan dog, who seemed to
have just such a temper as Mrs. Rosenberg, and would certainly have
scolded if he had had the gift of speech.

The two little girls went out to walk; but it was not a pleasant street
where the grocery stood, and Dotty hurried on to a better part of the
town. They fluttered about for two or three hours, as aimless as a couple
of white butterflies. Just as they were turning to go back to the dismal
little grocery, which Dotty thought was more like a lock-up than ever,
they met Mr. and Mrs. Parlin riding out in a carriage.

[Illustration: DOTTY AND THE BLACK-AND-TAN DOG.]

Dotty felt a sudden tumult of joy and shame, but the joy was uppermost.
She rushed headlong across the street, swinging her arms and startling
the horse, who supposed she was some new and improved kind of windmill,
dressed up in a little girl's clothes.

"O, my darling mamma, my darling mamma!"

To her surprise, the horse did not stop. He only pricked up his ears, and
looked with displeasure at the windmill, but kept along as before.

"Mamma, mamma, I say!"

Her mother never even looked at her, but turned her gaze to the blackened
trees, the heaps of ruin along the pavement.

"O; papa! O, stop, papa! It's me! It's Dotty!"

Mr. Parlin bent on his runaway daughter a glance of indifference, and
called out, in passing,--

"What strange little girl is this, who seems to know us so well? It
_looks_ like my daughter Alice. If it is, she needn't come to my house
to-day; she may go and finish her visit at Mrs. Rosenberg's."

Then the horse trotted on,--indeed, he had never paused a moment,--and
carried both those dear, dear people out of sight.

What did they mean? What had happened to Dotty Dimple, that her own
father and mother did not know her?

She looked down at the skirt of her dress, at her gaiters, at her little
bare hands, to make sure no wicked fairy had changed her. Not that she
suspected any such thing. She understood but too well what her father
and mother meant. They knew her, but had not chosen to recognize her,
because they were displeased.

Dotty's little heart, the swelling of which had net gone down at all
during the night, now ached terribly. She covered her face with her
hands, and groaned aloud.

"Don't," said Mandoline, touched with pity. "They no business to
treat you so."

"O, Lina, don't you talk! You don't know anything about it. You never had
such a father'n mother's they are! And now they won't let me come into
the house!"

This wail of despair would have melted Mrs. Parlin if she could have
heard it. It was only because she thought it necessary to be severe that
she had consented to do as her husband advised, and turn coldly away
from her dear little daughter. Dotty was a loving child, in spite of her
disobedience, and this treatment was almost more than she could bear. She
found no consolation in talking with Lina, for she knew Lina could not
understand her feelings.

"She hasn't any Susy and Prudy at her house, nor no _anything_" thought
Dotty. "If I lived with Mrs. Rosenberg and that dog, I'd want to be
locked out; I'd ask if I couldn't. But, O, my darling mamma! I've been
naughty too many times! When I'd been naughty fifty, sixty, five hundred
times, then she forgave me; but now she can't forgive me any more; it
isn't possible."

Dotty staggered against a girl who was drawing a baby-carriage, but
recovered herself.

"It isn't possible to forgive me any more. She told me not to go on the
water, and I went. She told me not to have temper, and I had it. Every
single thing she's told me not to do, I always went and did it. She said,
'I do not wish you to play with Lina Rosenberg;' and then I went right
off and played with her. I didn't have a bit good time; but that's
nothing. She hided my hat--Lina did; but if I'd gone home, straight home,
and not gone to her house, then she couldn't have hided it.

"I was naughty; I was real naughty; I was as naughty as King Herod and
King Pharaoh. Nobody'll ever love me. I'm a poor _orphanless_ child! I've
got a father'n mother, but it's just the same as if I didn't, for they
won't let me call 'em by it. O, they didn't die, but they won't be any
father'n mother to ME!

"'What strange little girl is this?' that's what my papa said. '_ Looks_
like my daughter Alice!' O, I wish I could die!"

"Come, come," said Lina; "let's go home. Mother said you and I might have
some macaroni cakes and lager beer, if we wouldn't let the rest of 'em
see us at it."

"I don't care anything about your _locker_ beer, Lina Rosenberg, nor your
whiskey and tobacco pipes, either. Nor neither, nor nothing," added the
desolate child, standing "stock still," with the back of her head against
a pile of bricks, her eyes closed, and her hands folded across her bosom.

"There, there; you're a pretty sight now, Dotty Dimple! What if you
should freeze so! Come along and behave."

"I can't, I can't!"

"If you don't, Dotty, I'll have to go into that barber's shop. I know the
man, and I'll make him carry you home _piggerback_"

"Well, if I've got to go, I'll go," said Dotty, rousing herself,
and starting; "but I'd rather be dead, over'n over; and wish I was;
so there!"




CHAPTER VIII.

PLAYING THIEF.


This day was the longest one to be found in the almanac; it was longer
than all the line of railroad from Maine to Indiana and back again.

Dotty shut her lips together, and suffered in silence. But when the
afternoon was half spent, it suddenly occurred to her that if she did not
go home she should die. Soldiers had died of homesickness, for she had
heard her father say so. She had not been able to swallow a mouthful of
dinner, and that fact was of itself rather alarming.

"Perhaps I'm going to have the _typo_. Any way, my head aches. Besides,
my papa didn't say I _mustn't_ go home. He said I must finish my visit,
and I _have_. O, I've finished _that_ all up, ever and ever and ever so
long ago."

She and Mandoline went out again to "breathe," Mrs. Rosenberg giving her
daughter a warning glance from the doorway, which meant, "Be watchful,
Mandy!" for the look of fixed despair on the little prisoner's face gave
the woman some anxiety lest she should try to escape.

The unhappy child walked on in silence, twisting a lock of her front
hair, and looking up at the sky. A few soft snow-flakes were dropping out
of the clouds. Every flake seemed to fall on her heart. Winter was
coming. It was a gray, miserable world, and she was left out in the cold.
She remembered she had been happy once, but that was ages ago. It wasn't
likely she should ever smile again; and as for laughter, she knew that
was over with her forever. Susy and Prudy were at home, making book-marks
and cologne mats; _they_ could smile, for they hadn't run away.

"I shouldn't think my mamma'd care if I went in at the back door,"
thought Dotty, meekly. "If she locks me out, I can lie down on the steps
and freeze."

But the question was, how to get away from Mandoline, who had her in
charge like a sharp-eyed sheriff.

"That's the street I turn to go to my house--isn't it, Lina?" asked
she, quickly.

"I shan't tell you, Dotty Dimple. Why do you ask?"

"'Cause I'm going home. I'm sick. Good by."

"But you musn't go a step, Dotty Dimple."

"Yes, I shall; you're not my mamma, Lina Rosenberg; you mustn't tell me
what to do."

"Well, I'm going everywhere you go, Dotty, but I shan't say whether it's
the way to your house, or the way to Boston; and _you_ don't know."

Dotty was not to be so easily baffled.

"I don't know myself, Lina Rosenberg, but if you're so mean as not to
tell, I can ask somebody else that _will_ tell--don't you see?"

This was a difficulty which Lina had not provided for. She was very sorry
Dotty had come out "to breathe."

Very soon they overtook a lady, who pointed out the right street to
Dotty; and it was in an opposite direction from the one she was taking.

"Now I've found out, Miss Rosenberg, and you can't help yourself."

"Well, I shall go with you, Dotty, just the same. I shall go right up to
your house, and tell your mother you've run away _again_"

It was very disagreeable to Miss Dimple to be pursued in this way; but
she put on an air of defiance.

"I shouldn't think you'd want to go where you wasn't wanted, Miss
Rosenberg."

Lina had never intended to do such a thing; she had not courage enough.

"O, dear! what shall I do to make you go back with me? My mother'll scold
me awfully for letting you get away."

"Well, there; you've got the dreadfulest mother, Lina, and I'm real
sorry; but it's no use to tease me; I wouldn't go back, not if you should
cut me up into little pieces as big as a cent."

Lina was ready to fall upon her knees, right on the pavement. She
offered Dotty paper dolls enough to people a colony; but Miss Dimple was
as firm as a rock, now her face was once set towards home. Lina turned on
her heel, and slowly walked away. Dotty called after her:--

"There, Lina, now you've told an awful story! You said you'd go to my
house, and tell my mother I'd run away again; and now you don't dare go;
so you've told an awful wicked story."

With this parting thrust at her tormentor, Dotty turned again to the
misery of her own thoughts. Her home was already in sight; but the
uncertainty as to her reception there made her little feet falter in
their course. Her head sank lower and lower, till her chin snuggled into
the hollow of her neck, and her eyes peered out keenly from under her
hat, to make sure no one was watching. There was a door-yard on one
side of the house. She touched the gate-latch as gently as if it had
been a loaded gun, and crept noiselessly along to the side door. Here
she paused. Her heart throbbed loudly; but, in spite of that, she could
hear Norah walking about, and rattling the covers of the stove, as she
put in coal.

Dotty's courage failed. What if Norah should make believe she didn't know
her, and shut the door in her face?

"I can't see Norah, and hear her say, 'What strange little girl is this?
It _looks_ like our Alice; but it can't be any such a child!' No, I can't
see anybody. I've finished my visit; I have a right to come home; but
p'rhaps they won't think so. I feel's if I wasn't half so good as
tea-grounds, or coffee-grounds, or potato-skins," continued she, with a
pang of despair. "I know what I'll do; I'll go down cellar; that's where
the rats stay; and if I _am_ bad, I hope I'm as good as a rat, for I
don't bite."

One of the cellar windows had been left out in order to admit coal.
Through this window crept Dotty, regardless of her white stockings and
crimson dress. When she had fairly got her head through the opening, and
was no longer afraid of being seen, she breathed more freely.

"Here I am! Not a bit of me out. But I must go on my tipsy-toes, or
they'll hear me, and think it's a _buggler_"

There was quite a steep hill to walk over, and she found it anything
but a path of roses. Once or twice she stumbled and fell upon her hands
and knees.

"Seems to me," said she, drawing out her foot, which had sunk above the
ankle in coal,--"seems to me I have as many feet as a caterpillar."

But she kept on, down the Hill of Difficulty, till she reached solid
ground. It was not a very cheerful apartment, that is certain. The light
had much difficulty in getting in at the little windows, and when it did
fight its way through it was not good for much; it was a gloomy light,
and looked as if it had had a hard time.

Dotty went up to the furnace for comfort. It was a tall, black thing,
doing its best to give warmth and cheer to the rooms up stairs, but it
was of no use to the cellar. It was like some brilliant people, who shine
in society, but are dull and stupid at home. Dotty opened the furnace
door, and tried to warm her cold fingers.

"Why, my hands are as black as a _sip_," sighed she; as if she could have
expected anything else.

There did not seem to be one ray of hope in her little dark soul. She
had no tears to shed,--she seldom had,--but when she was in trouble, she
was always in the lowest depths.

"Pretty well for me to make believe I was a thief, and was going to
steal! 'Who is this strange little girl?' said he; 'it _looks_ like--'"

She heard voices near the cellar door. What if Norah should come down
after butter? Dotty was not prepared for that. She could not hide in the
keg of lard, of course; and what _should_ she do?

"My head is tipside up; I can't think." Then she began to wonder how long
she could live down there, in case she was not discovered.

"I s'pose I can climb up on the swing shelf, and sleep there nights. I
can hide behind things in the daytime, and when I'm hungry I can eat out
of the jars and boxes."

The sound of voices came down distinctly from the kitchen overhead. Dotty
crouched behind an apple barrel, and listened. Grandma Read was talking
to Mrs. Parlin, who seemed to be in another room.

"Mary, my glasses _are_ gone this time," said she. "If little Alice were
only here, I should set her to hunting."

"She don't know I'm in the house this minute," thought Dotty; "no,
_under_ the house. Dear me!"

With that she walked softly up the stairs, and listened at the
door-latch; for the sound of her grandmother's voice was encouraging, and
Dotty, in her loneliness, longed to be near the dear people of the
family, even if she could not see them.

"Edward," said her mother,--what music there was in her voice!--"if you
are going after that dear child, you'd better take a shawl to wrap her
in, for it is snowing fast. And be sure to tell her we love her dearly,
every one of us, and don't believe she will ever run away again."

"O, was her papa going after her? Did they love her, after all? Were they
willing to keep her in the house?"

Dotty opened the door before she knew it. "O, mamma, mamma!" cried she,
rushing into her mother's arms.

"Why, Dotty, you darling child, where did you come from?" exclaimed Mrs.
Parlin, in great surprise, kissing the little, dirty girl, and taking her
right to her heart, in spite of the coal-dust.

"If you'll let me stay at home," gasped Dotty, "if you'll _let_ me stay
at home, I'll live in the kitchen, and won't go near the table."

"Where _did you_ come from?" said Mr. Parlin, kissing a clean place on
Dotty's black face, and laughing under his breath.

"I came through the cellar window, papa."

"Through the cellar window, child?"

"Yes, papa; I didn't s'pose you'd care!"

"Care! My dear, your mother is the one to care! Just look at your
stockings!"

"There was coal there, thrown in," said Dotty, with a quivering lip;
"and I had to walk over it, and under it, and through it."

"Was my little daughter afraid to come in by the door?"

"I didn't know's you wanted me, papa.

"I thought you'd say, 'What strange child is this?'"

Mr. Parlin, looking at the black streaks on Dotty's woeful face, found it
very difficult to keep from laughing. "A strange child' she appeared to
be, certainly.

"But I'd got my visit all finished up, ever and ever so long ago."

"So you really chose to come back to us, my dear?"

"O, papa, you don't know! Did you think, did you s'pose--"

Here Dotty broke down completely, and, seizing her father's shirt-bosom
in both her grimy hands, she buried her face in it, and sprinkled it with
tears of ink.

There was great surprise throughout the house when Dotty's arrival
became known.

"We didn't know how to live without you any longer," said Prudy; "and
tomorrow Thanksgiving Day."

"But I never should have come up," said Dotty, "if I hadn't heard mamma
talk about loving me just the same; I never _could_ have come up."

"Excuse me for smiling," said Prudy; "but you look as if you had fallen
into the inkstand. It is _so_ funny!"

Dotty was not at all amused herself; but after she was dressed in clean
clothes, she felt very happy, and enjoyed her supper remarkably well. The
thought that they "didn't know how to live without her" gave a relish to
every mouthful.

It was a delightful evening to the little wanderer. The parlor looked so
cheerful in the rosy firelight that Dotty thought she "would like to kiss
every single thing in the room." It was unpleasant out of doors, and the
wind blew as if all the people in the world were deaf, and must be made
to hear; but Dotty did not mind that. She looked out of the window, and
said to Prudy,--

"Seems as if the wind had blown out all the stars; but no matter--is it?
It is all nice in the house."

Then she dropped the curtain, and went to sit in her mother's lap. Not a
word of reproach had been uttered by any one yet; for it was thought the
child had suffered enough.

"Mamma," said Dotty, laying her tired head on her mother's bosom, "don't
you think I'm like the prodigal's--daughter? Yesterday I felt a whisper
'way down in my mind,--I didn't hear it, but I _felt_ it,--and it said,
'You mustn't disobey your mamma; you mustn't play with Lina Rosenberg!'"

"Only think, my child, if you had only paid attention to that whisper!"

"Yes, mamma, but I tried to forget it, and by and by I did forget
it--almost. There's one thing I know," added Dotty, clasping her hands
together; "I'll never run away again. If I'm going to, I'll catch myself
by the shoulder, and hold on just as hard!"

"My blessed child, I hope so," said Mrs. Parfin, with tears in her eyes
and a stronger faith in her heart than she had felt for many a day that
Dotty really meant to do better. "You don't know how it did distress your
papa and me to have you stay in that house a night and a day; but we
hoped it would prove a lesson to you; we meant it for your best good."

To make sure the lesson would not be forgotten, Prudy read her little
sister a private lecture. She had written it that afternoon with carmine
ink, on the nicest of tinted paper. Dotty received it very humbly, and
laid it away in the rosewood box with her precious things.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRUDY'S LECTURE.

"We must keep good company, Dotty, or not any at all. This is a fact.

"Even an apple is known by the company it keeps. Grandpa Parlin says if
you put apples in a potato bin, they won't taste like apples--they'll
taste like potatoes.

"Sometimes I think, Dotty, you'd be as good and nice as a
summer-sweeting, if you wouldn't play with naughty children, like Lina
Rosenberg; but if you do, you'll be like a potato, as true as you live.

"Finis."




CHAPTER IX.

THANKSGIVING DAY.


The next day was Thanksgiving. Dotty wakened in such a happy mood that it
seemed to her the world had never looked so bright before.

"I don't think, Prudy, it's the turkey and plum pudding we're going to
have that makes me so happy--do you?"

"What is it, then, little sister?"

"O, it's 'cause I dreamed I was sleeping on pin-feathers, and woke up and
found I wasn't. You'd feel a great deal better, Prudy, if you'd run away
and had such a dreadful time, and got home again."

"I don't want to try it," returned Prudy, with a smile.

"No; but it's so nice to be forgiven!" said Dotty, laying her hand on her
heart, "it makes you feel so easy right in here."

A fear came over Prudy that the little runaway had not been punished
enough. But Dotty went on:--

"It makes you feel as if you'd never be naughty again. Now, if my mamma
was always thumping me with a thimble, and scolding me so as to shake the
house, I shouldn't care; but when she is just like an angel, and forgives
me, I _do_ care."

"I'm so glad, Dotty! I think, honestly, mother's the best woman that
ever lived."

"Then why didn't she marry the best man?" asked Dotty, quickly.

"Who is that?"

"Why, Abraham Lincoln, of course." Prudy laughed.

"Yes; I suppose Mr. Lincoln was the best man that ever lived; but papa
comes next."

"Yes," said Dotty; "I think he does. And I'd rather have him for a father
than Mr. Lincoln, 'cause I'm better 'quainted with him. I shouldn't dare
kiss the President. And, besides that, he's dead."

"You're a funny girl, Dotty; but what you say is true. Everything happens
just right in this world."

"Does it?" said Dotty, wrinkling her brows anxiously; "does it,
now truly?"

"Yes, indeed, Dotty. Anybody wouldn't think so, but it does."

"Then I suppose it happens right for me to be a bad girl and run away."

"No, indeed, Dotty; because you can help it. Everything is right that we
_can't_ help; that's what I mean."

"Then I s'pose 'twas right for me to crawl through the cellar window,"
said Dotty; "for I'm sure I couldn't help it"

"O, dear me! you ask such queer questions that I can't answer them, Dotty
Dimple. All I know is this: everything happens just right in this
world--_when you can't help it_."

With which sage remark Prudy stepped out of bed, and began to dress
herself. Dotty planted her elbow in the pillow, and leaned her head
on her hand.

"I don't believe it happens just right for Mrs. Rosenberg to keep that
dog, or to thump so with a thimble; but, then, I don't know."

"I'm hurrying to get dressed," said Prudy. "The first bell has rung."

"Why, I never heard it," cried Dotty, springing up. "I wouldn't be late
to-day for anything."

Prudy looked anxiously at her little sister to see if she was cross; but
her face was as serene as the cloudless sky; she had waked up right, and
meant to be good all day. When Dotty had one of her especially good days,
Prudy's cup of happiness was full. She ran down stairs singing,--

"Thank God for pleasant weather!
  Shout it merrily, ye hills,
And clap your hands together,
  Ye exulting little rills.

"Thank him, bird and birdling,
  As ye grow and sing;
Mingle in thanksgiving,
  Every living thing,
  Every living thing,
  Every living thing."

Dotty was so anxious to redeem her character in everybody's eyes, that
she hardly knew what she was doing. Mrs. Parlin sent her into the kitchen
with a message to Norah concerning the turkey; but she forgot it on the
way, and stood by Norah's elbow gazing at the raisins, fruit, and other
nice things in a maze.

"What did my mamma send me here for? She ought to said it over twice.
Any way, Norah, now I think of it, I wish you please wouldn't starch my
aprons on the inside; starch 'em on the outside, 'cause they rub
against my neck."

"Go back and see what your mamma wants," said Norah, laughing.

"Why, mamma," cried Dotty reappearing in the parlor quite crestfallen--"
why, mamma, I went right up to Norah to ask her, and asked her something
else. My head spins dreadfully."

Mrs. Parlin repeated the message; and Dotty delivered it this time
correctly, adding,--

"Now, Norah, I'm all dressed for dinner; so I can do something for you
just as well as not. Such days as, this, when you have so much to do, you
ought to let me help."

To Dotty's surprise Norah found this suggestion rather amusing.

"For mercy's sake," said she, "I have got my hands full now; and when you
are round, Miss Dotty, and have one of your good fits, it seems as if I
should fly."

"What do you mean by a good fit?"

"Why, you have spells, child--you know you do--when butter wouldn't melt
in your mouth."

"Do I?" said Dotty. "I thought butter always melted in anybody's mouth.
Does it make my mouth cold to be good, d'ye s'pose?"

"La, me, I don't know," replied the girl, washing a potato vigorously.

"_I_ might wash those potatoes," said Dotty, plucking Norah's sleeve;
"do you put soap on them?"

"Not much soap--no."

"Well, then, Norah, you shouldn't put _any_ soap on them; that's why I
asked; for my mother just washes and rinses 'em; that's the proper way."

"For pity's sake," said Norah, giving the little busybody a good-natured
push. "What's going on in the parlor, Miss Dotty? You'd better run and
see. If you should go in there and look out of the window, perhaps a
monkey would come along with an organ."

"No, he wouldn't, Norah, and if he did, Prudy'd let me know."

As Dotty spoke she was employed in slicing an onion, while the tears ran
down her cheeks; but a scream from Norah caused her to drop the knife.

"Why, what is it?" said Dotty.

"Ugh! It's some horrid little _animil_ crawling down my neck."

"Let me get him," cried Dotty, seizing a pin, and rushing at poor
Norah, who tried in vain to ward off the pin and at the same time catch
the spider.

"_Will_ you let me alone, child?"

"No, no; I want the bug myself," cried Dotty, pricking Norah on
the cheek.

"Want the bug?"

"Yes; mayn't I stick him through with a pin from ear to ear? I know a
lady Out West that's making a c'lection of bugs."

"Well, here he is, then; and a pretty scrape I've had catching him;
thanks be to you all the same, Miss Dimple."

As it turned out to be only a hair-pin, Dotty shook her head in disdain,
and went on slicing onions.

"Sure now," said Norah, "I should think you'd be wanting to go and see
what's become of your sister Prudy. Maybe she's off on the street
somewhere, and never asked you to go with her."

"Now you're telling a hint," exclaimed Dotty, making a dash at a turnip.
"I know what you mean by your monkeys and things; you want to get me
away. It's not polite to tell hints, Norah; my mamma says so."

But as Dotty began to see that she really was not wanted, she concluded
to go, though she must have it seem that she went of her own accord, and
not because of Norah's "hints."

"Did you think it was a buggler, when I opened the cellar-door last
night, Norah?"

"No; I can't say as I did--not when I looked at you," replied
Norah, gravely.

"'Cause I'm going into the parlor to ask mother if _she_ thought I was a
buggler. I believe I won't help you any more now, Norah; p'rhaps I'll
come out by and by."

So Dotty skipped away; but it never occurred to her that she had been
troublesome. She merely thought it very strange Norah did not appreciate
her services.

"I s'pose she knows mother'll help her if I don't," said she to herself.

Dotty's goodness ran on with a ceaseless flow till two o'clock, when that
event took place which the children regarded as the most important one of
the day--that is, dinner.

After the silent blessing, Mr. Parlin turned to his youngest daughter,
and said,--

"Alice, do you know what Thanksgiving Day is for?"

"Yes, sir; for turkey."

"Is that all?"

"No, sir; for plum pudding."

"What do you think about it, Prudy?"

"I think the same as Dotty does, sir," replied Prudy, with a wistful
glance at her father's right hand, which held the carving knife.

"What do you say, Susy?"

"It comes in the almanac, just like Christmas, sir; and it's something
about the Pilgrim Fathers and the Mayflower."

"No, Susy; it does not come in the almanac; the Governor appoints it. We
have so many blessings that he sets apart one day in the year in which we
are to think them over, and be thankful for them."

"Yes, sir; yes, indeed," said Susy. "I _always_ knew that."

"Now, before I carve the turkey, what if I ask the question all around
what we feel most thankful for to-day? We will begin with grandmamma."

"If thee asks me first," said grandma Read, clasping her blue-veined,
beautiful old hands, "I shall say I have everything to be thankful for;
but I am most thankful for peace. Thee knows how I feel about war."

The children thought this a strange answer. They had almost forgotten
there had ever been a war.

"Now, Mary, what have you to say?" asked Mr. Parlin of his wife.

"I am thankful we are all alive," replied Mrs. Parlin, looking at the
faces around the table with a loving smile.

"And I," said her husband, "am thankful we all have our eyesight. I have
thought more about it since I have visited two or three Blind Asylums.
Susy, it is your turn."

"Papa, I'm thankful I'm so near thirteen."

Mr. Parlin stroked his mustache to hide a smile. He thought that was a
very _young_ remark.

"And you, Prudy?"

"I'm so thankful, sir," answered Prudy, reflecting a while, "so thankful
_this_ house isn't burnt up."

"Bless your little grateful heart," said her father, leaning towards her
and stroking her cheek. "For my part, I think one fire is quite enough
for one family. I confess I never should have dreamed of being thankful
we hadn't had _two_. Well, Alice, what have you to say? I see a thought
in your eyes."

"Why, papa," said Dotty, laying her forefingers together with emphasis,
"I've known what I'm thankful for, for two days. I'm thankful Mrs.
Rosenberg isn't my mother!"

A smile went around the table.

"But, papa, I am, truly. What should I want _her_ for a mother for?"

"Indeed, I see no reason, my child, since you already have a pretty good
mother of your own."

"Pretty good, papa!" said Dotty, in a tone of mild reproof. "Why, if she
was YOUR mother, you'd think she was _very_ good."

"Granted," returned Mr. Parlin.

"I don't think you'd like it, papa, to have her scold so she shakes
down cobwebs."

"Who?"

"Mrs. Rosenberg."

"Never mind, my dear; we will not discuss that woman to-day. I hope you
will some time learn to pronounce her name."

Then followed a few remarks from Mr. Parlin upon our duty to the Giver
of all good things; after which he began at last to carve the turkey.
The children thought it was certainly time he did so. They were afraid
their thankfulness would die out if they did not have something to eat
pretty soon.




CHAPTER X.

GRANDMA'S OLD TIMES.


Grandma Read was in her own room, sitting before a bright "clean" fire.
She did not like coal; she said it made too much dust; so she always used
wood. She sat with her knitting in her hands, clicking the needles
merrily while she looked into the coals.

People can see a great many things in coals. Just now she saw the face of
her dear husband, who had long ago been buried out of her sight. He had a
broad-brimmed hat on his head, and there was a twinkle in his eye, for he
had been a funny man, and very fond of a joke. Grandma smiled as if she
could almost hear him tell one of his droll stories.

Presently there was a little tap at the door. Grandma roused herself, and
looked up to see who was coming.

"Walk in," said she; "walk in, my dear."

"Yes'm, we came a-purpose to walk in," replied a cheery voice; and
Prudy and Dotty danced into the room, with their arms about each
other's waists.

"O, how pleasant it seems in here!" said Prudy; "when I come in I always
feel just like singing."

"Thee likes my clean fire," said grandma.

"But, grandma," said Dotty, "I should think you'd be lonesome 'thout
anybody but _you_."

"No, my dear; the room is always full."

"Full, grandma?"

"Yes; full of _memories_."

The children looked about; but they only two sunny windows; a table with
books on it, and a pair of gold fishes; a bed with snowy coverlet and
very high pillows; a green and white carpet; a mahogany bureau and
washing-stand; and then the bright fireplace, with a marble mantel, and a
pair of gilt bellows hanging on a brass nail.

It was a very neat and cheerful room; but they could not understand why
there should be any more memories in it than there were in any other part
of the house.

"We old people live very much in the past," said grandma Read. "Prudence,
if thee'll pick up this stitch for me, I will tell thee what I was
thinking of when thee and Alice came in."

So saying, she held out the little red mitten she was knitting, and at
the same time took the spectacles off her nose and offered them to
Prudy. Prudy laughed.

"Why, grandma! my eyes are as good as can be. I don't wear glasses."

"So thee doesn't, child, surely. I am a little absent-minded, thinking of
old mother Knowles."

"Grandma, please wait a minute," said Prudy, after she had picked up the
stitch. "If you are going to tell a story, I want to get my work and
bring it in here. I'm in a hurry about that scarf for mamma."

"It is nothing very remarkable," said Mrs. Read, as the children seated
themselves, one on each side of her, Prudy with her crocheting of
violet and white worsted, and Dotty with nothing at all to do but play
with the tongs.

"Mrs. Knowles was a very large, fleshy woman, who lived near my father's
house when I was a little girl. Some people were very much afraid of
her, and thought her a witch. Her sister's husband, Mr. Palmer, got very
angry with her, and declared she bewitched his cattle."

"Did she, grandma?" asked Dotty.

"No, indeed, my dear; and couldn't have done it if she had tried."

"Then 'twas very _unpertinent_ for him to say so!"

"He was a lazy man, and did not take proper care of his animals.
Sometimes he came over and talked with my mother about his trials with
his wicked sister-in-law. He said he often went to the barn in the
morning, and found his poor cattle had walked up to the top of the
scaffold; and how could they do that unless they were bewitched?"

"Did they truly do it? I know what the scaffold is; it is a high place
where you look for hen's eggs."

"Yes; I believe the cows did really walk up there; but this was the way
it happened, Alice: They were not properly fastened into their stalls,
and being very hungry, they went into the barn for something to eat. The
barn floor was covered with hay, and there was a hill of hay which led
right up to the scaffold; so they could get there well enough without
being bewitched."

"Did your mother--my great-grandma--believe in witches?" asked Prudy.
"What did she say to Mr. Palmer?"

"O, no! she had no faith in witches; thy great grandmother was a sensible
woman." She said to him, "Friend Asa, thee'd better have some good strong
bows made for thy cattle, and put on their necks; and then I think
thee'll find they can't get out of their stalls. Thee says they are as
lean as Pharaoh's kine, and I would advise thee to feed them better.
Cattle that are well fed and well cared for will never go bewitched."

"Did Mrs. Knowles know what people said about her?" asked Prudy.

"Yes; she heard the stories, and it made her feel very badly."

"How did she look?"

"A little like thy grandmother Parlin, if I remember, only she was
much larger."

"Did she know anything?"

"O, yes; it was rather an ignorant neighborhood; but she was one of the
most intelligent women in it."

"Did she ever go anywhere?"

"Yes; she came to my mother for sympathy. I remember just how she looked
in her tow and linen dress, with her hair fastened at the back of the
head with a goose-quill."

"There, there!" cried Dotty, "that was what made 'em call her a witch!"

"O, no; a goose-quill was quite a common fashion in those times, and a
great deal prettier, too, than the waterfalls thee sees nowadays. Mrs.
Knowles dressed like other people, and looked like other people, for
aught I know; but I wished she would not come to our house so much."

"Didn't you like her?"

"Yes; I liked her very well, for she carried peppermints in a black bag
on her arm; but I was afraid the stories were true, and she might bewitch
my mother."

"Why, grandma, I shouldn't have thought that of _you_!"

"I was a very small girl then, Prudence; and the children I played with
belonged, for the most part, to ignorant families."

"Grandma was like an apple playing with potatoes," remarked Dotty, one
side to Prudy.

"I used to watch Mrs. Knowles," continued Mrs. Read, "hoping to see her
cry; for they said if she was really a witch, she could shed but three
tears, and those out of her left eye."

"Did you ever catch her crying?"

"Once," replied grandma, with a smile; "and then she kept her
handkerchief at her face. I was quite disappointed, for I couldn't tell
which eye she cried out of."

"Please tell some more," said Dotty.

"They said Mrs. Knowles was often seen in a high wind riding off on a
broomstick. It ought to have been a strong broomstick, for she was a very
large woman."

"Why, grandma," said Prudy, thrusting her hook into a stitch, "I can't
help thinking what queer days you lived in! Now, when I talk to _my_
grandchildren, I shall tell them of such beautiful things; of swings and
picnics, and Christmas trees."

"So shall I to _my_ grandchildren," said Dotty; "but not always. I shall
have to look sober sometimes, and tell 'em how I had the sore throat, and
couldn't swallow anything but boiled custards and cream toast. 'For,'
says I, 'children, it was _very_ different in those days.'"

"Ah, well, you little folks look forward, and we old folks look
backward; but it all seems like a dream, either way, to me," said
grandma Read, binding off the thumb of her little red mitten--"like a
dream when it is told."

"Speaking of telling dreams, grandma, I had a funny one last night," said
Prudy, "about a queer old gentleman. Guess who it was."

"Thy grandfather, perhaps. Does thee remember, Alice, how thee used to
sit on his knee and comb his hair with a toothpick?"

"I don't think 'twas me," said Dotty; "for I wasn't born then."

"It was I," replied Prudy. "I remember grandpa now, but I didn't use to.
It wasn't grandpa I dreamed about--it was Santa Claus."

Grandma smiled, and raised her spectacles to the top of her forehead.

"We never talked about fairies in my day," said she. "I never heard of a
Santa Claus when I was young."

"Well, grandma, he came down the chimney in a coach that looked like a
Quaker bonnet on wheels--but he was all a-dazzle with gold buttons; and
what do you think he said?"

"Something very foolish, I presume."

"He said, 'Miss Prudy, I'm going to be married.' Only think! and he such
a very old bachelor."

"Did thee dream out the bride?"

"It was Mother Goose."

"Very well," said Mrs. Read, smiling. "I should think that was a very
good match."

"She did look so funny, grandma, with a great hump on her nose, and one
on her back! Santa Claus kissed her; and what do you think she said?"

"I am sure I can't tell; I am not acquainted with thy fairy folks."

"Why, she shook her sides, and, said she, 'Sing a song o' sixpence.'"

"That was as sensible a speech as thee could expect from that quarter."

"O, grandma, you don't care anything about my dream, or I could go on and
describe the wedding-cake; how she put sage in it, and pepper, and
mustard, and baked it on top of one of our registers. What do you suppose
made me dream such a queer thing?"

"Thee was probably thinking of thy mother's wedding."

"O, Christmas is going to be splendided than ever, this year," said
Dotty; "isn't it grandma? Did you have any Christmases when you
were young?"

"O, yes; but we didn't make much account of Christmas in those days."

"Why, grandma! I knew you lived on bean porridge, but I s'posed you had
something to eat Christmas!"

"O, sometimes I had a little saucer-pie, sweetened with molasses, and the
crust made of raised dough."

"Poor, dear grandma!"

"I remember my father used to put a great backlog on the fire Christmas
morning, as large as the fireplace would hold; and that was all the
celebration we ever had."

"Didn't you have Christmas presents?"

"No, Alice; not so much as a brass thimble."

"Poor grandma! I shouldn't think you would have wanted to live! Didn't
anybody love you?" said Dotty, putting her fingers under Mrs. Read's cap,
and smoothing her soft gray hair; "why, I love every hair of your head."

"I am glad thee does, child; but that doesn't take much love, for thee
knows I haven't a great deal of hair."

"But, grandma, how could you live without Christmas trees and things?"

"I was happy enough, Alice."

"But you'd have been a great deal happier, grandma, if you'd had a Santa
Claus! It's so nice to believe what isn't true!"

"Ah! does thee think so? There was one thing I believed when I was a very
little girl, and it was not true. I believed the cattle knelt at
midnight on Christmas eve."

"Knelt, grandma? For what?"

"Because our blessed Lord was born in a manger."

"But they didn't know that. Cows can't read the Bible."

"It was an idle story, of course, like the one about Mother Knowles. A
man who worked at our house, Israel Grossman, told it to me, and I
thought it was true."

Here grandma gazed into the coals again. She could see Israel Grossman
sitting on a stump, whittling a stick and puffing away at a short pipe.

"Well, children," said she, "I have talked to you long enough about
things that are past and gone. On the whole, I don't say they were good
old times, for the times now are a great deal better."

"Yes, indeed," said Prudy.

"Except one thing," added grandma, looking at Dotty, who was snapping the
tongs together. "Children had more to do in my day than they have now."

Dotty blushed.

"Grandma," said she, "I'm having a playtime, you know, 'cause there can't
anybody stop to fix my work. But mother says after the holidays I'm going
to have a stint every day."

"That's right, dear. Now thee may run down and get me a skein of red yarn
thee will find on the top shelf in the nursery closet."




CHAPTER XI.

THE CRYSTAL WEDDING.


As the crystal wedding was to take place on the twenty-fourth, the
Christmas tree was deferred till the night after, and was not looked
forward too by the children as anything very important. They had had a
tree, a Kris Kringle, or something of the sort, every year since they
could remember; but a wedding was a rare event, and to be a bridesmaid
was as great an honor, Dotty thought, as could be conferred on any
little girl.

It was intended that everything should be as much as possible like the
original wedding. Mrs. Parlin was to wear the same dove-colored silk and
bridal veil she had worn then, and Mr. Parlin the same coat and white
vest, though they were decidedly out of fashion by this time. Dotty was
resplendent in a white dress with a long sash, a gold necklace of her
aunt Eastman's, and a pair of white kid slippers. Johnny was to be
groomsman. He was a boy who was always startling his friends with some
new idea, and this time he had "borrowed" a silver bouquet-holder out of
his mother's drawer, and filled it with the loveliest greenhouse flowers.

Until Dotty saw this, she had been happy; but the thought of standing up
with a boy who held such a beautiful toy, while her own little hands
would be empty--this was too much.

"Johnny Eastman," said she, with a trembling voice, "how do you think it
will look to be holding flowers up to your nose when the minister's
a-praying? I'd be so 'shamed, so 'shamed, Johnny Eastman!"

"You want the bouquet-holder yourself, you know you do," said Johnny;
"you want everything you see; and if folks don't give right up to you,
then there's a fuss."

"O, Johnny Eastman, I'm a girl, and that's the only reason why I want the
bouquet-holder! If I was a boy, do you s'pose I'd touch such a thing? But
I can't wear flowers in the button-holes of my coat--now can I?"

The children were in the guest chamber, preparing to go down--all but
Prudy, who was in her mother's room, assisting at the bridal toilet. Susy
and Flossy stood before the mirror, and Johnny and Dotty in the middle of
the room, confronting each other with angry brows.

[Illustration: DOTTY WANTS THE BOUQUET-HOLDER.]

"Hush, children!" said Susy, in an absentminded way, and went on
brushing her hair, which was one of the greatest trials in the whole
world, because it would not curl. She had frizzed it with curling-tongs,
rolled it on papers, and drenched it with soap suds till there was
danger of its fading entirely away; still it was as straight, after all,
as an Indian's.

"O, dear!" said she; "it sticks up all over my head like a skein of yarn.
Children, do hush!"

"Mine curls too tight, if anything; don't you think so?" asked Flossy,
trying not to look as well satisfied with herself as she really felt;
adding, by way of parenthesis, "Johnny, why can't you be quiet?"

"Are you going to let me have that bouquet-holder, Johnny Eastman?"
continued Dotty; "'cause I'm going right out to tell my mother. She'll
be so mortified she'll send you right home, if you hold it up to your
nose, when you are nothing but a boy."

"That's right, Dimple, run and tell."

"No, I shan't tell if you'll give it to me. And you may have one of the
roses in your button-hole, Johnny. That's the way the Pickings man had,
that wrote Little Nell; father said so. There's a good boy, now!"

Dotty dropped her voice to a milder key, and smiled as sweetly as the
bitterness of her feelings would permit. She had set her heart on the
toy, and her white slippers, and even her gold necklace, dwindled into
nothing in comparison.

"Whose mother owns this bouquet-holder, I'd like to know?" said Johnny,
flourishing it above his head. "And whose father brought home the flowers
from the green-house?"

"Well, any way, Johnny, 'twas my aunt and uncle, you know; and they'd be
willing, 'cause your mamma let me have her necklace 'thout my asking."

"I can't help it if they're both as willing as two peas," cried Johnny.
"I'm not willing myself, and that's enough."

"O, what a boy! I was going to put some of my nightly blue sirreup on
your hangerjif, and now I won't--see if I do!"

"I don't want anybody's sirup," retorted Johnny; "'tic'ly such a cross
party's as you are."

"Johnny Eastman, you just stop murdering me."

"Murdering you?"

"Yes; 'he that hateth his brother.'"

"I'm not your brother, I should hope."

"Well, a cousin's just as bad."

"No, not half so bad. I wouldn't be your brother if I had to be a
beggar."

"And I wouldn't let you be a brother, Johnny Eastman, not if I had to go
and be a heathen."

"O, what a Dotty!"

"O, what a Johnny!"

By this time the little bridesmaid's face was anything but pleasant to
behold. Both her dimples were buried out of sight, and she had as many
wrinkles in her forehead as grandma Head. Johnny danced about the room,
holding before her eyes the bone of contention, then drawing it away
again in the most provoking manner.

"If you act so, Johnny Eastman, I won't have you for my bridegroom."

"And I won't have you for my bride--so there!"

The moment these words were spoken, the angry children were frightened.
They had not intended to go so far. It had been their greatest pleasure
for several weeks to think of "standing up" at a wedding; and they would
neither of them have missed the honor on any account. But now, in their
foolish strife, they had made it impossible to do the very thing they
most desired to do. They had said the fatal words, and were both of them
too proud to draw back. There was one comfort. "The wedding will be
stopped," thought Dotty; "they can't be married 'thout Johnny and me."

The guests were all assembled. It was now time for the bridal train to go
down stairs and have the ceremony performed. As the children left the
chamber, uncertain what to do, but resolved that whichever "stood up,"
the other would sit down, Johnny seized a bottle of panacea which stood
on the mantel, and wet the corner of Dotty's handkerchief.

"There is some sirup worth having," said he; "stronger than yours. Rub
it in your eyes, and see if it isn't."

The boy did not mean what he said, or at any rate we will hope he did
not; but Dotty, in her haste and agitation, obeyed him without stopping
one moment to think.

Instantly the wedding was forgotten, the bouquet-holder, the anger, the
disappointment, and everything else but the agony in her eyes. It was so
dreadful that she could only scream, and spin round and round like a top.

A scene of confusion followed. The poor child was so frantic that her
father was obliged to hold her by main force, while her mother tried to
bathe her eyes with cold water. They were fearfully inflamed, and for a
whole hour the wedding was delayed, while poor Dotty lay struggling in
her father's arms, or tore about the nursery like a wild creature.

Johnny was very sorry. He said he did not know what was in the bottle; he
had sprinkled his cousin's handkerchief in sport.

"She talks so much about her 'nightly blue sirreup,'" said he to his
mother, "that I thought I would tease her a little speck."

"I don't know but you have put her eyes out," said his mother, severely.

"O, do you think so?" wailed Johnny. "O, don't say so, mother!"

"I hope not, my child; but panacea is a very powerful thing. I don't know
precisely what is in it, but you have certainly tried a dangerous
experiment."

"I didn't mean to, mother; I'll never do so again."

"That is what you always say," replied his mother, shaking her head; "and
that is why I am so discouraged about you. Nothing seems to make any
impression upon you. If you have really made your cousin blind for life I
hope it will be a lesson to you."

While Mrs. Eastman talked, looking very stately in her velvet dress,
Master Johnny was balancing himself on the hat-tree in the hall, as if he
scarcely heard what she said; but, in spite of his disrespectful manner,
he was really unhappy.

"I knew something would go wrong," continued Mrs. Eastman, "when it was
first proposed that you and Dotty should stand up together, and I did not
approve of the plan. What is the reason you two children must always be
quarrelling?"

"She is the one that begins it," replied Johnny. "If I could have stood
up with Prudy, there wouldn't have been any fuss."

"With Prudy, indeed! I dare say you would be glad to do so now, you
naughty boy. Your kind aunt Mary suggested it, but I told her, No. Since
you have hurt Dotty so terribly, you cannot be groomsman."

"O, mother!"

"No, my son. She is unable to perform her part, and you must give up
yours. Percy will take your place."

In spite of his manliness, Johnny dropped a few tears, which he
brushed away with the back of his hand; but his mother, for once in
her life, was firm.

I will not say that Johnny's disappointment was not some consolation to
Dotty, who lay on the sofa in the parlor with her eyes bandaged, while
the wedding ceremony was performed. If Johnny had been one of the group,
while her own poor little self was left out, necklace, slippers, and
all, she would have thought it unjust.

As it was, it seemed hard enough. She was in total darkness, but her
"mind made pictures while her eyes were shut." She could almost see how
the bride and bridegroom looked, holding each other by the hand, with the
tall Percy on one side, and the short Prudy on the other,--the dear
Prudy, who was so sorry for her sister that she could not enjoy taking
her place, though a fairer little bridesmaid than she made could hardly
be found in the city.

The same clergyman officiated now who had married Mr. and Mrs. Parlin
fifteen years before; and after he had married them over again, he made a
speech which caused Dotty to cry a little under her handkerchief; or, if
not the speech, it was the panacea that brought the tears--she did not
know which.

He said he remembered just how Edward Parlin and Mary Read looked when
they stood before him in the bloom of their youth, and promised to live
together as husband and wife. They had seemed very happy then; but he
thought they were happier now; he could read in their faces the history
of fifteen beautiful years. He did not wonder the time had passed very
pleasantly, for they knew how to make each other happy; they had tried to
do right, and they had three lovely children, who were blessings to them,
and would be blessings to any parents.

It was here that Dotty felt the tears start.

"I'm not a blessing at all," thought she; "he doesn't know anything about
it, how I act, and had temper up stairs with Johnny! Johnny's put my eyes
out for it, and I'll have to go to the 'Sylum, I suppose. If I do, I
shan't be a blessing so much as I am now! To anybody ever!"

By and by aunt Eastman presented the bride with a bridal rose, which
looked as nearly as possible like the one she had given her at the first
wedding, and which grew from a slip of the same plant. Dotty could not
see the rose, but she heard her aunt say she hoped to attend Mrs.
Parlin's Golden Wedding.

"I shall be ever so old by that time," thought the little girl.
"Fifteen from fifty leaves--leaves--I don't know what it leaves; but I
shall be a blind old lady, and wear a cap. Perhaps God wants to make a
very good woman of me, same as Emily, and that's why he let Johnny put
my eyes out."

Here some one came along and offered Miss Dimple a slice of wedding cake,
which tasted just as delicious as if she could see it; then some one
else put a glass of lemonade to her lips.

"Has my little girl a kiss for me?" said Mrs. Parlin, coming to the sofa
as soon as she could break away from her guests.

The gentle "mother-touch" went to Dotty's heart. She threw her arms about
Mrs. Parlin's neck, wrinkling her collar and tumbling her veil.

"Take care, my child," said Mr. Parlin, laughing; "do not crush
the bride. Everybody has been coming up to salute her, and you
must understand that she does you a great honor to go to you and
_beg_ a kiss."

"It is just like you, though, mamma. You are so good to me, and so is
everybody! No matter how naughty I am, and spoil weddings, they don't
say, 'You hateful thing!'"

"Would it make you a better child, do you think, Dotty, to be scolded
when you do wrong?"

"Why, no, indeed, mamma. It's all that makes me _not_ be the wickedest
girl in this city, is 'cause you are so good to me; I know it is."

Mrs. Parlin kissed the little mouth that said these sweet words.

"And now that I am blind, mamma, you are so kind, I s'pose you'll feed me
with a spoon."

"You will surely be taken care of, dear, as long as your eyes are in
this state."

"But shan't I be always blind?"

"No, indeed, child; you will be quite well in a day or two."

"O, I'm so glad, mamma. I was thinking I shouldn't ever go to school, and
should have to be sent to the 'Sylum."

While Dotty was speaking, Johnny came up to the sofa, and, taking her
hand, said, in a tone of real sorrow,--

"Look here, Dotty; I was a naughty boy; will you forgive me?"

As Johnny was not in the habit of begging pardon, and did it now of his
own free will, Dotty was greatly astonished.

"Yes, Johnny," said she, "I forgive you all up. But then I don't ever
want you to put my eyes out again."

"I won't, now, honest; see 'f I do," replied Master Johnny, in a choked
voice. "And you may have that bouquet-holder, to keep; mother said so."

"O, Johnny!"

"Yes; mother says we can call it a 'peace offering.' Let's not quarrel
any more, Dotty, just to see how 'twill seem."

"What, never!" exclaimed Dotty, starting up on her elbow, and trying to
look through her thick bandage at Johnny. "Never! Why, don't you mean to
come to my house any more, Johnny Eastman?"

"Yes; but I won't quarrel unless you begin it."

"O, _I_ shan't begin it," replied Miss Dimple, confidently; "I never do,
you know."

Johnny had the grace not to retort. He was ashamed of his ungentlemanly
conduct, and knelt before the sofa, gazing sadly at his blindfolded
little cousin. It was a humble place for him, and we will leave him
there, hoping his penitence may do him good for the future.

As for Miss Dimple, we will bid her goodbye while her eyes are closed. Be
patient, little Dotty; the pain will soon be over, and when we see you
again, you will be trudging merrily to school with a book under your arm.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dotty Dimple at Play, by Sophie May

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOTTY DIMPLE AT PLAY ***

***** This file should be named 10320.txt or 10320.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/3/2/10320/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL

