The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Girl Scouts' Good Turn, by Edith Lavell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Girl Scouts' Good Turn

Author: Edith Lavell

Release Date: January 11, 2008 [EBook #24248]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN ***




Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









 THE GIRL SCOUTS'
 GOOD TURN

 BY EDITH LAVELL

 AUTHOR OF

 _"The Girl Scouts at Miss Allen's School," "The Girl
 Scouts at Camp," "The Girl Scouts' Canoe
 Trip," "The Girl Scouts' Rivals."_

 [Illustration]

 A. L. BURT COMPANY
 Publishers       New York




 THE
 GIRL SCOUTS SERIES

 A Series of Stories for Girl Scouts

 By EDITH LAVELL

 The Girl Scouts at Miss Allen's School
 The Girl Scouts at Camp
 The Girl Scouts' Good Turn
 The Girl Scouts' Canoe Trip
 The Girl Scouts' Rivals

 Copyright, 1922
 By A. L. BURT COMPANY

 THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN

 Made in "U. S. A."

 [Illustration: Marjorie had played the best of anyone since the
 beginning of the term.
 (_The Girl Scouts' Good Turn_)        _Page 75_]




THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN




CHAPTER I

THE RECEPTION


     "And it's somewhere there in fairyland----
     It's where the rainbow ends!"

Marjorie Wilkinson hummed softly to herself as she skipped from place to
place, adding the finishing touches to the effect she and her committee
had planned.

It was the first Saturday of the regular fall term at Miss Allen's
Boarding School. The girls were back again in their old places--all
except the seniors of the previous year, who had graduated--and now the
sophomores were preparing for the first social event of the year, their
reception to the freshmen. Marjorie Wilkinson was chairman.

The clock struck seven, and she stood perfectly still in the center of
the floor, viewing the result of their work. The bare, ugly gymnasium
had disappeared; in its place was a little winter scene from fairyland.
Cedar branches, decked with flakes of artificial snow, and great white
snowbanks, completely hid the walls from view. Spread over the floor,
except for a space in the middle reserved for dancing, were pine needles
and more patches of snow; and everywhere frosty tinsel glimmered in the
soft, blue light of the covered electric bulbs.

The girls walked lightly and spoke softly, as if they feared that by
some rude noise they might break the magic spell of the scene.

Marjorie, wearing her first real party dress--a pale blue georgette,
with a silver sash, and a narrow silver band about her forehead, seemed
in perfect harmony with the blue and silver of the scene. But, standing
gracefully erect, with one satin-slippered foot extended in front of the
other, and her head thrown back as she contemplated the effect, she did
not think of the impression she was making. It was not until Lily
Andrews, her room-mate, drew her attention to her costume that she
thought of herself.

"Your dress is just lovely with the rest of the effect," she said,
putting her arm affectionately through Marjorie's.

"Thanks, Lil," replied the other girl carelessly. "Isn't the room
wonderful? I think it's the prettiest scene, off the stage, that I ever
saw!"

"It's lovely. They certainly can't help liking it, can they?"

"Poor freshies!" sighed Marjorie, with the infinite wisdom of the
sophomore. "Remember how green we were?"

"Indeed, I do--and that first reception, when they still had the
sorority! Didn't we just think Frances Wright and Ethel Todd were
nothing short of goddesses? I wonder whether these freshmen know about
our Girl Scout troop, and are as eager to make it as we were the
sorority!"

But before Lily could reply, the orchestra, three players who came from
the city, entered the room, and Marjorie hurried over to give them the
final directions. When she turned around again, Lily had vanished; but
near her stood Ruth Henry, her old friend from her home town, who had
played the part of jealous rival ever since the girls had been at Miss
Allen's.

"Hello, Marj!" She greeted her with the old familiarity; indeed, the
girls were good friends now, in spite of all that had happened the
previous year. "Your dress is sweet," she added.

"I'm glad you like it, Ruth. Yours is a dream, too!"

Ruth sat down on a chair near-by, and beckoned Marjorie to sit beside
her.

"The freshies aren't here yet," she remarked. "We might as well rest. I
want to ask you something."

Marjorie complied with her request as far as her physical presence was
concerned. But her eyes wandered from one place to another over the
room, reviewing the effect, and her mind was drifting from what Ruth was
saying. But the latter hardly noticed her preoccupation, so intent was
she upon her own interests.

"Listen, Marj!" She reduced her voice to an intimate tone. "Have you
thought about our class president?"

"Our president?"

"Yes--not Doris Sands--of course, she is still president; but what I
mean is--our next president!"

"No, I haven't," replied Marjorie, absently. "I never gave it a thought.
Why?"

"Well, I have; and our class meeting is Monday evening, you know. I
think we ought to talk it over, for it's important to get just the right
girl."

"I suppose it is," admitted Marjorie, glancing nervously towards the
door. "Why do you s'pose they're so late, Ruth?"

"Oh, they'll be along soon," replied Ruth, with annoyance. "It's hardly
half-past seven."

But Marjorie could not content herself to sit still any longer.

"Well, it'll be hard to get anybody as good as Doris," she said, rising.
"I wish it weren't against the Constitution to elect her over again."

"I hear my name being taken in vain," said a pleasant voice, and the
girls looked up to see their pretty class president just behind them.

"Pardon me for interrupting your tete-a-tete, but do you know who has
charge of the games?" she asked.

"Lily," replied Marjorie. "But you needn't worry; she's all prepared."

"Good!" exclaimed Doris, glad to dismiss the matter from her mind. Then,
"I certainly am crazy to get acquainted with the freshmen. I know most
of them by sight now, and I've talked to two or three, but I don't know
any of their names."

"Won't it be fun to pick out the Girl Scouts?" remarked Ruth.

"But we don't _pick_ them, Ruth," protested Marjorie; "they pick
themselves."

At this moment half a dozen freshmen entered the open door of the
gymnasium, and the girls hastened over to welcome them and to make them
feel at home. They walked in shyly, hesitating just inside the door, for
everything was new and strange to them.

Marjorie was seized with a great longing to seek out all the retiring
ones and tell them that she would be their friend. But perhaps some of
the freshmen might resent this, and interpret her attitude as
condescending. So she tried to content herself with entertaining as many
different girls as she could, and remembering as many names as possible.

The first freshman to make any definite impression upon her was
Florence Evans, sister of Edith Evans, the senior who had served as
Acting Lieutenant of the troop at camp, and who still held that office.
It was Florence that introduced herself to Marjorie. Neither bold nor
shy, with a little more than the ordinary amount of good looks, she
seemed unconsciously to possess the poise of her older sister.

"I have heard so much about you, Marjorie," she said, not hesitating in
the least to use the older girl's first name; "Edith told me all about
your winning the canoe at camp. And I have been so anxious to meet you!"

"Thanks," replied Marjorie, sincerely flattered that the senior whom she
admired so much had seen fit to mention her name at home. "We certainly
did have a wonderful time during the summer!"

"I'm crazy to be a Girl Scout!" said Florence, enthusiastically. "My
room-mate, Mildred Cavin"--she nodded toward an attractive girl a few
feet away, talking to Lily--"my room-mate and I talk of nothing else."

Ruth, who overheard the remark, smiled with conscious self-importance;
but Marjorie's thoughts flew back to the time when she was in Florence's
place: a freshman eager to make good among the upper classmen. But then
it was a question of popularity and personal favoritism; now everything
was different.

"It all depends upon yourself, Florence," she said. "You can become a
Girl Scout if you will work hard enough. You must receive a mark of over
eighty per cent on your first report, and you must make the hockey
squad. Then you'll be among the first to join."

"Yes, I know. But isn't it dreadfully hard to get on the hockey team?
With so many upper classmen, I mean?"

By this time Mildred Cavin, Daisy Gravers, and Esther Taylor--three more
freshmen--had joined them. Evelyn Hopkins, Ruth Henry's room-mate, who
had missed making both the sorority and the Scout troop the previous
year, sauntered up, just as Florence asked the question.

"It's an impossibility!" she exclaimed, pettishly. "At least, if you're
not in right with Miss Phillips, the Gym teacher who is Captain of the
troop, you don't stand one bit of show!"

Marjorie colored at the words and the tone of this statement; she so
much desired that her classmates appear dignified and well-poised to the
freshmen.

Esther Taylor, a stylish girl with a flippant manner, laughed
derisively. "Scouts don't mean much in my young life," she said,
defiantly. "I'm no soldier-girl!"

Marjorie did not feel ready to go into the explanation of what Girl
Scouts really stand for; she merely arched her brows and looked away
indifferently. To her relief, the orchestra struck up a one-step, and
the girls all separated to dance.

Games and dancing followed alternately, until the groups were entirely
broken up, and everyone was acquainted. It was half-past nine when an
intermission was called for refreshments to be served.

The sophomores disappeared into a screened corner to procure the
ice-cream for their guests, and while they were waiting for plates,
Marjorie again encountered Ruth.

"It's my opinion," remarked the latter, "that we've struck a bunch of
lemons! I haven't met a single girl so far that has pep enough to
organize a secret class meeting, or put up any kind of a fight against
us sophomores! Why, I don't believe there will be one girl in the whole
freshman class who'll make the Girl Scout troop!"

"I'd be willing to bet a box of the best chocolates made that Edith
Evans' sister makes it!" retorted Marjorie. "She's just the type!"

"I guess you're right," admitted Ruth; "but if you'd ever talk to that
funny little thing over near the piano, you'd be disgusted with
freshmen, too. She sort of keeps her mouth open, as if she weren't quite
all there, and makes the queerest replies--or else none at all. But
she's the most hopeless one I've struck yet."

"Who is she?" asked Marjorie, peeping around the screen and looking
towards the orchestra. "That little girl in pink?"

"Yes--with the scared look."

"What's her name?"

"Alice Endicott," answered Ruth. Then, "But why all this interest,
Marj?"

"No special reason, except that I'm sorry for anybody that is lonely. I
think I'll try to make friends with her."

"You always did enjoy the 'Big Sister' act, didn't you?" jeered Ruth. A
sarcastic little gleam came into her eyes. "How about Frieda Hammer?"
she asked, pointedly. "She didn't turn up, did she?"

Ruth referred to the country girl whose father had worked on the farm
where the Scout camp was situated the previous summer. The girl had come
to the kitchen tent three separate times, at night, and upon each
occasion had stolen a great deal of food. Upon the final occurrence she
had been detected and identified, but although she had admitted the
theft to Miss Phillips when she was later accused, she made no attempt
at apology or explanation. The girl's ignorance, her wildness, her lack
of advantages, had touched the pity of Marjorie and Frances, and some of
the other softer-hearted Scouts; accordingly, the troop had voted to
send Frieda to public school in the fall, assuming her support as their
public Good Turn. Marjorie had been tremendously enthusiastic over the
project, while Ruth, on the other hand, had thrown cold water upon it
from the beginning. Now that the girl had not appeared as she had
promised, Ruth felt elated; Marjorie, in her turn, was equally cast
down.

"She may come yet!" she answered, defiantly, putting more hope into her
tone than she really entertained. "Mrs. Brubaker wrote to Miss Phillips
that Frieda's baby sister was sick! So probably she'll come in a week or
so."

Marjorie succeeded in obtaining two plates of ice-cream and some cakes,
and, holding them high above the heads of the crowd, made her way to the
distant corner indicated by Ruth. She found the freshman still sitting
alone, half hidden by an overhanging evergreen, gazing dejectedly into
space.

"Pardon me," said Marjorie pleasantly, "may I give you some ice-cream?"

The girl looked up suddenly, and for an instant her brown eyes met
Marjorie's. She seemed pale and thin, and her eyes appeared unusually
large and liquid, as if tears were never far from the surface.

"Thank you," she muttered, rising and taking the plate.

"And may I sit with you?" continued the older girl. "At least, if you
are not expecting----"

"No, no; nobody is with me!" She flushed painfully at the reference to
her own unpopularity.

"Ruth Henry said she was just talking to you," said Marjorie hastily,
trying to cover her embarrassment. "And your name is Alice Endicott,
isn't it?"

"Yes."

"And who is your room-mate?" pursued Marjorie, wondering why the girl,
whoever she was, should desert Alice, knowing how shy she was.

"Esther Taylor," replied the freshman; "but she doesn't bother much with
me."

It was obvious that poor little Alice was both homesick and lonely, and
Marjorie's heart warmed toward her as it might to a lost child. She
chatted pleasantly all through the intermission; then, securing her a
partner for the next dance, she left with the promise to seek her again.

When the party was all over, and the tired sophomores were getting ready
for bed, Marjorie, who still felt the sting of Ruth's taunt, remarked to
Lily,

"Well, if we can't do our Good Turn for Frieda Hammer, we can do one
right here for the new girls, to keep them from being homesick. I, for
one, intend to try."

"I'm with you," agreed Lily, as she crawled into bed.

But Ruth Henry's last waking thoughts were of a different nature: how
she might best succeed in gaining the class presidency for herself.

"If I go at the thing boldly," she decided, "there is no reason why I
should fail. And I mean to do it, if I never accomplish another thing as
long as I'm at Miss Allen's!"




CHAPTER II

THE SOPHOMORE PRESIDENT


"Are you going to dress for Ruth's tea?" asked Doris Sands of Marjorie
Wilkinson, as the girls walked out of the dining-room together.

Marjorie pulled down the corners of her mouth at the question. It did
seem strange to her that Ruth Henry should have decided in such a hurry
to give a tea. There must be something behind it! Probably the girl was
making a play for popularity, so that she might be elected to an office.

"I'm not going. It's just at the time of hockey practice, and, of
course, I couldn't miss that. Lily won't be there, either."

"I'm sorry!" murmured Doris. "Things never seem half so nice without
you, Marj!"

Marjorie smiled gratefully; Doris Sands not only said pleasant things,
but one knew that she meant them. It was too bad that the class
constitution prohibited a girl's re-election as president. The sophomore
class could never find anyone else so tactful, so universally popular as
Doris, Marjorie thought.

"Thanks, Doris," she said. "But I don't see why Ruth couldn't give us
more notice, so that we might have arranged things to go. She never said
a word about it at the reception!"

"Ruth always does things on the spur of the moment, and for queer
reasons," sighed Doris, for the intricacies of the workings of Ruth's
mind were too complicated for her simple, straightforward nature to
comprehend. She and Ruth were exceptionally good friends; but then Doris
Sands was the sort of girl who could get along with anybody. She never
thought of Ruth as self-seeking; merely attributed the measure of
success she obtained to cleverness. She always looked for the best in
everybody.

When Marjorie and Ruth had entered the seminary the previous fall, there
had been thirty-five girls in the class. Now the membership had
decreased to twenty-five, and they were all on rather intimate terms.
Five of these were Girl Scouts: Anna Cane, Doris Sands, Lily Andrews,
Ruth and Marjorie. These were the envied few, the inner circle, the
leaders of the class. From their number everyone except, perhaps, Evelyn
Hopkins, who always coveted good things for herself, expected the class
president to be chosen.

Ruth had invited all twenty-five girls to her tea, although she and her
room-mate, Evelyn Hopkins, scarcely hoped to be able to pack that number
into their room. However, all did not accept the invitation; only
fifteen or sixteen finally appeared.

Doris and Evelyn were passing sandwiches and cakes, while Ruth poured
the cocoa. The conversation, which buzzed from groups in all parts of
the room, was suddenly silenced by the hostess's general remark,

"Girls," she said, still standing beside the wicker tea-table in the
corner, "I guess you wondered why I was in such a hurry to entertain
you, but the fact is, I thought it would be nice to have a little
informal discussion about class matters before the meeting to-night.
Because we don't want to conduct our affairs just any old way, hit or
miss; we want to make ours the best class ever!"

"Hurray!" cheered Doris; "you've surely got the right spirit, Ruth."

Encouraged by the applause of the president, Ruth continued,

"We want a good strong organization, to keep those freshies from getting
their secret meeting, and electing a class president; we want an
efficient president ourselves--not that we can ever get one as good as
our last year's"--she smiled admiringly at Doris--"who will systematize
the whole thing! What do you all think?"

"Good for you, Ruth!" cried Barbara Hill, a quiet little girl who had
always admired Ruth's courage. "We want somebody that will put heart
and soul into the job!"

"I don't think we ought to discuss each other now," explained Ruth;
"that would be too embarrassing. But I just want everybody to think, and
think hard, and not vote for a girl just because she's popular."

"I think Marj Wilkinson would be dandy!" remarked Anna Cane;--"by the
way, she isn't here this afternoon, is she? I wonder why?"

Ruth felt a cold shiver pass over her; no matter how hard she tried to
evade her, her old rival seemed to confront her upon every occasion. She
had really planned the tea for a time when she knew Marjorie could not
come, so that she might put her out of her classmates' minds; but here
she seemed to appear in the spirit, as if to mock her! Was this
fate--for the way she had treated Marjorie the previous year--or was it
merely her own conscience that caused her to dread the mention of the
other girl's name for honors that she coveted for herself?

She reached over and put a lump of sugar into her cup of cocoa before
she trusted herself to reply. When she spoke again, her voice was
perfectly natural.

"Marj would certainly be great as president," she said sweetly; "except
for one thing--and that's the very thing that's keeping her away this
afternoon; she's more interested in athletics and Scout activities--in
fact, anything where Miss Phillips is concerned"--she paused for a
second to allow the girls who were not Scouts time to think it
over--"more interested than she is in class affairs! I begged and begged
her to give up hockey this afternoon, but she wouldn't! And I think our
president, whoever she is, especially at this important time, should
give all the interest possible to the class."

"That's right, Ruth," agreed Evelyn, who had really been coached upon
what to say in the case of such a situation arising. "And another
thing--why don't we save Marj for senior president? She'd make a
perfectly wonderful one then!"

"Yes, that's a good idea," commented Doris; and here the conversation
lost its general tone. But Ruth felt satisfied; the purpose of her tea
had not been in vain. She had sown the seed of opposition to Marjorie,
and even if she herself were not elected to the office, she would have
the satisfaction of knowing that she had kept Marjorie from it. And
senior year was a long way off; perhaps Marjorie might lose her
popularity by then. At any rate, she felt assured that the present
danger was avoided.

It was only quarter of eight when she and Evelyn made their way to the
English class-room, where Doris had scheduled the class meeting. The
president and one or two others were already there. But Ruth had no
intention of discussing the matter again; indeed, her idea in coming
early was to ward off any attempt to change the sentiment she had
started at her tea.

By eight o'clock, nearly twenty girls had arrived, and Doris called the
meeting to order.

"I don't see why people can't be interested enough to come on time!"
remarked Ruth, significantly. The observation seemed general, but as
Marjorie Wilkinson and Lily Andrews entered the room a few minutes
later, when the roll was being called, the girls remembered the remark,
and the shaft went home.

"I certainly want to congratulate the reception committee," said Doris
at the beginning of the meeting,--"and particularly Marjorie Wilkinson
as chairman. I'm sure we couldn't have given the freshmen a lovelier
party!"

Marjorie blushed modestly at the praise, and Ruth smiled artificially.
No one must think she minded Marjorie's success.

"Madame President!" said Marjorie, rising, "would it be in order to make
a suggestion along the same line?"

"Certainly," nodded Doris.

"Well," she explained, "I noticed at the party--and later--that a number
of our freshmen were pretty homesick. Now wouldn't it be possible for
each girl in our class to sort of 'adopt' a particular girl, to look out
for her, and try to make her happy? I know that the Y.W.C.A. has
instituted that custom in several of the colleges, and it works
splendidly."

"I think that is a charming idea, Marjorie," said Doris. "What do the
rest of the class think?"

Ruth instantly thought of all sorts of objections, but hesitated to be
the first to voice them, lest her opposition might seem too pointed. She
winked slyly at Evelyn; she could depend upon her to rally to her cause.

"Madame President," said Evelyn, interpreting Ruth's silent request,
"would there be enough of us? Aren't there forty freshmen?"

"I thought of that," answered Marjorie; "but I am sure the juniors would
help."

"Juniors!" exclaimed Barbara Hill, scornfully. "We wouldn't want a rival
class to come to our assistance, would we?"

"Seniors, then," replied Marjorie, with annoyance in her tone. She was
interested in the idea itself, not in the details of its execution.

"I think Marjorie's plan is wonderful," put in Ruth, deciding at this
point that she could remain out of the discussion no longer, "but I have
one suggestion to make. You know yourselves that girls of our age don't
like to be pitied and petted! Let's do something, certainly, just as
Marjorie proposes, to make the freshmen feel at home, but I would advise
that we do everything in our power to give them a good, lively
interest--that instead of treating them like the Infant Department of a
Sunday School, we take away their loneliness by some good stiff rivalry!
Let's call them together, and tell them more about their secret class
meeting, and challenge them to try to outwit us! They'll be so busy, and
they'll develop so much real class spirit that they won't have time to
get blue."

"I think that's great!" cried Evelyn, jumping up impulsively. "Let's get
the thing started right away."

"Perhaps we had better have our class elections first," said Doris,
glancing at her watch. "Then we can continue with the discussion
afterwards, till nine o'clock, for I promised Miss Allen I'd close
promptly. Nominations are now in order!"

"I nominate Ruth Henry!" said Barbara Hill, still glowing with
admiration of the girl.

"I nominate Lily Andrews!" announced Marjorie, to the surprise of
everyone.

"I nominate Evelyn Hopkins!" declared Ruth, glorying in the fact that
her loyalty to her room-mate would be silently applauded.

"And I move that the nominations be closed!" chimed in Barbara, again.

The whole thing had been done so quickly that Marjorie's especial
friends hardly realized that her chances for class presidency had
vanished completely. Marjorie herself did not mind: her attention was so
taken up with hockey and freshmen and Scout activities, that she had
scarcely given the matter a thought. Nor did Lily, stunned as she was at
the proposal of her own name for the office, realize her room-mate's
exclusion. But Ruth was so exultant that she could hardly refrain from
crying out in her joy. It seemed to her that her dearest wish was about
to come true. Two easier opponents, she thought, could not possibly have
been selected: Lily Andrews would never be elected--she was too fat and
plain; and Evelyn Hopkins--light, frivolous, self-centered girl that she
was--was decidedly unpopular. The outcome of the business seemed assured
in Ruth's favor; she was so certain of her own election, that she did
not even bother to vote for herself, but instead cast her ballot for
Evelyn.

Clerks and a judge of the election were appointed, and the voting was
quickly concluded. While they withdrew to count the ballots, the others
proceeded to discuss a time at which to call the freshmen class
together, to emphasize the importance of securing their own meeting.
Wednesday afternoon was finally decided upon.

The judge of elections returned, and stood beside Doris. Ruth looked at
the girl closely, vainly attempting to ascertain from her expression the
outcome of the election; but the latter returned her only an impersonal
stare.

"There was a tie," she announced, "between Lily Andrews and Ruth Henry,
each candidate having received nine votes. We shall need to have
another ballot between these two."

Ruth almost gasped at the announcement; quick figuring allowed her to
conclude that Evelyn must have received seven votes! Undoubtedly the
girl had voted for herself, and, of course, Ruth had cast hers in her
favor--but where had she obtained the other five? Ruth forgot to reckon
on the fact that a number of girls outside of the Scout troop were more
or less jealous of their successful rivals, and would vote for Evelyn
simply because she was not a Girl Scout.

"I'll fix that," thought Ruth; "I'll just vote for myself this time!"

Ruth smiled confidently as the judge again returned with her decision,
she was so sure of victory. Now she was glad she had not made the office
before; it would be so much more honor to be sophomore president!

"I have the honor to declare that our next president will be Lily
Andrews!" announced the girl briefly, and resumed her seat.

And, amid shouts and applause, the meeting broke up, for the hour of
nine had struck.

Ruth Henry was defeated again, but not wholly so; for Marjorie's plan
for befriending homesick freshmen had been put aside, and her chance of
becoming president lost. But--her rival's candidate had won!




CHAPTER III

MARJORIE'S FRESHMAN


If Marjorie was disappointed at the failure of her plan, she was
tremendously elated over her room-mate's election to the class
presidency. Lily Andrews was not a girl who was naturally popular like
Doris Sands, or Marjorie herself. She had fought valiantly for
everything she had achieved, and her triumph, therefore, was all the
more precious.

For an instant, while the vote was being taken, Ruth had thought of the
Lily Andrews that had first appeared at Miss Allen's--extravagantly
overdressed, noticeably fat, and crude in every respect. She had smiled
confidently at the picture, scorning the idea that such a girl could
ever stand a chance against her.

But Ruth had not counted on the fairness of the girls at Miss Allen's:
they thought of their new president, not as she had been, but as she was
now; and because Lily had put aside her extravagant taste, had
resolutely trained herself down by self-denial, and had even done
creditably in athletics, she was greatly admired. Besides this, Lily
Andrews was genuine--and so loyal! Moreover, all the girls, even those
who were not Scouts and therefore knew nothing about Ruth's disgraceful
trick against Marjorie the previous year, often had cause to doubt the
former's sincerity.

Lily herself was too much overcome with surprise to realize it all at
once. She walked out of the room with Marjorie's arm around her, still
under the impression that she must be dreaming.

When they reached their own room Lily sank down into a chair, exhausted
from the excitement.

"Marj, what ever made you nominate me?" she cried. "I'm not the stuff
presidents are made of--like you and Doris!"

"Oh, but you are--or you wouldn't have gotten it!"

"I got it because they didn't put anybody good against me! I had meant
to nominate you; but before I had a chance, Barbara moved that the
nominations be closed. But you led me into it--now you must tell me what
to do!"

She looked at her room-mate imploringly, as if she were already bowed
down with the sense of responsibility.

"I'm sorry, Lil, but I can't tell you," laughed Marjorie. "You know I've
never been president."

"That's true! Oh, say, Marj, wasn't Ruth the surprised girl when she
heard I got it? I couldn't help watching her face, and I nearly died!"

Marjorie, too, had enjoyed the situation immensely; for while she
usually disliked seeing anyone disappointed, Ruth had been so
over-confident, and so scornful of Lily the preceding year, that she
could not help being glad of the outcome. Then, a sudden thought struck
her.

"You asked me what I'd do, Lil," she said. "I'd advise you to enlist
Ruth's help!"

"Ruth Henry?" This in consternation.

"Yes; for this reason: she has had a big disappointment in not being
elected herself, and I know Ruth well enough to realize that when she is
disappointed, she often gets spiteful. So, if you take my advice, you
will make her your friend before she has a chance to become your enemy!"

Lily weighed carefully the suggestion put forth by her room-mate. She
nodded her head slightly in her approval of the plan.

"I guess you're right," she said. "I had, of course, thought of
consulting Doris, and I suppose I might as well include Ruth. It can't
do any harm."

The next day was one of those beautiful mild days that would seem to
belong rather to summer than to autumn. The windows all over the school
were wide open; the sound of lawn-mowers could be heard in the distance;
the drowsy warmth of the air made the girls think of Commencement time.

Resolutely putting aside her desire to be lazy, and oppressed by the
thought of her official duties, Lily Andrews decided to devote the
afternoon to a consultation with Doris Sands, the out-going president.

But Marjorie shared no such cares. Freed from hockey practice, and
planning to study her lessons in the evening, her thoughts flew to her
canoe--that beautiful prize she had won at the summer camp. What could
possibly be more delightful than an afternoon spent in paddling and
drifting about the lake, with her copy of Alfred Noyes' poems to glance
into now and then? The idea was so alluring that she could hardly force
herself to sit through luncheon.

As a rule Marjorie Wilkinson was a sociable being--she enjoyed other
girls' companionship, and possessed an unusual quality of friendliness.
But to-day she felt dreamy; she longed to get away from everybody, where
conversation would be unnecessary, and where she could give herself up
to her own drowsy imaginings. For she had many happy things to think
about. That very morning she had received a letter--nothing thrilling in
it, but just an interesting, boyish account of activities at
Princeton--whose signature had made her heart beat more rapidly. For it
was from John Hadley, the boy whom she had liked and admired most of all
the Boy Scouts the previous year. The very fact that he should still
think of her amidst all the rush of his busy college life flattered her,
and set her to dreaming.

So she found her book and started for the lake, only to remember, when
she had gone half of the distance, that she had left her paddle in the
closet.

"I believe I'll leave it in the canoe after this," she decided; "nobody
would ever think of taking the canoe, and it would be so much less
trouble. And I'd probably go out oftener if I didn't have to come up
here for the paddle every time."

She hurried across the sun-lit campus, through the trees, to the little
lake. There under a weeping-willow, lay the canoe.

A thrill of delight passed over her as she turned the canoe right side
up; the possession of such a beautiful object had never lost its charm.
She wondered whether she was selfish in enjoying it alone, but dismissed
the idea when she recalled the fact that Lily and Doris and Ruth would
all be occupied with their own affairs.

The picturesque scene--only a tiny lake in comparison with the one at
camp--and the smooth, gliding motion of the canoe were in perfect
harmony with the girl's mood and the quiet, peaceful day. She began to
hum softly to the rhythmic dip, dip of the paddle into the still water.

"If John Hadley were only at Episcopal Academy now," she mused, "maybe
we could sneak some good times!" Then she fell to dreaming that he
suddenly appeared on the edge of the lake, and that they spent the
afternoon together. But when the thought recalled to her mind the
consequences of that other stolen meeting, at camp, she actually laughed
aloud.

Her laughter evidently startled some one on the bank, for there
immediately followed a gasp, and then a suppressed sob. Marjorie stopped
paddling.

"Who's there?" she called, softly. "Can I do anything to help----"

A very mussed, woe-begone figure emerged from behind a clump of
rhododendrons. Her hair streamed in her eyes, her summer dress bore
evidence of a careless position, and her tear-stained cheeks of weeping.
It was Alice Endicott, the little freshman whom Ruth had made such fun
of at the sophomore reception. And she was evidently in the deepest
distress.

"Alice!" exclaimed Marjorie, in surprise. "Why, what is the matter?"

"Nothing!" sobbed the girl forlornly. Then, "Everything!"

Both remarks, so entirely opposite, were no doubt correct. Nothing
really was the matter, and yet everything was wrong; for Alice Endicott
was hopelessly homesick.

Marjorie ran the nose of her canoe aground upon the low bank and begged
Alice to get in. Hardly knowing what she was about, the younger girl
climbed into the bow and sank down facing Marjorie.

"Now tell me all about it," said Marjorie, in the most sympathetic tone
imaginable. She thought of her own first days at the school, when Ruth,
obviously so popular, had totally neglected her, and when her own
room-mate, Lily Andrews, had seemed impossible. Remorseful, too, because
of her own selfish happiness, she felt more eager than ever to comfort
the lonely freshman. But it was a difficult matter, she knew.

"I want to go home," sobbed Alice, with her handkerchief at her eyes.

"No, no!" protested Marjorie. "Please give us another chance. Don't you
like it a bit here?"

"I hate it!" exclaimed the other, with more emphasis than Marjorie
thought her capable of. "You're the only girl who's been even half
decent to me."

"And I'm ashamed of myself," muttered Marjorie sadly. "But please
forgive us all, Alice; we didn't realize how you felt. Won't you,
please--and wait a day or two while you decide whether you want to stay
or not?"

Alice stopped crying; she was really surprised at Marjorie's sincerity
in assuming the blame herself. Still, she pursued her same line of
argument.

"There's nothing here that I can't get in school near home."

Marjorie was silent; was this accusation true? Was Miss Allen's really
nicer than any other school, or was it merely her own opinion? She met
the question fairly, searching her mind truthfully for an answer. At
last she found one: in the eyes of even unprejudiced observers, it must
appear to excel all other schools--_because of its Girl Scout troop_!

And so she replied to Alice's challenge with a description of the troop,
and of the big organization of which it was a part, telling of its
principles and its aims; relating stories of the hikes, the parties, the
good times with the Boy Scouts, and--best of all--of the wonderful
camping trip during the vacation. She told her about the contest, that
the very canoe in which they were sitting was a reward from the Girl
Scouts.

"So you see," concluded Marjorie, "you can have a great big aim here,
and you can begin right now to do such good work that you'll be a Scout
as soon as the first report comes out!"

"But----" said Alice slowly, dipping her hand idly into the water--"but
suppose I don't make it!"

Marjorie drew a quick breath. Suppose she did not! Suppose, like
herself, she should lose out! Then, in a flash, Marjorie became aware of
a great truth: the value of human suffering. Up to this time, she could
never quite see any good in her former disappointment; now she realized
that it made her akin to all the others in the world who had suffered
and would suffer again. She could understand, and she could comfort
Alice from the depths of her own experience, just as Miss Phillips had
comforted her.

"And if you missed out, you would try again!" she said, proceeding to
recount the story of her own failure, being careful, however, to leave
Ruth's part out of the narrative.

As the sun sank lower, the girls talked on, until Marjorie noticed that
it was time to dress for dinner. Alice seemed quite happy now, and even
smiled at the dirty smudges on her nose which she saw reflected in the
tiny mirror on the bottom of Marjorie's powder puff.

"I guess I was pretty silly," she admitted, as the girls strolled across
the campus together. "But my room-mate, Esther Taylor, never pays the
slightest attention to me, and I was pretty lonely. But I won't be
again." She smiled shyly up into Marjorie's face. "For I know now that I
have a friend."

"Indeed you have," assured the older girl, pressing her hand. "And you
have a big aim before you. I shall be terribly disappointed, Alice, if
you don't make the Girl Scout troop!"

"I _will_ make it!" she replied resolutely; and Marjorie believed her.

"Promise to come to see me every day," urged Marjorie, as Alice turned
to leave her at the door of her room.

"I'd love to! But you'll get tired of me, I'm afraid."

"No, I won't! And remember--_you're my freshman_!"

"And it all goes to prove," she thought as she closed the door of her
room, "that Ruth may block my plans, but she can't influence the real
me! And I've really won, after all!"




CHAPTER IV

THE FIRST SCOUT MEETING


If the members of Pansy troop could have consulted their own wishes,
they would have held a Scout meeting as soon as all the girls had
arrived at school. But Miss Phillips had declared that such a thing was
impossible; there were too many other matters to attend to.

School had opened on Thursday, and the first real event outside of the
regular program had been the sophomore reception. It was not until over
a week afterward, on Friday evening, that the Girl Scouts met for the
first time.

The meeting was scheduled for seven-thirty, but by a quarter after the
hour, everyone of the fifteen girls had arrived.

Every Scout wore her uniform; as each one entered the little room which
had been set aside by Miss Allen for the troop, she saluted the Captain,
who sat at a desk in the front. It seemed like old times; only the two
seniors, who had been graduated, were missing. The present members
could not help thinking of them.

"Too bad we can't stay at Miss Allen's forever," remarked Marjorie; "it
seems awful to think we had to lose two Scouts."

"But we'll get more," observed Ruth, optimistically, who had never been
a girl of deep friendships.

"And next year Edith and Helen will be gone," continued Marjorie--"and
the others."

For an instant she came face to face with the great fact that has
staggered the individual since the beginning of civilization--the
realization of the ceaseless passage of time. Marjorie reflected, with a
certain sense of sadness, that she too must graduate, and leave the
school and the Scout troop to younger girls. The thought sobered her; it
was with an effort that she turned her attention to the Captain, as she
called the Scouts to order.

"We shall begin a trifle early," explained Miss Phillips, "since
everybody is here, for there is a great deal to talk about. Now--Troop,
_Attention_!"

The usual opening ceremony was performed, together with the recitation
of the Scout laws and pledge. It was so familiar to them all that they
hardly thought of the words as they repeated them; to Marjorie, however,
they were impressive, for she had not been a member of the troop so long
as the other girls.

The treasurer made her statement, and the dues were collected. As there
were no committees to report, the Captain proceeded immediately to "old
business."

"I suppose you are all eager to hear about our troop's Good Turn," she
began, "and I am very glad to be able to tell you something favorable.
But first, for the benefit of the girls who were not at camp, let me
explain that the troop met and decided to send a poor, ignorant, badly
brought-up country girl to public school in this town, and to pay her
board and buy her clothing all year. Her name is Frieda Hammer. And, as
you all know, although her mother promised to send her the day before
school opened, she did not arrive. I have since learned that she kept
her at home because the baby was sick, but intends to send her this
Saturday."

Marjorie's eyes shone. Their plan was to succeed after all! Ruth had
been mistaken; when Frieda began to develop and make progress, perhaps
Ruth would be sorry for the distrustful attitude she had taken! And
think what it would mean to Frieda--a girl of her own age! Now she would
have pretty clothes that the Scouts would buy her, live in a lovely home
in the village, where the Scouts would pay her board, and go to the
public school. She would meet nice girls, develop friendships, and have
the opportunity to study and prepare herself to make something worth
while of her life. She would be just like Cinderella--and the Scouts
would be the fairy godmother!

"But _where_ shall we get the money, Captain?" demanded Ruth. She made
no attempt to conceal her disapproval of the project; she would have
preferred to direct the troop's attention to earning money for the
following summer's outing.

"That is what we must talk about this evening," replied Miss Phillips.
"But in the meantime, we have twenty-six dollars in the treasury. Mrs.
Johnson, in the village, tells me she will board Frieda for the special
rate of six dollars a week--she's interested in her, too, and would like
to help us--so what would you all say to paying twelve dollars in
advance for board, and spending the other fourteen on some clothing?"

"Great! Splendid!" cried the girls.

"But how about our Hallowe'en party!" pouted Ruth. "Aren't we going to
have any more good times ourselves?" Then, noticing the spirit of
antagonism that her remark had aroused, she hastened to add, "I wouldn't
mind if I thought Frieda would appreciate it. But I'll bet she won't!
She'll steal again, just like she did at camp!"

Miss Phillips held up her hand to caution Ruth not to go any farther;
and Frances Wright, who, next to Marjorie, had been most interested in
the girl from the start, protested vehemently.

"Ruth!" she cried, disdainfully, "you surely don't think that!"

"Yes, she does!" exclaimed Marjorie impulsively. "She doesn't trust----"

"Girls!" remonstrated the Captain, rising from the chair to take command
of the situation. "We will have no more discussion about the matter. We
shall simply vote on the motion--if someone will be kind enough to make
one--to spend the twenty-six dollars that we have in the treasury on
board and clothing for Frieda Hammer."

The motion was made and carried by an overwhelming majority, and Miss
Phillips asked Frances Wright to accompany her to the city the following
Saturday to meet the girl when she should arrive.

"Now we must discuss other ways to raise money," continued the Captain.
"Several of the girls have suggested a Christmas bazaar. This I consider
a splendid plan, so if you are all in favor of it, we shall start in
making things for it immediately. But, of course, we cannot hold that
until December, and we shall need money before then. So has anyone else
a proposal?"

The resourceful Marjorie arose to her feet. After giving the customary
salute, she began:

"The other day, when I was out in my canoe on the lake, it occurred to
me how lovely it must be there at night. I kept wishing we could have
some sort of party on the water, and then the idea came to me to have a
sort of Japanese fête, and charge admission. We could hire Japanese
lanterns, and put up two or three attractive booths to sell
refreshments, and I could sell rides in my canoe--maybe we could hire
two or three extra boats for the occasion--and maybe tell fortunes, or
something like that. Do you suppose," she concluded, "that we could get
Miss Allen's permission?"

Miss Phillips did not need to ask for an expression of opinion; she
could read from the Scouts' faces their approval of the plan. As a mere
matter of form, she called for a vote upon the question, and when the
suggestion was unanimously adopted, a date was selected, and Marjorie
herself appointed chairman of the committee.

"And now," said the Captain, "I have a lovely invitation for you!"

"The Boy Scouts?" cried Ruth, joyfully.

"Not this time, Ruth. No--it's from Miss Martin's school. They want us
to visit them, I think to give a Scout demonstration. And then, I
believe, they intend to start a rival troop."

"I would love to see some other Girl Scouts," said Edith Evans. "Won't
it be great to have a sister troop!"

"Yes, indeed," agreed the Captain. "But I am not willing to take fifteen
Scouts--not even two patrols, you know--over there to demonstrate. I
asked Miss Watson, the gym teacher at Miss Martin's, to postpone the
invitation until after the first of November, when our reports come out
and the hockey team is chosen. That will give us an opportunity to fill
up our troop; indeed, I hope we have at least three, and maybe four full
patrols!"

"Do you really expect so many freshmen to meet the requirements,
Captain?" asked Frances.

"No, not only freshmen. I think some more upper classmen will
qualify--girls like Mae VanHorn, for instance, who just fell a trifle
short last year."

"Would it be possible, Captain," suggested Marjorie, shyly, "to make
Frieda a Girl Scout? Couldn't she be an honorary member, or something?"

But Miss Phillips wisely shook her head.

"No; in one respect, Ruth was right--we must not expect a lot from her
at first. Frieda Hammer is a girl who has never been taught right from
wrong, and we must go very slowly. If she proves worthy, perhaps we can
take her in later, although I would prefer to let her wait till she
passes our school examinations, and has a chance to enter just like any
other girl. We all appreciate things we have to work hard for, you
know!"

"We certainly do!" agreed Marjorie, emphatically; and Ruth, sensitive to
the reference, could not control the flush that spread over her face.

"And now for Scouting itself," concluded the Captain; "for we must not
neglect that. We shall probably go for a hike Saturday a week, if it is
clear, and then we are going to study definitely for our first-class
test. I made a big mistake when I thought you could pass it in two
weeks' time at camp. But then I was going by the old handbook, and in
the new one it is much more difficult; the signalling alone will
probably require two months' study. I am going to ask Mr. Remington, the
Boy Scoutmaster, to give the final test in the semaphore and Morse code,
and every other requirement must be passed with the same thoroughness.
If my dream comes true, the first class Scouts of Pansy troop will be
able to go anywhere--even to National Headquarters--and pass the
stiffest examination the Director herself could give, bringing credit to
Pansy troop!"

"Whew!" exclaimed Ruth. "I sort of miscalculated at camp, didn't I?"

The girls laughed at the recollection of the episode of kidnapping
Frieda's sister.

"Frieda will never forgive me for that," she added; "I guess I can never
hope to become her friend!"

"I guess you don't care much!" remarked Ethel, with a touch of sarcasm
in her tone.

"Well, I don't believe it's going to do any good!" she flashed back.
"You mark my words--Frieda Hammer can't be trusted!"

"Girls!" expostulated Miss Phillips again. "Come to order! We shall now
review our semaphore alphabet. Lineup! Troop, _attention_! Right
_dress_!"

When the meeting was over, Marjorie and Lily sauntered slowly back to
their room.

"I was so happy about Frieda," said Marjorie, a shade of discouragement
creeping into her voice, "till Ruth threw such cold water on the
project. Do you believe it will work out all right, Lil?"

"I believe _everything_ will work out all right," replied the other girl
optimistically. "After you won the canoe, and I was elected class
president against Ruth, I feel as if nothing we ever really want will
fall through. So please don't worry, Marj!"

And Marjorie decided that she would adopt Lily's cheerful view of the
situation--and wait. In a little over a week, Frieda would arrive; from
the very beginning Marjorie would adopt so friendly an attitude that it
would be impossible for the girl to treat her indifferently.

"For kindness always wins in the end," she thought, as she turned out
the pretty boudoir lamp beside her bed.




CHAPTER V

CHECK-MATED


Ever since Lily Andrews had taken up her duties as sophomore president
she found a noticeable change in the attitude of certain members of the
class towards her. Foremost among this group were Ruth Henry and Evelyn
Hopkins, who boasted proudly among the other girls of their friendship
with the president. If Ruth harbored any resentment against her
successful rival, she carefully concealed it; and most of her classmates
spoke of her as Lily Andrews' "right-hand man."

Without a doubt, Ruth was a great help to the new officer. Marjorie,
always more interested in athletics and Scout affairs, paid only a
half-hearted attention to Lily's official problems; and Doris Sands was
really tired out and needed a rest. So, in sheer desperation, Lily
sought Ruth, and always found her interested and helpful.

One afternoon when Marjorie was out walking with Alice Endicott, Lily,
with notebook and pencil in hand, hurried over to Ruth's room. She found
her sitting languidly beside her wicker tea-table, playing with the
tea-ball, and carrying on a disconcerted conversation with Evelyn.

"How many times do I have to tell you not to knock, Lily Andrews!" she
exclaimed. "I thought you knew us well enough by this time----"

Lily laughed, nevertheless highly flattered. It is always more or less
of a triumph to conquer a dislike, and Lily felt genuinely pleased at
the change in Ruth's attitude toward her.

"You're awfully good----" she began.

"Not at all!" protested Ruth. "But Evelyn and I are always at home to
our friends!" Then, noticing the notebook, "What's the important
business now, Lil?"

"Oh, it's class stuff again! I want your advice, Ruth."

"It's yours for the asking!" replied the hostess, magnanimously, well
pleased to be so obviously within the "inner circle."

"You really ought to be class president, Ruth. You do more work than I
do, and don't get the credit."

"I don't want credit," lied Ruth; "all I want is our class's good."

"Yes, I know. Well, here is my present trouble. You know, every single
class since the foundation of the school has succeeded in holding their
meeting in spite of the sophomores' attempt at interference. Why can't
we break the spell? What could we possibly do?"

Ruth sat up straight in her chair and half closed her eyes, lost in
contemplation.

"We _will_ break the spell!" she announced, slowly. "I think I have a
new idea!"

"Ruth, you are so clever!" exclaimed Evelyn, who could not keep out of
the conversation. "I almost believe you can do it!"

"Tell us what your plan is!" begged Lily, impatient with even a moment's
unnecessary delay.

"The private detective system--and by that I mean to have each girl in
our class responsible for one or two freshmen, and know where they are
every minute of the day. In that way, all of us would really be on guard
all the time!"

"Wonderful!" cried Lily enthusiastically. "Would it really be possible
to do it?"

"I don't see why not; the struggle lasts only six weeks--nearly two are
gone already. And if everybody will work----"

"That's great, Ruth," interrupted Lily, deciding instantly to adopt the
plan; "I'll post a notice for a meeting this very evening, and we'll put
it up to the class. Then, if everybody approves of the scheme, I want
you to be chairman of the Vigilance Committee--the leader, you know, to
whom the girls would report any suspicions."

Ruth's heart gave a bound of delight: the appointment was just what she
desired. With a little tact and diplomacy, she could make Lily a mere
figure-head, and herself the power behind the throne; in this manner she
could pave the way for her own election to the presidency for junior
year.

But she did not dare to betray to Lily the fact that she was eager for
the office. She even hesitated a moment before she accepted.

"Of course it will mean an awful lot of work, but if you really think I
am capable, Lily, you know I'd do anything for the sake of the class."

"Of course you're capable," reassured the other, "and you must take it.
It will remove a big weight from my mind, too, if you do."

The girls discussed the matter in detail, while Evelyn made tea. Then,
refreshed and encouraged, Lily returned to her own room.

At the class meeting that evening, when Lily announced that Ruth Henry
was chairman of the Vigilance Committee, the general wave of surprise
that spread over the room was apparent. For most of the girls remembered
how ungraciously the latter had treated her the previous year, before
there was any talk of Lily's rising to prominence. But the act only
served to enhance the admiration the girls felt for their president;
they realized anew how magnanimous she was, and how much she valued the
good of the class.

Ruth presented her plan so effectively that it was immediately approved
and adopted. Each girl was allowed to select her own freshman, for, as
Ruth remarked, if the sophomores chose their particular friends there
would be less cause for suspicion. She herself picked out two
charges--Esther Taylor and Florence Evans--both girls of unusual energy.
Marjorie Wilkinson naturally selected Alice Endicott. Each sophomore was
equipped with a whistle which she was instructed to blow if necessary,
unless she happened to be inside of the dormitory building. And since,
according to Miss Allen's rules, it was forbidden to hold the meeting
before the rising bell in the morning, or after the supper bell in the
evening, the difficulty of the problem was reduced fifty per cent.

The freshmen, in the meantime, were striving to formulate some definite
plan for concerted action. But with no officers to assume responsibility
or give directions, and with no opportunity for general discussion,
there seemed to be little hope of their getting together. However, as in
all cases heretofore, they relied upon the resourcefulness and hesitance
of the junior president.

The holder of that office was Ethel Todd, one of the very cleverest of
the Girl Scouts. Exceptionally capable, she usually accomplished what
she set out to do. When she learned that Ruth Henry was chairman of the
Vigilance Committee she was more determined than ever to check-mate any
plans the other might make. Taking matters in her own hands, she
arranged for a thorough consultation with Florence Evans and Mildred
Cavin, whom she considered class leaders.

"Ruth Henry has some clever scheme," she informed them, "you can just
depend on that. But I mean to beat her, no matter how perfect her system
is," she added. She had never forgiven Ruth for the contemptible manner
in which she had treated Marjorie the previous year, and she could not
resist the temptation to do everything in her power to get even.

So she set about to discover the sophomore's plan, and to outwit the
girls if she could. She watched Ruth's movements closely, and saw her
follow Esther Taylor to the library the following afternoon, remain
there as long as the freshman did, and come out again a few seconds
afterward, dogging her footsteps to the hockey field. This same
occurrence took place the day after; at the same time she perceived that
Lily Andrews seemed always close on the trail of Mildred Cavin, and
Marjorie of Alice Endicott. Ethel retired to her own room to think over
this in quiet.

What could it all mean? Did Ruth and Lily and Marjorie think that the
other freshmen could not hold a meeting without these few girls--that
they, leaders though they were, were indispensable? She glanced out of
the window and saw Daisy Gravers walking down the path to the gate; a
few steps behind her came Doris Sands, apparently unconcerned about
things in general, but every now and then glancing at Daisy, and then
looking hastily toward the dormitory. Then, in a flash, the system was
disclosed to the junior President!

"PRIVATE DETECTIVE SYSTEM!" she exclaimed aloud, jumping suddenly to her
feet. "Each freshman shadowed by a soph!"

She hit upon a brilliant, yet simple, plan. She would beat Ruth by
_cleanliness_! Accordingly, she wrote forty notes to forty freshmen,
telling them to wear kimonas, carry soap and towels, and be in the
shower-bath compartment on the third floor at one minute after seven the
following day. If the sophomores were up early enough to notice the
freshmen's absences, they would not suspect anything unusual in such a
proceeding.

The next morning was a dark one, and, much to her annoyance, Ruth
overslept by ten minutes. Jumping up suddenly, she hastily put on her
bathrobe, and, passing along the hall by way of Esther Taylor's and
Florence Evans' rooms, made her way toward the shower. She did not hear
any stir as she went by the freshmen's doors, but being late, she
hurried on. A moment later, she reached the shower-bath compartment.

As she was just about to enter, the swinging door was abruptly flung
open, and a noisy crowd of girls, in kimonas and bath-robes, almost
knocked her over. They were freshmen, and they were all tremendously
happy over something; in a flash, she read the news of their victory.
She did not even need Mildred Cavin's announcement: "Florence Evans is
freshman president!" to confirm her fears.

The hot blood rushed to Ruth's face as she caught sight of Ethel Todd's
triumphantly gleaming eyes. Dejected, defeated, she disappeared into the
shower to drown her disappointment in cold water.

For, in her own imagination, she saw the junior presidency fading from
her grasp!




CHAPTER VI

THE ARRIVAL OF FRIEDA


Marjorie and Lily were seated in the old-fashioned, comfortably
furnished parlor in the home of Mrs. Johnson, that motherly woman who,
through her interest in both the Girl Scouts and their ward, had
promised to board Frieda for six dollars a week. The girls had come down
to see her to venture a little plan of theirs, and Marjorie was relieved
to find her so easy to become acquainted with. Mrs. Johnson was just the
sort of person--placid, sympathetic, jolly--that any normal girl would
love. This fact, thought Marjorie, ought to help them a great deal in
their success with Frieda.

"You see," explained Marjorie, idly running her finger along the surface
of the horse-hair sofa on which she was seated, "we want to make Frieda
enjoy herself from the very beginning. Some of the freshmen at Miss
Allen's were pretty homesick at first, and we want to avoid all that
with her. For she really belongs to us, you know; we're responsible for
her!"

"Yes, yes," agreed Mrs. Johnson, still in doubt regarding the purpose of
the girl's remarks. Was Marjorie afraid that she, Mrs. Johnson, would
not treat her kindly?

"But what----?" she began.

"What I am trying to tell you about," laughed Marjorie, interrupting
her, "is that, provided you are willing, we want to have a little
surprise party here for her when she arrives. We thought we'd order cake
and ice-cream, and have everybody hide somewhere in the house. Then,
when Miss Phillips and Frances and Frieda come in, you suggest that she
go to her room, and take off her things, and come down again.

"While she's upstairs, we'll come out of our hiding-places and play the
piano, and sing her a welcome song. Ethel Todd, one of the Scouts, has
written a dandy--a parody on 'Jingle Bells'!"

Mrs. Johnson beamed happily.

"Indeed, I do heartily approve of your plan, my dear," she said. "Now
won't you and your friend"--she rose from her seat--"come up to see her
room? I wish I could have put her on the second floor, but you know my
father and mother live with me, and they demand the first
consideration."

Mrs. Johnson led the way up two flights of stairs and into a little room
with a gabled roof. The room itself, the curtains, the rag rug, the bed,
and the old fashioned bureau, were very neat and clean, but the whole
effect of the furnishing was too bare to allow the room to be regarded
as really attractive. Marjorie wondered what it would seem like to
Frieda, unused as she was to luxury of any sort.

"It's awfully nice," she said with sincerity. "I'm sure Frieda will like
it."

"I hope she does!" sighed Mrs. Johnson; "but you never can tell about
young people these days."

When Saturday finally came, there was great excitement among the members
of the Girl Scout troop. They felt like people who are about to adopt a
child, so interested were they in the girl's welfare. Ruth alone was
indifferent. She refused to believe that any good would come of the
whole project. Some of the Scouts thought she harbored resentment
against Frieda for disclosing her deceit in borrowing the baby at camp.
Ethel Todd, always suspicious of Ruth, thought that she naturally was
hostile toward any scheme in which Marjorie was deeply interested.

But Ruth's opposition in reality was caused by neither of these things;
for once her reasons were impersonal. She really doubted Frieda's
ability to appreciate what was being done for her, and though she could
not exactly explain why, she felt positive that the girl would betray
the troop's confidence, and make them wish that they had never
considered the undertaking.

A dull, dreary rain on Saturday morning seemed to presage failure for
the girls' plans at the very start. It was always dismal, Marjorie
thought, to go anywhere in the rain, but especially to a new town.
Frieda would receive a bad impression of the place from the beginning,
and, if she had any tendency toward homesickness, the inclemency of the
weather would only help to intensify it.

"I certainly am glad we planned this party, Lil," she observed, as the
girls were donning their Scout uniforms. "That will probably be the only
bright spot in the day for Frieda."

"You forget," said Lily reprovingly, "that Frieda is to be met by our
Captain!"

"That's right, Lil! She's lucky!"

She looked dreamily out of the window, not seeing the rain, but thinking
of the first time Miss Phillips had talked with her. From the very start
she had meant more to Marjorie than any of the sorority girls.

"And yet," she added wistfully, "Miss Phillips didn't seem able to make
much impression upon either Frieda or her mother before. Oh, I do hope
Ruth is mistaken!"

At half-past two, fourteen Girl Scouts, all in uniform, were concealed
on the first floor of Mrs. Johnson's house. Two of the girls were in the
cellar-way, three in the roomy kitchen, two under the dining-room table,
four behind chairs and the sofa in the living-room, one underneath the
sofa, and two in the dining-room closet. While they tried not to become
hilarious, for they expected their guests at any moment now, suppressed
whispers and giggles were heard from time to time from all parts of the
downstairs.

Mrs. Johnson, apparently the only person in the room, sat in a chair
beside the table, knitting a white sweater for Frieda. Marjorie,
sprawled at full length under the sofa, was making vain attempts to keep
up a conversation with Lily and Ethel, who were behind it.

Suddenly a step was heard on the porch, and instantly a hush fell upon
the room. The girls in the dining-room and kitchen became silent, too,
as Mrs. Johnson answered the bell. But the Scouts' hearts fell as they
distinguished the deep tones of a masculine voice.

"Michael Doyle, the plumber, told me to come here and look at the
kitchen sink," they heard. "I'm his helper. Didn't you send for someone,
Mrs. Johnson?"

"Why, to be sure!" replied their hostess genially, opening the door to
admit the man. The girls remained in their hiding places, and only with
great effort suppressed their desire to giggle. Mrs. Johnson led the way
to the kitchen, where she explained the cause of the difficulty to the
man.

In the meantime, more steps were heard outside; the hearts of the
concealed girls beat all the more wildly with excitement because of the
false alarm they had just experienced.

It was evident, after a moment or two of silence, that Mrs. Johnson had
not heard the bell. Probably she had gone down the cellar with the
plumber. Marjorie was debating in her own mind whether she ought not to
creep out of her hiding place and open the door, for the day was too
disagreeable to keep anyone outside longer than necessary, when Miss
Phillips tried the knob, and, finding that it turned, she opened the
door and walked in. Frieda followed, and then Frances.

Frieda Hammer, a girl of fourteen or fifteen, was dressed in an
old-fashioned woolen suit of a style of nearly ten years back. Its
bedraggled, uneven skirt reached down to her ankles, while the sleeves
of the coat came far short of her wrists. Her hair was arranged in an
exaggerated fashion, with huge ear-puffs, according to her idea of the
latest mode; and on her head was a dirty straw hat, trimmed with big
artificial roses. She slouched into the room, dragging her muddy feet
over the carpet, and threw herself into Mrs. Johnson's chair.

She glanced around the room with a look of the utmost disdain; then
closed her jaw tightly, causing her lower lip to protrude, as is often
the habit with persons of sullen dispositions. Marjorie caught sight of
her attitude and could hardly repress a sigh of dismay; then she espied
Frances, looking nervous and unhappy, and her last hope vanished. Ruth
must be right after all!

Miss Phillips sank into a chair opposite to Frieda, as if she were both
mentally and physically exhausted. Then, breaking the silence at last,
she remarked, in a tone which she tried to make pleasant,

"It's nice to be home, isn't it?"

But she received no reply from the girl. Her sullen expression never
changed; it might seem that she had not heard Miss Phillips' remark.

"I guess Mrs. Johnson will be here in a minute," the latter added,
cheerfully. "And then you can go to your room and wash."

Still there was no word or sign from Freida. "She certainly isn't very
appreciative," thought Marjorie; "but maybe she's homesick."

"Would you like to try on your new things?" asked Miss Phillips.

With a shrug of the utmost indifference, Frieda replied,

"I don't care!"

"You're not a bit homesick, are you, Frieda?" asked Frances, more, it
would seem, as if to make conversation, than because she really thought
there was any likelihood of this contingency.

The girl regarded her questioner scornfully.

"For them folks?" she asked sarcastically. "I don't want to see them no
more!"

Frances sighed--and surrendered. Ever since she and her Captain had met
the country girl, she had tried to be friendly and sympathetic; in every
instance Frieda had repulsed her in this rude manner. At first Frances
had felt hurt; with a great deal of effort she had kept back the tears
that the sharp replies would bring dangerously near to the surface.
Then, too, the girl had been so outrageously ungrateful; she had almost
made a scene in a store where Miss Phillips tried to buy a ten-dollar
dress, and had declared that she would never wear it! Finally, they had
compromised on a dark skirt and two middy blouses; but Frieda took no
pains to hide her resentment at the cheapness of the clothing. Many of
her remarks had been absolutely insulting; and now Frances was utterly
disgusted with her, and wished that Pansy troop had taken Ruth Henry's
advice, and let Frieda Hammer stay where she was till the end of her
days.

Just at that moment Mrs. Johnson appeared with a great, warm smile of
welcome on her motherly face. Surely, Frances thought, this would have
melted the hardest heart. She and Miss Phillips both rose at her
entrance; but Frieda sat perfectly still, and gave no indication that
she was aware of the other's presence.

"Stand up, Frieda," commanded Miss Phillips, pleasantly, and the girl
shuffled to her feet, still keeping her eyes fixed on the piano.

"Mrs. Johnson, this is Frieda Hammer. Frieda, you are very lucky to
have such a lovely home, and such a kind, adopted mother! Won't you
shake hands?"

The girl thrust out her hand awkwardly, still avoiding the eyes of the
older woman. "A bad sign"--thought Mrs. Johnson, unconsciously--"she
never seems to look anyone in the eyes."

"I will take you to your room, my dear," she said. "Then you can come
down again and have something to eat!"

This last remark was made with a side glance at Miss Phillips, and a
twinkle in her eye. But for once the latter did not respond; she was so
discouraged and mentally worn-out, that she had completely forgotten the
surprise party.

"Don't want nuthing!" protested Frieda, rudely. And, seizing her bag,
she followed Mrs. Johnson up the stairs.

As soon as she was out of sight, the girls began to move cautiously from
their hiding places. But suddenly they all stood perfectly still,
arrested by the unbelievable words they now heard, which Frieda
literally shouted at kind Mrs. Johnson.

"You ain't a-going to put me in the attic!" Her bag fell to the floor
with a bang. "I didn't come here to be no servant girl! I knew there was
a trick to it!"

"But, my dear----" Mrs. Johnson's soft voice pleaded in words that were
not distinguishable to the girls below.

By this time the Scouts were gathered about the piano. Frances sank on
the sofa and buried her face in her hands, and Miss Phillips sighed
deeply. Marjorie looked frightened, as if something dreadful were about
to happen. Ruth alone was unaffected; she had been right from the first!

"Oh, Ruth!" cried Frances, forgetting all about the surprise party. "If
we only had taken your advice!" Her voice died in a wail.

"Sh!" cautioned Marjorie. "Oh, girls, don't let's give up! Please! Let's
try our song. Maybe that--and the ice-cream----"

But to her dismay, she received no word of encouragement from Miss
Phillips. Their Captain seemed to have reached the lowest depths of
despair.

Ethel, however, struck the chord, and the girls chimed in weakly. Then,
the music, strengthening their hopes as it progressed, made them more
cheerful. Loudly, they brought out the words of the chorus:

    "Frieda dear, Frieda dear, we're so glad you're here!
    Frieda dear, Frieda dear, your Scout friends are near----"

and they fairly shouted the name in hope of evoking some response.

But none came; in five minutes Mrs. Johnson reappeared with wet eyes.
She felt so sorry for the Scouts.

"It's no use, girls," she said, sadly; "she wouldn't come down. And when
I stepped out into the hall to show her the big closet for her wraps,
she locked the door in my face!"

Marjorie burst into tears and hid her face on her room-mate's shoulder.
She felt as if she had never been more disappointed, even when she
failed to make the Scout troop.

"Don't cry, dear," said Mrs. Johnson, "she'll come around in time. Now
let's have the party, anyway. Suppose you change it, and have it in
honor of me instead! Day after to-morrow is my birthday!"

Marjorie looked up, smiling through her tears; and the girls all went
out to prepare the refreshments. Miss Phillips flashed Mrs. Johnson a
grateful look; the tact and good sense of the older woman had prevented
the misfortune from becoming a tragedy.




CHAPTER VII

THE JAPANESE FÊTE


When the disappointed girls left Mrs. Johnson's home at the conclusion
of the surprise party, Marjorie probably looked most dejected of all.
She resolutely avoided Ruth's society, feeling that she could not bear
her "I told you so" attitude; instead, she sought Lily, who seemed to
understand how she felt. The girls walked in silence; Lily knew her
room-mate well enough now to realize that talking would not help, and
she discreetly refrained from intruding upon her thoughts.

When they reached their own room, Marjorie threw herself upon the bed
with a sob. Lily sat down beside her and put her arm around her neck.

"Marj, please don't take it so hard," she begged. "It won't do any
good."

"Of course it won't," Marjorie replied, brokenly. "But I cared so much
about her liking us."

"Well, she may, yet. Maybe she was frightened--and homesick. Why don't
you go down to see her all by yourself?"

The suggestion brought Marjorie a ray of hope. She dried her eyes, and
squeezed Lily's hand gratefully.

"I certainly will do that!" she exclaimed. "Thank you for suggesting
it."

The following day, Sunday, was mild and beautiful; Marjorie was so glad
to see that the rain was gone, and so hopeful about her new project,
that she felt quite cheerful again. She selected one of her prettiest
dresses--a pale pink voile--and also wore her pink silk sweater which
matched it so perfectly.

"I won't bother with a hat," she thought. "It's so warm, and it will
seem more informal without one."

It was only a few minutes' walk to Mrs. Johnson's house, and she reached
it in no time. With trembling fingers, she rang the doorbell. The woman
herself answered the summons.

"How do you do, Mrs. Johnson?" she said pleasantly. And then, just as if
she were paying an ordinary call on one of her own friends, "Is Frieda
in?"

Mrs. Johnson smiled. "Yes. Do come in, and sit down--Marjorie--isn't
that your name? Let's talk a little first, and then I'll call her."

Marjorie sat down upon the edge of the sofa, and leaned forward eagerly.
She was curious for news of this strange girl, who so baffled everybody,
even Miss Phillips and kind Mrs. Johnson.

"She isn't civilized, Marjorie," said the older woman. "That's exactly
what it is; she has lived with people all of her life who have no
conception of morals, or manners, or training, and she simply acts like
a sort of mental savage."

"But there were the Brubakers--her father worked for Mr. Brubaker. Don't
you suppose----?"

"No; I don't suppose she ever saw anything of them. She is used to
wandering about just as she pleases. Whatever education she has acquired
was probably beaten into her by some rough, country schoolmaster."

Marjorie sighed hopelessly.

Mrs. Johnson read her thoughts. "But it isn't hopeless, my dear," she
added softly. "Frieda is a human being, with a soul. And she is young,
too. If we can keep her here, away from her parents' bad influence, we
may yet be able to civilize her. Don't give up yet!"

Marjorie was unconsciously encouraged by these words. But she wanted
more definite details of the girl's behavior.

"I sent her supper to her last night," said Mrs. Johnson, "by Annie, the
girl who comes in to help me cook and wash dishes. She said that Frieda
opened the door and snarled at her something which she could not
understand, except the word 'servant,' and snatched the food and slammed
the door in her face.

"She did not appear at breakfast, but I heard her go out for a walk;
and when she came back, I was home from church and had dinner on the
table. I asked her to come in, and she followed me to the dining-room.

"When I introduced her to father and mother, and Mr. Johnson, she paid
not the slightest attention. Her manners at the table were terrible; she
evidently knew nothing about the use of a knife and fork. She ate
greedily, as if she were very hungry. And, by the way, I think the girl
is decidedly undernourished.

"Immediately after dinner she went to her room again. Now, if you want
to go up and see her, you can do as you like. You know the facts."

Marjorie jumped to her feet.

"Oh, I will go!" she cried impulsively. "There must be some good in
her."

"Yes," agreed Mrs. Johnson, "or else she would not have consented to
come here."

Marjorie lowered her eyelids. She was thinking of that remark of Ruth's:
that Frieda had only seized the opportunity as another chance to steal
something. But she resolutely suppressed the idea; she did not want to
antagonize Mrs. Johnson to any greater extent against the girl.

Up the steps she ran, two at a time, so that she might not have time to
lose courage and change her mind. She knocked at the door of the room.

"Who is it?" This, gruffly.

"It's Marjorie--Marjorie Wilkinson! The girl with the canoe. I want to
take you for a ride in my boat!" This last proposal was made on the
inspiration of the moment.

To her surprise, she heard Frieda step forward and unlock the door.

"Whew!" she whistled, gazing at Marjorie's costume in open-mouthed
amazement. "Some dress!"

Marjorie smiled, all the while noting with pleasure the changed
appearance of the other. For Frieda wore the pleated skirt and middy
that Miss Phillips had bought for her the day before, and her hair was
arranged quite simply in the style Frances Wright adopted, without, of
course, the artificial ear-puffs.

"How nice you look, Frieda!" she observed, admiringly.

"None of that!" shouted the other girl. "This dress makes me sick, when
I look at yours!"

Marjorie perceived the jealousy in Frieda's eyes, and hastened to change
the subject.

"Will you go out in my canoe with me now?"

"Nope! Not in this rig!"

"But Frieda----"

"If you like it so much," she interrupted, "you wear it--and give me
yours!"

Now Marjorie's pink voile was one of her favorite dresses, and she had
counted upon wearing it in the evenings all winter. But it was not
really expensive, and she felt that she would gladly part with it if it
would effect a reconciliation. The sweater would be a weightier matter;
it had been a birthday gift from her father. Still, she would sacrifice
that, too, on the altar of this, her greatest desire of the present
time.

She considered making a bargain and extracting a promise of friendship
from the girl, but this, she felt, might antagonize her. So she merely
said,

"All right, Frieda; but you can't wear this to school. I'll wear yours
back to the dormitory, and then I'll put on another dress and give this
back to you again."

Frieda could hardly believe her ears when she saw Marjorie actually take
off her sweater and start to unfasten her dress. Then she clapped her
hands with delight; she was not so uncivilized as to lack the feminine
characteristic of love of pretty clothing.

The change was effected quickly, and the girls walked out together and
back to Miss Allen's where Marjorie changed the dress; and then to the
lake. Marjorie tried to talk naturally, but, only receiving
monosyllables as replies, finally gave up. Untying the canoe, and taking
the paddle from the bottom, she bade Frieda get in, and pushed off.

"Ain't it locked?" asked Frieda in astonishment.

"No, everybody here is honest. And people from outside the school don't
know about it."

They drifted on, Marjorie glancing now and then at her companion, who
sat back lazily--in fact, almost contentedly--watching the sky and the
water, and listening to the rhythmic dip of the paddle. A wave of great
happiness surged over Marjorie; she felt that she had progressed farther
than she would have dreamed possible, after the previous day's
experience.

"Frieda, will you come to our Japanese party on Friday evening, if I
give you a ticket?" asked Marjorie, as she left the girl at Mrs.
Johnson's.

"Maybe. What's it going to be like?"

Marjorie explained the plans, but she saw that they conveyed little
meaning to the country girl. Nevertheless, she resolved to send her a
ticket.

It happened that Friday night, which was the last of September, was
clear and mild; the stars twinkled brightly over the pretty scene at the
edge of the lake. Japanese lanterns were strung all about the trees, and
the tables, containing refreshments, were decorated with gay autumn
flowers. Robed in Japanese kimonas, with long, Oriental pins in their
hair, the girls flitted about from place to place, welcoming their
guests and serving the dainty food. Out on the lake, where Marjorie was
drifting in her canoe, a victrola was playing soft music.

"The boat reminds one of Venice," observed Miss Allen, who was one of
the first to arrive. "I believe I'd enjoy a ride!"

Lily, to whom the remark was directed, whistled softly to her room-mate.
Instantly, the girl turned around, and made for the shore.

"Venice or Japan, whichever you like, Miss Allen," laughed Lily, "just
so long as we make the money--for the cause is a good one, you know."

Teachers, girls from the school, people from the village,--a larger
crowd than the Scouts had dared to hope for--continued to arrive.
Charmed by the novel idea, they bought lavishly; and few escaped without
first visiting the fortune-telling booth presided over by Miss Phillips,
or taking a ride in one of the row-boats, or in Marjorie's canoe.

All the while, however, Marjorie watched anxiously for the appearance of
Frieda. Would the girl disappoint her? Marjorie had been so busy during
the week that she had not been able to go to see her, but Mrs. Johnson
had told Miss Phillips that Frieda had gone regularly to school, and
that her teacher reported progress.

Towards nine o'clock, however, just as Marjorie was landing her canoe
with two of the teachers who had been for a ride, she caught sight of a
familiar pink dress.

Ruth, who had joined their group in order to serve the guests with
ice-cream, also noticed the newcomer.

"I wonder who that is!" remarked Ruth, vainly attempting to identify the
girl in the dim light. "She's all dolled up, too!"

A smile spread over Marjorie's face, and she waved her hand in welcome.
Frieda advanced slowly, as if she were not sure that she desired to
join the group. When she was within half a dozen steps of them, Ruth
recognized her.

"Frieda Hammer!" announced Ruth, in a stage whisper that was perfectly
audible to the girl herself. Then, turning to the others, and laughing,
she added, "Hold on to your jewelry! Nothing's safe----"

"Sh!" cautioned Marjorie, in the deepest distress. "Do be careful, Ruth.
She'll hear you!"

But the girl had evidently overheard the remark, for a hard look came
into her eyes. She grit her teeth fiercely, but said nothing; then,
turning swiftly around, she disappeared among the trees.

The older women, sensing a scene, sauntered away; but Ruth stood where
she was, smiling defiantly. Marjorie might have cried, had she not been
so angry.

"It's all your fault!" she exclaimed; "Frieda was just getting friendly,
and here you had to spoil it! Just the way you spoil everything I try to
do!"

"Calm yourself, Marj!" remarked Ruth, with a superior air. "She can't
feel things like we do! Besides, she is a thief, so why not call her
one?"

"Would you like to have all your sins thrown in your face?" retorted
Marjorie. "And you know----"

"May I have a canoe ride?" said a pleasant voice behind them, and the
girls turned around to see Mrs. Johnson, with her husband, standing near
them.

"Certainly," murmured Marjorie, ashamed of her loss of temper, and
hoping that the others had not heard the angry words. Ruth turned away,
and Marjorie once more paddled out on the lake. But the evening was
spoiled for her.

For Frieda Hammer had again been antagonized!




CHAPTER VIII

THE HOCKEY TEAM


"Marjorie!"

Lily Andrews, entering the room, found it necessary to speak twice
before she aroused the attention of her room-mate, who was seated on her
couch, idly fingering the geometry book she was supposed to be studying,
and looking into space. Lily could not remember when she had seen her
look so dejected. But she had a piece of news that she thought would
bring a smile to Marjorie's lips.

"Miss Phillips wants you!"

"She does! What for?" This, eagerly.

"Oh, I don't know--hockey, or something, I guess!"

The look of happiness died from Marjorie's face. She seemed tremendously
disappointed. Lily looked at her questioningly; heretofore, the girl had
always been delighted to be summoned by her favorite teacher, for no
matter what purpose.

"What's the matter, Marj?"

"Nothing; only I hoped that maybe it had something to do with Scouts."

"With Scouts?"

"Well--with Frieda, then!" This explanation was given rather grudgingly,
and with a greater degree of impatience than she was wont to use with
Lily.

"Didn't you tell me you hoped she'd come to the Japanese fête, Marj?"
pursued the other.

"Yes; and she did come!"

"But I didn't see her!"

"Well, then you missed her, that's all." Marjorie arose from her seat,
as if to end a very distasteful conversation.

But Lily was not through.

"Marj, is it true that you gave her your pink dress?"

"Yes, it is."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" cried Lily, in the most relieved tone. "Ruth saw
Frieda wearing it--and your sweater besides--and she said Frieda stole
it!"

"And you believed that!" Marjorie's eyes flashed in anger. "Oh, Lil, how
could you?"

"Well, you didn't tell me; and you know she did steal before. So Ruth
thought probably----"

"Ruth Henry makes me sick!" exclaimed Marjorie, now tried to the utmost.
"And I'll bet she got you to pump me----"

"No, not exactly," replied Lily, a little ashamed of her questions;
"but we were both curious to know."

Marjorie shook her head with disgust, and resolved to say nothing
further.

"Where is Miss Phillips?" she asked.

"In her office."

"Thanks."

Without another word, she left the room, and went straight to the
gymnasium.

"Good afternoon!" said Miss Phillips, pleasantly, as Marjorie entered
the little office; "sit down here. I want to talk about the hockey
squad."

"Yes, of course," murmured Marjorie, making a great effort to collect
her thoughts and show an interest in the conversation.

"And I consulted you first," continued Miss Phillips, "because you have
been at practice most faithfully, and played the best of anyone since
the beginning of the term."

The compliment, which should have brought happiness to the girl, only
touched her lightly; she hardly acknowledged it with a weak smile.
Picking up a pencil, she ran the thick end along the edge of the desk,
as if she were giving the teacher only a small part of her attention.
Miss Phillips noticed and was annoyed, but she said nothing. She
realized that even the loveliest characters experience perverse moods.

"I have decided on yourself, Ruth Henry, Ethel Todd, Frances Wright,
and Mae VanHorn for forwards; Edith Evans and Marian Guard for two of
the half-backs, and Lily Andrews for goal. That leaves one half-back and
two full-backs yet to be chosen, and I think we ought to have about five
substitutes. Now whom do you suggest? Let's think of each class in
turn."

Marjorie concentrated her attention upon the matter at hand, and thought
hard.

"Is Helen Stewart's ankle all right by now?" she asked. The latter, who
was to have been the heroine in the play at the last Commencement, had
sprained her ankle the day that the Scouts had entertained a group of
settlement children, and had been obliged to give up athletics for a
while. Apparently, however, she was all right now.

"Yes; but it isn't very strong. Suppose we put her as one of the
substitutes?"

"All right," agreed Marjorie.

"And there's nobody else in the senior class."

"No."

"Nor in the junior. Ada Mearns could play well, if she would only try,
but she won't bother. Now what do you think about your own class?"

"Could Doris Sands possibly----?"

"Marjorie!" reproved Miss Phillips. "You're letting your personal
feelings enter into the consideration. Doris Sands is very sweet and
very capable, but--she's no hockey player!"

"That's true," admitted Marjorie. "Well, how about Evelyn Hopkins? She
never seems to get anything."

But again the teacher shook her head. "Evelyn doesn't go about things
right," she answered. "Individually, she's a good player, but she's
miserable in team work. Evelyn plays selfishly."

Marjorie smiled; Miss Phillips seemed to sum up the girl's character
correctly.

"Of course, Mae's new; do you think she will make good, Captain?"

"There's no doubt about it," replied Miss Phillips positively; "making
the sorority last year was bad for Mae VanHorn, but losing out on the
Scout troop was a good thing. All of her best friends are Scouts, and
she certainly has buckled down to work well. The other teachers tell me
she is getting along beautifully thus far in her lessons."

"We can never get seven girls out of the freshman class!" remarked
Marjorie, skeptically.

"Then we'll just appoint the best ones for the regular positions, and
trust to luck for substitutes till we have a regular game. It's all we
can do!"

"Well, Edith Evans' sister Florence can play almost any position," said
Marjorie. "She surely is a dandy girl; I think she'll be another like
Edith."

"Let's put her in for full-back; that's a mighty important position,"
suggested Miss Phillips. "And what do you think of Alice Endicott?
She's certainly worked hard!"

Marjorie's eyes brightened; she wanted that little homesick girl, whom
she had been pleased to call "her freshman," to win out. A shadow
crossed her face as she thought how she had neglected her lately, while
all her thoughts were centered on Frieda Hammer. And Alice appreciated
every little attention so much, while Frieda was so ungrateful.

"I'm so glad you think so," she said enthusiastically; "I have watched
her, too, and I think she could hold her own as half-back."

"Oh, that reminds me," exclaimed Miss Phillips, "I think Daisy Gravers
could play full-back."

The team was complete.

It became apparent that Marjorie was anxious to dismiss the subject, for
she rose to go.

"But we have only one substitute," remarked Miss Phillips.

Marjorie paused a moment before she replied. Then,

"What would you think of Barbara Hill?"

"Good--but erratic. Yes, she'd do for a sub forward. All right, then,
I'll notify the girls, and call a meeting to elect a captain. We must
beat Miss Martin's this year!"

Marjorie flushed at the recollection of the previous year's game, which,
she had always considered, she had lost for her school.

"Let's make everybody go into training this year!" she said, prompted by
the recollection.

"All right!" agreed Miss Phillips. Then, abruptly changing the subject,
she looked straight into Marjorie's eyes, and asked softly,

"What's the matter, Marjorie?"

The girl colored again under her scrutiny. But there was no use in
attempting to hide anything from the Captain.

"Oh, just about Frieda! I'm discouraged."

Miss Phillips rose, and laid her hand upon her shoulder.

"Don't worry, dear; it will be all right in the end. But it is a long
process. Anyhow, I have kept in close touch with Frieda's public school
teachers, and they say that she is attending to her work, and making
good headway. She even stays after school for extra instruction. And you
know, Marjorie, there is nothing--except perhaps religion--that can
change a person like education."

The Captain's cheerful words encouraged Marjorie.

"We did make a good deal on the Japanese fête, didn't we?" she asked.

"Over a hundred dollars! And the returns aren't all in yet."

"Well, I will try to be patient," said Marjorie, walking toward the door
of the office. Then, turning around, she added,

"Miss Phillips, couldn't you urge _all_ the Scouts to adopt a friendly
attitude toward Frieda? We'll never get anywhere till they do!"

"I didn't know they hadn't!" replied Miss Phillips; "but I will deliver
a gentle lecture at next Scout meeting if you think there is any doubt."

Marjorie flashed her grateful look, and was gone. Temporarily, she felt
cheered and relieved, but she knew that the feeling would not last. Deep
in her subconscious mind, she sensed dangerous rocks ahead, and probably
treacherous waters to go through, before Frieda would be safe--morally
safe--as she and Lily and all her friends, were safe.

But she would be brave; she would not cross her bridges before she came
to them!




CHAPTER IX

THE LOST CANOE


It was in October that the hockey squad was announced, and a meeting
held. The list of names which Miss Phillips posted upon the
bulletin-board was examined with breathless interest by every girl in
the school; for there would be no new Scouts chosen from among those who
had not already qualified in hockey.

Except among the fortunate few, a great feeling of disappointment
prevailed all over the school. Girls who knew that their report marks
would be high, and who had looked eagerly forward to becoming Girl
Scouts of Pansy troop, were sick with despair at falling short of the
coveted goal.

For the same reason, however, the few new girls who had made the team
appreciated the honor all the more. It meant a great deal to Mae
VanHorn, who had lost out the previous year, and who cared more for
Marjorie and Frances and Ethel, than any of the other girls in the
school. It brought a feeling of pride to Barbara Hill, who admired Ruth
so ardently. But perhaps it carried the greatest happiness of all to
the three freshmen who were chosen--Florence Evans, Alice Endicott, and
Daisy Gravers. If their marks would only permit them to become Girl
Scouts!

For the past week Marjorie had been happy. With an easy majority, she
had been elected captain of the team, and the position and the
popularity pleased her. Then, too, she spent much of her time with Alice
Endicott, who simply bubbled over with joyousness all the time, so that
it would have required real trouble to allow anyone to be sad in her
presence. And Frieda, although she had never gone so far again in
accepting Marjorie's friendship as she had on that first Sunday
afternoon, was at least civil. She treated Mrs. Johnson with a fair
degree of courtesy, but she seemed to distrust the Scouts, and avoided
them on every occasion. At one time Pansy troop had invited her to go
with them on a hike, but she had refused in a formal little note,
written in an uneven hand, and evidently dictated by her teacher.

"It must have been that insulting remark of Ruth's, the night of the
fête!" Marjorie assured herself, over and over. "Except for that, we'd
probably be good friends by now!"

Then she would remind herself that Frieda really was progressing, that
the troop was doing its part, and that there was actually no cause to
worry.

On one afternoon that was warm and beautiful, and for which there was no
hockey practice scheduled, she was debating in her mind what to do, when
Lily threw open the door.

"Marj!" she exclaimed, "inside, on a day like this!"

"Oh, I'm going out," her room-mate replied slowly. "Only I can't decide
where. What are you going to do?"

"Play tennis with Doris."

"That's nice."

She watched Lily put on her bloomers, which the girls were allowed to
wear on their own courts, and her sneakers, still undecided as to her
course of action.

"Want to play, too?" invited Lily. "Why not get Ruth, and we'll make it
doubles?"

Marjorie wrinkled her nose; in her own mind she still harbored
resentment against Ruth, and the idea of her company was rather
distasteful.

"No--thanks! I don't want to do anything very strenuous."

A knock sounded at their door, and in answer to Lily's cheery, "Come!"
Alice Endicott entered.

"If I bother you people too much, just put me out!" she announced gaily.
"I simply must have company!"

"Not homesick?" asked Marjorie.

"No, indeed! Only I want to go for a walk, or do something; and your
society's so infinitely more pleasant than my own----"

"I'll tell you what I'll do," interrupted Marjorie. "Let's go canoeing!"

Alice clapped her hands with delight. She had never been out in
Marjorie's canoe since the day when their friendship had really started,
and she longed to be invited again.

"Oh, how lovely!" she cried. "And it's such a perfect day!"

"I'll have to send it home at Thanksgiving," remarked Marjorie, as she
and Alice crossed the campus on their way to the lake. "And I don't know
how I'll ever do without it."

"Oh, well, there will be skating," Alice reminded her. "And then, it
will soon be spring again."

They came in sight of the tree to which Marjorie always kept the canoe
tied, and she looked anxiously, as usual, for the first sight of it.
Suddenly, her heart stopped beating: she could not see it!

"Alice!" she shrieked, in terror. "It's gone!"

Alice followed Marjorie's gaze, but she, too, saw no canoe. However, she
attributed no particular significance to that fact.

"It's probably around the other side," she said optimistically: "or
maybe you tied it to another tree."

But as the girls came nearer to the spot, Marjorie knew that she had
been right. They looked all around the small lake; but the canoe was
nowhere to be found!

"Somebody's borrowed it!" suggested Alice, "and probably couldn't find
you to ask permission!"

"But then they'd be on the lake!"

"No--if you should carry the canoe about a hundred yards, you'd find the
stream gets deep enough to paddle. And it goes a long way, too, even
joins a river. I know because once Daisy and I hiked and hiked, meaning
to follow it to the end. There were several swift places where you might
have to carry the canoe a few yards, but it could easily be done."

Marjorie's face brightened at the hope the words offered.

"Let's walk up that way ourselves," she suggested.

Climbing the school fence at the edge of the lake, they followed a
little creek, which, though shallow in many places, could still be
navigated by a canoe.

"Why didn't any of us ever think of this?" remarked Marjorie. "I've
never had the canoe off the lake."

"Couldn't we try it to-morrow?" asked Alice, wondering whether it were
quite the thing for her to suggest.

"Yes, I'd love to!" replied Marjorie. But her expression grew sad again,
as she recalled the circumstances which led them on this walk of
exploration.

The woods were wonderful now, dressed in their gorgeously colored
foliage. Brown, orange, scarlet, with just enough somber evergreen to
set off the brilliancy of the other trees by contrast, the scene was at
the height of its splendor. But so intent were the girls upon watching
the water, they hardly noticed the spectacle.

"Look! Look!" cried Alice suddenly. "There--around that bend! Isn't that
the end of a canoe?"

Marjorie held her hand to her forehead, and shaded her eyes in an effort
to distinguish the object in the distance. But, although she saw what
Alice meant, it was too far off for identification. In their eagerness,
the girls started to run.

Marjorie was the first to stop, realizing her mistake.

"It's a dead tree trunk!" she gasped, out of breath from the exertion.

She stopped and leaned against a tree, tired out and disappointed. But
she resolutely conquered her desire to cry: whatever happened, she must
not break down before a freshman!

"Let's go back," she said. "I'm awfully tired."

"We might as well," said Alice. "For whoever has borrowed it will be
sure to bring it back by supper time."

"Perhaps; but somehow I feel as if it were gone forever! I can't tell
you why----"

"Oh, please don't worry, Marj!" begged the younger girl. "Nobody would
take it!"

They went to Marjorie's room, and discussed the occurrence over and
over. Alice stayed until half-past five, when Lily came back from
tennis.

"Too dark to play!" cried Lily as she threw open the door. "Heavens, why
sit in darkness?"

Marjorie and Alice had hardly noticed the gradually deepening twilight,
so wrapped up were they in the event of the afternoon. They blinked as
Lily flashed on the lights.

"Who won?" asked Marjorie, half-heartedly.

"Doris, of course!" This carelessly. Then, looking closely at her
room-mate, she realized that something was wrong.

"What's happened, Marj? No bad news from home?"

"Oh, no--it isn't that." Marjorie swallowed hard, in the effort to keep
her voice calm. Then, blurting it out, "I've lost my canoe!"

Lily stood perfectly still in open-mouthed amazement, while Alice,
assisted here and there by Marjorie, told of the afternoon's adventure.
But Lily smiled reassuringly.

"You're worrying yourself needlessly, Marj. Somebody's borrowed it, of
course! It couldn't have drifted away--there's no place for it to
drift--and surely nobody would steal it!"

"Somebody must have!" declared Marjorie, feeling now that any moment she
would break down. To her relief, Alice arose to go.

As soon as the door closed upon the retreating freshman, Marjorie began
to sob violently. Lily went over and sat beside her.

"Don't, Marj, please don't!" she begged. "Wait till after supper, at
least. I'll go over and tell Miss Allen all about it the minute I'm
dressed, and we'll see what she can do."

Marjorie dried her eyes, and the girls got ready for supper. In fifteen
minutes, Lily was ready to go.

"Tell Miss Allen not to make an announcement till the very end of the
meal, so that if I get any news of the canoe, I can let her know."

But Marjorie was disappointed to find that no one came up to her with an
explanation or an apology. Unfortunately, too, all the girls were
present at the meal--a circumstance which left her no room for the hope
that one of her school-mates had the canoe.

Just as dessert was being served, she caught Miss Allen's questioning
eyes fastened upon hers, and she shook her head sadly in reply to the
silent interrogation. Accordingly, the Principal arose and told
Marjorie's story, and asked whether anyone had seen the canoe. But there
was no response.

"Girls, I don't suspect anybody," she said, after a few minutes of
silence, "but just for the sake of formality, I will call a meeting for
eight o'clock this evening and ask every girl where she was early this
afternoon, for Marjorie tells me that she saw it herself at one
o'clock."

"Oh, Miss Allen!" interrupted Marjorie, much to everyone's
consternation, "I really don't want to go as far as that! I am sure that
none of the girls took it."

"Somebody might have taken it for a prank," remarked the Principal,
without administering any reproof for the interruption. "And we may as
well go on with the investigation."

There was not a single girl at the school who dared to absent herself
from that meeting. Miss Allen herself presided, and, beginning with the
senior class, she requested each girl in turn to rise and state where
she had spent the early part of the afternoon.

"And whenever another girl can confirm a statement, I wish she would do
so," added Miss Allen.

The meeting proceeded rapidly; the girls, a little nervous at the
recital in public of their own affairs, nevertheless spoke swiftly; and,
without a single exception, their statements were all confirmed by other
girls.

The whole proceeding served only to intensify Marjorie's despondency.
Now, she felt, the girls might think that she suspected them, which in
reality had never been the case. When Miss Allen had suggested a joke,
her mind naturally flew to Ruth; but now that the whole affair had
assumed such serious proportions, she dismissed that solution from her
thoughts.

The last freshman in the school was recounting her afternoon's program,
when one of the housemaids threw open the door.

The faces all swung instantly around, and the speaker became silent. The
newcomer announced her mission without delay:

"An important message for Miss Phillips," she said. "I took it over the
telephone."

"Will you give it to me?" asked the latter, rising and advancing to take
what she expected to be a written message.

"Yes, ma'am; I didn't write it down," she replied. And before Miss
Phillips could warn her not to inform the whole school, she shouted out,
to the surprise of everyone,

"_Mrs. Johnson sent word that Frieda Hammer has been missing since
half-past one this afternoon._"

"With Marjorie Wilkinson's canoe!" exclaimed Ruth, in a tone that was
audible all over the assembly room.




CHAPTER X

THE HALLOWE'EN PARTY


The meeting which Miss Allen had begun with such formality ended in a
turmoil. Everyone jumped up excitedly at the news of Frieda's
disappearance and at the interpretation which Ruth gave to the
occurrence.

For all the girls in the school--even those who were not Scouts--knew
about Frieda Hammer. They were aware, too, of the fact that the Japanese
fête had been given to raise money to support her, and it was common
knowledge that over a hundred dollars had been cleared.

But only the Scouts themselves knew the details: that, after five weeks'
board had been paid in advance, Frieda had been given fifteen dollars,
which she was to use for her ticket home on Thanksgiving. This idea had
been Marjorie's; she wanted by some such outward sign to testify to the
girl that the Scouts trusted her. Miss Phillips, Ruth, and one or two
others had opposed the plan, but Marjorie's enthusiasm had finally
carried it.

So now Marjorie had this double tragedy to face: she had not only lost
her canoe, but her confidence had been betrayed. And Ruth, who had
prophesied something of the sort from the first, had triumphed!

Miss Phillips was too wise to call a Scout meeting immediately; she
wanted to give the discussion a chance to simmer down. Besides this, she
felt deeply for Marjorie. The girl had encountered a terrible
disappointment; older and more experienced people than Marjorie had
broken down under parallel circumstances. Miss Phillips wanted to give
her a good chance to cry; after that, she depended upon Lily's good
sense and tact to console her.

Accordingly, nothing was done until the next night, when Miss Phillips
called the Scouts to a meeting.

The subject was hardly mentioned before Ruth Henry sprang to her feet.

"Captain," she began, talking rather fast, for she had in her own mind a
number of points that she wished to make, "we all have to admit that we
have failed. The idea--social service, Good Turn, whatever you want to
call it--is splendid; but the person we selected, unworthy. Let's forget
all about it; for we can't get back Marjorie's canoe. It's probably sold
by now.

"Well, this is my suggestion: hold our bazaar just as we have planned,
and use the money, first to buy Marjorie a new canoe, and then to bring
a nice Christmas to some needy family, in the village, with lots of
children."

"Hurray! Good for you, Ruth!" cried several of the girls impulsively
when she sat down.

Amid their shouts, however, Marjorie stumbled to her feet. She looked
pale, as if she had slept little the previous night; and her eyes bore
the traces of tears. But outwardly she was calm.

"It is awfully good of Ruth," she said, seriously, "but I really
wouldn't want the troop to replace my canoe. I won't need it much longer
this fall, and perhaps father will give me one for my next birthday. And
I like Ruth's suggestion about the poor family. But"--she lowered her
voice and pronounced each word slowly and very distinctly--"is the troop
going to accept this defeat as final?"

"You mean, Marjorie, that you would like to give Frieda another chance?"
asked the Captain.

"Yes." The word was little more than a whisper.

Miss Phillips said nothing; she was simply astounded at the girl's
generosity. Frieda Hammer had stolen Marjorie's dearest possession, and
yet the latter was ready to forgive her!

But Ruth interpreted Marjorie's attitude merely as the usual opposition
to her own suggestions.

"Then would you like to put a detective on the case?" she asked.

"No! A thousand times, no!" protested Marjorie, emphatically.

"Then what could we do to trace her?"

"I could at least telegraph to her mother, with a prepaid reply," put in
Miss Phillips.

"Oh, do--please do!" begged Marjorie; and the affair rested at that.

"Now," said Ethel, anxious to change the subject, "let's talk about our
Hallowe'en party. It's only a little over a week off!"

The tone of the meeting changed from that of serious-minded discussion
of a theft and its treatment, to care-free chatter about an evening of
fun. Even Marjorie put aside her trouble for the time and entered
heartily into the preparations.

The Hallowe'en party was to be the last event of the Scout troop as it
now stood. The day following--November first--the reports would be
issued, and the new Scouts would officially join the troop at the next
meeting. This would necessitate new divisions into the patrols,
re-elections, etc.

The fifteen girls who now belonged to Pansy troop felt especially close
together. All, except Helen Stewart and Anna Cane, had lived side by
side at camp, eaten at the same table, gathered around the same camp
fire at night, been comrades on many hikes, and competed in the contest
which Marjorie had so unexpectedly won. They wanted their troop to grow,
and to take in new girls, especially if a troop was to be established
at the rival seminary: but they were glad to be allowed this party for
themselves.

The day after the Scout meeting, Miss Phillips sent a telegram to Frieda
Hammer's mother, and received the following reply:

     "No signs of Frieda. Is she kidnapped?--M. Hammer."

Marjorie's last hopes vanished as she read the telegram. There was
nothing to be done; she must be content to give up her dream. Miss
Phillips suggested that the girl might come back again after her money
was all spent; upon this meager supposition Marjorie fastened her
expectations.

In the meantime, preparations for the Hallowe'en party were in full
swing. Miss Phillips had suggested that each girl dress to represent a
character in history.

"Choose a man or a woman, whichever you please," she told them; "but
don't try to get your parents to send you costumes! Make them
yourselves, for they needn't be too elaborate. Then we can guess which
one each character represents, as well as the identity of the girl who
wears the costume."

The gymnasium was decorated with corn stalks and autumn leaves, and here
and there against the walls stood stuffed paper witches, to remind the
guests that it was really Hallowe'en. Weird, soft music was coming from
the victrola to remind one that ghosts were abroad that night.

George and Martha Washington, with powdered hair and silver buckled
shoes were the first guests to be greeted by the committee. Soon after
them came Pocohontas, and a Quaker who was intended to be Elizabeth Fry,
but who might have represented almost any member of the Society of
Friends.

Marjorie and Lily came as John Alden and Priscilla--proud because they
were on time for once, and enjoying the fun of acting the part of
lovers.

"It reminds me of the masquerade at camp," whispered Marjorie;
"remember?"

"Yes, wasn't that ridiculous? But you know this is really clever. Oh,
look at these!"

Eight masqueraders, all dressed as women and representing various
characters from Queen Elizabeth to Florence Nightingale, came in,
walking rather awkwardly, as if hampered by their skirts.

"But who can they be?"

"There are too many of them!" laughed Lily; "wouldn't you say that there
were more than fifteen of us here now?"

Lily made an effort to count, but the guests moved so constantly that
the act was almost impossible. However, when seven more masqueraders
arrived in a group, the girls' suspicions were confirmed. Miss Phillips
must have invited outsiders! Perhaps she even knew the marks, and from
them was able to ascertain which girls would be Girl Scouts, and
wishing to surprise the troop, had secretly invited them.

The riddle was too much for them; Lily gave it up, and returned to the
fun of acting the part of lover to Marjorie. She was just putting her
arm affectionately about her room-mate, when the trained nurse, who was
supposed to represent Florence Nightingale, approached, and, in a very
squeaky, obviously disguised voice, said,

"I'm jealous, young man. Won't you please kiss me?"

Lily laughingly leaned toward the intruder and was about to grant the
request, when her eyes fell upon the nurse's hand. It could not belong
to a girl!

"Who are you?" she demanded indignantly.

"Florence Nightingale!"

Lily stamped her foot impatiently. "No, I mean in real life!"

The other raised the mask obediently, and to the girls' astonishment,
revealed himself as Dick Roberts!

"The Boy Scouts!" cried Lily, out loud, and the news spread like wild
fire.

The guessing began, and the votes were taken. After a few moments, the
prize was awarded to General Pershing--a girl, evidently--who was
dressed in a real Army uniform, adorned with many medals and campaign
bars. Across the front, on a white ribbon, she wore, to the amusement of
everyone, these letters:

"COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF!"

That, and her mustache, made a mistake impossible.

But no one guessed her identity, until Marjorie noticing her hands,
exclaimed,

"Ruth Henry!" and the victor laughingly unmasked.

It was another triumph for Ruth!

Miss Phillips called for the boys to volunteer to carry in the tubs of
water filled with apples, and as Marjorie watched the proceeding a
homesick feeling stole over her. John Hadley was no longer there!

She glanced at Lily, radiant with the excitement and pleasure, and
decided that she, too, would find some boy to be interested in. Turning
around at the mention of her own name, she found David Conner waiting to
put her name on his dance program.

The Scouts played games and danced until ten o'clock, and then Miss
Phillips announced that refreshments were ready in the basement.

"The basement!" repeated Frances, in amazement. "Do you mean that,
Captain?"

"Yes; and we are going to reach it through the underground connection
between the gym and the main building," explained Miss Phillips; "so we
shall walk over to the main hall and go down the cellar and then follow
single file through this dark passage to the basement. You may see
something weird!"

"Who's going to lead?" asked Ruth, her eyes shining with excitement.

"We'll draw lots!"

And, by the irony of chance, the part fell to Doris Sands, the most
timid girl in the troop.

"Oh, Captain, I'll die of fright!" she protested.

"It's only play, Doris! You won't mind."

Laughing and chatting gaily they strolled in groups across the driveway
to the main building; then down the narrow cellar steps at the rear of
the hall, and across the cellar to a dark passage.

"Here we are!" announced Miss Phillips, calling everyone to a halt. "Now
get in single file."

Doris went first, with Roger Harris behind; then came Ruth, Jack
Wilkinson, Marjorie, and Lily--all eager for the adventure. Forming a
long chain with their right hands on the shoulders in front, they
advanced cautiously. After the first few steps, the passage became
lower, and pitch-black; they had to bend down and feel their way step by
step as they went.

"Oh!" shrieked Doris, stopping suddenly. "Look! Ugh!"

Roger and Ruth, peering around her shoulder, caught sight of a pair of
gleaming eyes piercing through the darkness.

"It's a cat!" cried Roger, reassuringly. "But how in the world did you
succeed in keeping it there?"

"I tied a chicken-bone to a stone," answered Miss Phillips. "And nothing
will induce pussy to leave."

Frightened by the voices, the cat fled immediately, and the procession
continued. In a minute or two, Doris caught sight of a ghost. But this
time she was not really frightened.

"I know it's only a dummy!" she said. "I'm not afraid any more!"

But when the ghost actually began to stretch out its arms and move
towards her, Doris admitted that she was scared, and clung, trembling,
to Roger. For the hands of the ghost were the bony structures of a human
skeleton, and its head was an empty skull!

"That's our lab skeleton, I'll bet!" exclaimed Roger. "But who's moving
it?"

"I am!" laughed David Conner, throwing off his disguise.

With another yard, light was visible ahead, and the basement of the
gymnasium came into view. Doris breathed a sigh of relief.

"It's nice to stand up straight again, isn't it?" remarked Marjorie, as
the whole party reached the less cramped quarters. "But that was a great
idea, Captain!"

"Wouldn't it make a jolly place to haze freshmen?" commented Ruth, who
never grew tired of playing tricks.

"Refreshments are ready!" announced the Captain. "Look for your
place-cards."

The basement was so cleverly camouflaged and the table so charmingly
decorated that the effect could not have been better in the most
elaborate dining hall. Corn-stalks, crêpe-paper, candles, and favors
worked wonders with the usually ugly room.

It seemed, too as if there were everything imaginable to
eat--sandwiches, doughnuts, cider, apples, nuts, and candy--indeed,
Marjorie regretted that she must eat carefully, for she was still in
training.

Seated with David Conner next to her on one side and Dick Roberts on the
other, she had not a single dull moment in which to regret the absence
of John Hadley. All too soon the party came to an end.

"If only our good turns were as successful as our good times," remarked
Marjorie, as she and Lily made their way to their room, "Pansy troop
would be wonderful!"

"You're worrying about Frieda Hammer again," remonstrated Lily. "Do try
to forget her!"

"I almost wish I could!" replied the other, with a sigh.




CHAPTER XI

THE HAUNTED HOUSE


It was the first of November, the day when the reports were to be given
out!

Marjorie had no fears for her own marks now, she knew that she would
pass creditably. But she glanced sympathetically towards Alice Endicott,
and Daisy Gravers, those freshmen who were so anxiously waiting for the
deciding factor.

She recalled the parallel situation, early last spring, when she had
awaited her own report with such trepidation. And then to have been
disappointed--through Ruth's cruel dishonesty! She hoped with all her
heart that there was no such disappointment in store for Alice.

Miss Allen's secretary read the list, and the girls came forward to
receive their reports, stumbling back to their seats in their haste to
examine them. Marjorie found herself calm when her own name was called,
but actually trembling when Alice answered the summons.

Miss Phillips had promised to hike to a certain so-called "haunted
house" in the vicinity, taking a picnic supper,--in celebration of the
new Scouts. The troop had agreed to meet for a moment at the rear of the
assembly room to learn who these girls would be.

But Marjorie did not need to wait for the meeting to know the news from
Alice. The girl's expression of bitter mortification told the story only
too plainly! Marjorie dropped her eyes; she could not bear to see her
cry.

And then an overwhelming feeling of remorse took possession of her.
Perhaps it was her fault! Perhaps, if instead of wasting time and
thoughts upon good-for-nothing Frieda Hammer, she had helped Alice in
her studies, she might now be a Scout! And yet Marjorie was sincere
enough with herself to know that she did not, even now, care so much
about Alice or her success, as she did about Frieda. She realized, too,
that although a week had gone by, she was still hoping that the runaway
would return. Every day she went to the library to read the
advertisements and personals in the newspapers in search of a clue. And
every day, too, she read about the crimes, fearful lest she might
discover Frieda's name, or a description of her, among the accounts.

Bringing her thoughts back with an effort to Alice Endicott and the
Scouts she hurried over, at the dismissal of the assembly, to the place
where the freshman was standing.

"What branch did you fail in, Alice?" she asked, in the most
matter-of-fact tone she could assume. She knew that here in public was
no place for sympathy.

"Chemistry!" answered Alice, with a brave effort to suppress a sob.

"Chemistry?" repeated Marjorie. "But I don't understand--I thought you
made ninety-five in that test!"

"I did; but I cut three afternoon lab periods for hockey!"

Marjorie laughed in relief. "Why, child, you can easily make that up! In
less than a week you'll be a Scout! Is everything else all right?"

"Apparently."

Immensely cheered by Marjorie's words and manner, Alice proclaimed
herself ready to join the Girl Scouts at the other end of the room. Here
they encountered wild hilarity. Everybody was congratulating the new
girls. Mae VanHorn, Florence Evans, Daisy Gravers, and Barbara Hill had
all made the required mark.

Alice, now quite calm and self-controlled, told her story, to which
Marjorie added her own interpretation.

"But you'll miss the hike!" exclaimed Florence.

"Oh, are you going right away?" asked Alice, dolefully.

"This very afternoon!" replied Miss Phillips. "I'm sorry, Alice, but the
arrangements are all made. Anyhow, we'll soon have another!"

The leaves were falling, and the air was quite sharp; the Scouts wore
heavy sweaters and woolen caps to protect them from the cold.

"We'll look for nuts," said Miss Phillips. "Remember our lesson on
edible plants?"

"Yes, indeed!" they all cried. "But you didn't tell us anything about
nuts."

"We'll make it a game," answered the Captain. "Each girl who finds a new
variety will get a point. Whoever has the greatest number of points by
the time we reach the haunted house, wins!"

"How are we to know the haunted house, Captain?" asked Doris. "I've
never seen it. Is there a story about it?"

"There is really no way of telling that the house is haunted, Doris; it
looks like any other house, except that it is larger, and was once upon
a time much finer than any of the other houses for miles around. I have
seen it on a number of occasions, and I have heard the legend that is
still told about it; but I've never been inside, so I'm rather curious
to see what it's like. That's why I suggested that we have our suppers
there."

"But does anyone live there?" asked Lily.

"No," replied Miss Phillips; "it has not been occupied for years and
years--not since anybody around this locality can remember. Some of the
uneducated people hereabouts still believe it is haunted, I understand;
but it is rather unreasonable to suppose that any of the more cultured
ones take any stock in the old story. While the fact that it was
supposed to be haunted may have kept people from living in it a good
many years ago, I think the real reason it is vacant nowadays is because
it is so large that it would require a fortune to fix it up--it never
seems to have had any care taken of it--and another fortune to keep it
going after it had been made habitable. I believe it is still owned by
the heirs of the original owner, who live in England, and that the
estate is looked after by a firm in Philadelphia, which rents the ground
to the farmers. Why, a few years ago, I passed by the house often, and
after I had heard the legend, I determined to go inside, but I could
never get up enough courage."

"Did you use to live around here, Captain?" asked Marjorie.

"That was when I was a student at Miss Allen's," answered Miss Phillips.

"A student at Miss Allen's?" echoed the girls, in surprise.

"I never knew that," said Marjorie. "You never told us before, Captain,"
she added reproachfully.

"Didn't I?" laughed their leader. "Well, I did go to Miss Allen's; and
I liked it so well that I did not want to leave; so when I finished
college, I went back as teacher."

"No wonder you seem so much like one of us," remarked Marjorie.

"Do I?" said the other, rather flattered by the suggestion, in the
girl's remark, of the place she held in their affections. "Perhaps that
is because I feel like one of you."

"Captain, won't you tell us the story of the haunted house?" begged
Doris, who, while she was the most timid girl among them, was always the
most eager to hear about ghosts, as if she really enjoyed the creepy
feeling that it gave her.

"Oh, it's too long to tell now, Doris. But I may tell you some other
time; perhaps if I told you now, some of you would not want to visit the
place."

"Captain! I've got a chestnut!" cried Ruth, holding up a small, familiar
nut.

"Sure enough--there's the tree! Let's stop here a minute, and all get
some."

Most of the girls succeeded in gathering a handful, before they started
on. They proceeded at a leisurely pace, pausing now and then to hunt for
nuts or to examine other objects of interest to the student of nature.

"Why, there are some birds, and they're not sparrows, either!" said
Daisy Gravers, indicating several slate-colored birds about the size of
English sparrows. "I didn't know there were any other winter birds
around here!"

"They are Juncos, or Snowbirds," explained the Captain. "They are a
winter bird with us, and as soon as the warm weather comes they will fly
north. Don't forget to put them down in your notebooks, girls."

They had now reached the outskirts of the woods, through which they had
been walking for some time, and Miss Phillips called a halt and
suggested that they count their nuts. Ruth, who had been the most
diligent searcher, won the game, having found a greater number of
varieties than any of the other girls. The Scout Captain told them
something about each variety and the tree upon which it grew, before
they continued their walk.

"Only a short distance along this road, and we reach the haunted house,"
said Miss Phillips.

The girls walked closer around her. They had emerged into open country,
and were climbing a winding road which extended before them uphill; on
their left the land descended gradually to a valley below them, where in
the distance, they could see the scattered houses nestled among the
fields of fertile farm-land.

"The nearest village is about a mile down the valley," the Captain
informed them. "When the haunted house was built it was the farthest
away from the village, but since that time a number of others have
sprung up all around here."

Mounting to the top of the hill, they found that the road, instead of
dipping suddenly down again, was level; and that to the right of it
there started a high stone wall which followed the irregularities of the
road for a considerable distance. It was covered with lichen and moss,
and showed gaps here and there where the mortar had crumbled away and
the stones fallen in a heap upon the ground; while in other places, the
tangled growth of ivy vines almost entirely obscured the stonework.

The Scouts kept to the road until they came to a break in the wall which
formed the gateway. Wide open and sagging inward, two massive gates of
iron grill-work had rusted and settled upon their hinges until they were
firmly imbedded and immovable in the ground. The girls stopped and were
examining the intricacy and beauty of the design in the wrought
iron-work, when an old woman came hobbling along the road towards them.
Doris shivered; in fact, all of the girls trembled in spite of
themselves: for the creature, thin, tattered, and old, reminded them of
a ghost herself.

"I wouldn't go in there, if I was you girls," she warned them, holding
up her bony hand. "There was a strange-lookin' figer there last week or
so! Nobody seen her come, and nobody seen her go--only once or twice
some of us that lives near-by saw her through the winder. Some said she
were a human, out of her mind, some says she were a spirit--only but for
the boat she brung with her, and went away in again!"

"The boat!" repeated Marjorie, breathlessly. "Was it a canoe?"

But the old woman shook her head; she did not know any distinction among
varieties of boats.

"She must 'a come by the stream at the back of the house, and vanished
the same way," muttered the stranger; "but whoever she was, she wan't no
good! What with her, and the old ghost that some says shrieks around the
house o' nights nobody'd get me inside! I wish you wouldn't go in!"

"Oh, nothing will hurt us," said Miss Phillips, gently. "We want some
place that is protected from the wind where we can eat our supper."

"It was Frieda! I know it was Frieda!" cried Marjorie, after the old
woman had left them.

"Well, what if it was?" remarked Ruth. "You'll never see your canoe
again, so there's no use of your getting so excited."

"Probably not," assented Marjorie, making a desperate effort to calm
herself. For Ruth could never understand what the thing meant to her.
Nevertheless, she was encouraged to have this much information about the
girl.

Close together, and keyed up with excitement, they advanced eagerly
along the lane leading to the house, which they could see about a
hundred yards away, gray-white through the grove of tall trees which
surrounded it. And as they drew nearer their agitation seemed to become
intensified, as if they were about to discover--they knew not what!

The house itself was a perfect example of old Colonial mansion, with its
wide, hospitable doorway before which tall columns supported a balcony.
Its exterior, despite the appearance of age and decay that was
everywhere apparent, was still impressive by reason of its great beauty
of design.

Standing among the rank weeds which grew waist high about the place,
they gazed in awe at the walls which once were white, but now were
streaked and weather stained; at the windows, whose broken panes
admitted the rain or the sunshine, and from which the shutters were
sagging or had fallen completely away; at the shingles of the roof,
violet-toned and curling up; and at the nests the birds had built in the
chimneys and eaves.

As Miss Phillips stepped upon the low porch, the rotting boards bent
beneath her weight. Trying the knob of the massive door, she found it
locked.

"I guess we'll have to get in some other way," she said. "Let's walk
around and investigate."

They followed her around to the back, where through the trees they
caught sight of the glistening water of the stream. But here also the
doors were locked, and not wishing to effect an entrance through a
window if a door were available, they passed around to the left wing.
Here they mounted the broad piazza, and Ruth turned the knob of the
door, which opened. She entered boldly, while the rest of the girls
followed more cautiously behind her. They were in a large room, well
lighted by its many windows. A damp, musty odor pervaded the place.

"This was evidently the conservatory," remarked the Captain. "Let's look
farther."

They explored room after room, holding their breath as they entered each
one, as if they were about to discover something strange and terrifying
there. But there was nothing but dust and cobwebs to greet their eyes.
They went about opening doors, investigating bedrooms, peering into
closets; but they could find nothing interesting or exciting--not the
slightest vestige of a ghost.

"I guess this ghost only walks at night," said Lily,--"or at certain
seasons of the year."

"It certainly looks that way, doesn't it?" agreed Doris, grown quite
brave.

Up to this time, not one girl had actually admitted to herself that she
did not expect to find a ghost; and none could tell from the Captain's
expression what she thought of it; but now they were positive that they
did not believe in ghosts--the idea was too preposterous--especially
when Lily, upon opening a closet-door, exposed an old wig-form which
lay on the shelf, and which caused them great amusement.

"I dare say the people who lived here wore artificial wigs, both men and
women," commented Miss Phillips; "it was about that period."

If there ever was a ghost, it was one which left no traces; and the
girls became more at ease in this atmosphere of emptiness. They did,
however, have one brief moment of panic. They had all climbed the stairs
to the third floor and had paused upon the landing, undecided as to
which way they should go first, when a sharp whirring or rustling was
heard in the room nearest them.

For an instant they all stood perfectly still, paralyzed by fright. Then
Miss Phillips, with a quick step forward, flung open the door. This act
started the rustling again; and through the open doorway they could see
that it was nothing but a swallow which had in some way become
imprisoned there. Marjorie caught it in her hand, where it lay
palpitating distressedly; and thrusting her arm through a broken pane of
glass, allowed the creature to escape.

The short autumn day was drawing to a close, and the chillness of the
damp, musty atmosphere was beginning to affect the girls unpleasantly.
The sight of another fireplace--there seemed to be one in every
room--recalled Miss Phillips's thoughts to practical things.

"Let's go down to that big room," she suggested, "and prepare our
supper."

In fifteen minutes a bright fire was going and the kettle boiling
cheerily. The girls were so busy hurrying to and fro in preparation of
the meal that they had forgotten the ghost.

It was only after they were seated on the floor, and had time to look
around, that Marjorie recalled the situation to their minds by
remarking,

"Can you imagine Frieda Hammer staying here all night long by herself?"

The girls shuddered at the suggestion.

"Wouldn't it be great if we could trace her?" said Edith, after a
moment's silence. "I hate to think of her all alone--with no
protection."

"Yes," answered Miss Phillips, "though I haven't said much about the
matter, the girl has been constantly in my mind. And I wanted to tell
you that I have written to a friend of mine, a woman who is a private
detective, and asked her to look into the matter. She would, of course,
make nothing public, but would only try to bring Frieda back here, or
send her home.

"But I have been thinking that perhaps some of you girls might have a
plan, so I am going to offer a medal of merit to any Scout who locates
her. During Thanksgiving--well, I will leave it to you! But we simply
must find Frieda!"

The fire had died down to the coals, and the girls grew silent as they
gazed dreamily at the pictures their imaginations invented. It was Doris
who spoke first.

"Now is a good time for the story, Captain. Please tell us!" she
pleaded.

Miss Phillips hesitated, glancing keenly at the eager faces of the girls
around her, who now seemed perfectly calm and self-possessed. Then she
looked at her watch; it was not quite six o'clock. There would still be
time; but she hesitated to tell a ghost-story in the same house--in the
very room!--where the ghost was supposed to appear. It was the girls'
own tranquil manner that decided her.

"When I was a freshman at Miss Allen's," she began, "I roomed with a
sophomore whose home was not far from here. Several times I went with
her to spend week-ends with her parents. On one of these occasions,
after we had finished dinner and were comfortably seated around the open
fire, her grandfather--a very old man with snow-white hair--was talking
of his boyhood in this neighborhood. Even then this house was believed
haunted, but the story was better known than it is now, when there are
few living who could tell the details. It was my good fortune to hear it
from his own lips, just as his grandfather had told him.

"His grandfather, he said, was a frequent guest here in the old days.
The man who built this house came over from England, it was said, to
escape scandal. Very wealthy, handsome, and of noble birth, to all
appearances he was a gentleman, having a very gracious way about him;
but in reality he was wayward, headstrong, and dissipated. He
entertained lavishly, and his parties were the talk of the
countryside--especially the dress-ball which he gave every New Year's
Eve, starting at midnight and continuing throughout the next day and
night. It was after one of these New Year's parties, which was
particularly riotous, that he disappeared as mysteriously as he had
come. Friends who called at the house several days after the event found
that the servants and the furniture had vanished, no one knew whither,
and the house completely empty. Naturally, this gave rise to much
speculation on the part of the townsfolk, who invented many stories;
some said that he had repented of his evil ways and fled into
retirement; others that the devil had carried him off for a companion in
wickedness.

"Meanwhile, the house remained deserted, and decay set in. It was not
until the following New Year's Eve that it was seen occupied again;
then, two men who were returning late from a revel took a short-cut
through the garden in front of the house. The moon, flooding the house
with a pale light, showed shadows passing and repassing before the
windows of the reception hall. The watchers clutched at each other in
sudden fear.

"'This is the anniversary!' said one, in a hoarse whisper; and they
went home to talk it over.

"They agreed to say nothing about it; but when the next night still
another saw the same occurrence, they made the story known. That was the
beginning of the ghost legend. And while the place continued deserted
and silent at all other times, year after year on the anniversary of the
great ball, some late reveler was sure to report tales of strange doings
there. It formed a fine topic of discussion on a winter evening at the
inn, when the wind outside howled about the four corners.

"Now there were those who believed in these old wives' tales, and those
who did not; and numbered among the scoffers was one Simon
Some-body-or-other, whom the village folk called Simple Simon, partly
because of his foolish appearance, and partly because of his great love
for pies. Simon was the village fiddler--in fact, he had never been
known to do anything else--and was in great demand at all the feasts and
dances about the countryside. His awkward, angular form was a familiar
sight at all such festivities, where he could be found in a corner by
himself, out of the way, his head cocked to one side, eyes gazing up at
the ceiling, and an idiotic smile on his face, fiddling as if his life
depended on it. If the dancers had been as tireless as Simon, they would
never have stopped to rest, for he ran on from one tune to another
without the slightest intermission; indeed, the only times he paused at
all would come right in the middle of the piece, and the dancers would
wait, stranded in the center of the floor, while he raised the mug of
ale which always stood well filled at his elbow; for they never allowed
him to go thirsty. This eccentricity they overlooked, because Simon was
himself so obliging.

"One night in the inn-parlor, three gossips, heads together and elbows
on the table, were discussing the haunted house. Simon joined them,
scoffing as usual.

"'I tell you what I'll do,' said one. 'You sleep the night there, this
coming New Year's Eve, and I'll buy you a keg of the best ale in this
cellar!'

"Simon could only gasp at this proposal; but the magnificence of the
reward was too much for him. 'Done!' he cried; and without considering
the consequences, agreed to pass a night among the ghosts. The only
requirement was that he should go to the house before midnight, and
remain there until sunrise.

"The weeks passed, and the wager was apparently forgotten; at least,
Simon hoped that it was, for he had repented his rashness. But it was
not forgotten; when the time drew near, he was reminded of it, and
became more apprehensive. Were those stories true? He doubted. Only at
night, as he lay in bed sleepless, he felt a peculiar sinking sensation
within him. It was noticed that he became pale and worn, was quieter
than usual, and played more out of tune; and he even seemed to be
losing his appetite for pies.

"But none of these things let him off; and when the fateful evening
came, Simon, with his beloved fiddle tucked beneath his arm for
companionship, and a lantern, appeared at the inn. They wished him good
luck and pleasant dreams, doubting nevertheless that he would have
either; and the landlord, a kindly soul, slipped a cold snack and a jug
of his best ale into his hand.

"Outside he paused to look back upon the cheery comfort of the
inn-parlor. Well, there was nothing now but to go ahead with it, he
reflected; and with a heavy heart, he turned his steps in the direction
of the haunted house.

"Though the moon had not yet risen, there was sufficient light from the
stars for him to see his way. It was strange, he thought, how familiar
objects which he had never particularly noted before, now had a friendly
look, with the whiteness of the frost upon them. Simon walked fast, as
if to keep up both his circulation and his courage, and his step sounded
crisply upon the hard dirt road.

"When he was abreast of the house, he hesitated. The moon, mounting
above the treetops, was shining upon the windows. There was no sound, no
movement, from within. Breathless, he entered. His own footsteps echoed
and re-echoed about the bare, vault-like hall, emphasizing its
emptiness. He closed the door behind him, made a light in his lantern,
and whistling loudly to keep up his courage, entered the living-hall.
The air was damp and chilly; his breath came like smoke from his
nostrils. Setting his lantern upon the floor, he crossed to the
fireplace and tossed in fagots and logs from the supply which was still
there. The merry crackle of the burning logs, and the warmth and light
of the fire cheered him, somewhat; and he attacked the jug and the
meat-pie provided by the thoughtful landlord. Revived by the food, he
lit his pipe, and taking up his violin, commenced to play. He went over
all the tunes he knew, played them in different keys and with
variations, to while away the evening; and every time he felt his
courage deserting him he turned to his jug for moral support. As you can
guess, he did this pretty frequently until, just as he was draining the
last drop, he heard a door bang somewhere upstairs, and a rustling in
the hall above him. Almost afraid to breathe, he sat there waiting for a
recurrence of the sound. Everything was perfectly still except the
burning logs in the fireplace. After a while Simon began to fancy that
he had not really heard anything, but that his overwrought nerves were
playing a trick upon him; so he rose, tiptoed across the room and stood
back in the shadows of the great curving stairway, listening. Again he
heard sounds above him, more rustling, and footsteps this time. A chill
passed over him and the blood froze in his veins; at every fresh noise
he felt as if a million pins were pricking his scalp. But nothing
happened, and when the sounds had apparently ceased, he waited where he
was, leaning against the stairway, so paralyzed with fear that he could
not move from the spot.

"He remained thus, listening, while the evening wore away. In spite of
his fear Simon became drowsy. The wind outside had risen, and was
rattling the shutters and roaring in the chimney, causing the fire to
brighten and burst into a feeble flame. Then a wonderful thing happened!
The great hall suddenly became ablaze with the light of hundreds of
candles. In wonder Simon raised his head and saw a stately procession of
men and women, fully fifty couples, arm-in-arm descending the stairs.
They wore beautiful clothing--not a bit like the people in the
village--but such as Simon had never seen before, except in pictures. He
who was apparently the host strode over to the fire and kicked the logs
into a blaze, while others gathered about it to warm their hands. Simon
thought the scene a grand sight, with their lace ruffles, knee-breeches,
wigs, and buckled shoes; and he was lost in admiration of the women,
with their powdered hair and white shoulders, their jewels, and their
bright eyes which shone so coquettishly above their fans. If these were
ghosts, he reflected, they were very gallant ones, and good to look at;
he was beginning to be glad he had come when the host suddenly clapped
his hands together, and looking his way, ordered the music to begin.
There seemed nothing out of the way in all this to Simon as he tucked
his fiddle beneath his chin, and drawing the bow across the strings,
commenced playing a waltz. Partners were chosen, and the dancing began.
Simon, as usual, went from one tune to another, but these people never
tired; all night long the dancing continued; and when Simon, weary and
thirsty, paused from habit to reach for the mug of ale which was not at
his elbow, the host glared at him so furiously that he went on playing
more frantically than ever. Faster and faster the mad phantoms danced,
swirling around and around the room; faster and faster he fiddled, till
his arm ached and his back felt broken; and just as the revel had
reached the highest pitch and the fiddle was squeaking its loudest, the
stairway against which he was leaning seemed to give way, and Simon fell
with a crash. Dazed and bruised from the fall, he sat up; the phantoms
had vanished, the lantern was out, and the fire had burned down and was
casting flickering shadows about the walls. In growing horror, Simon ran
screaming from the house, and down the road to the inn as fast as his
legs could carry him. He burst in upon them, his fiddle clutched tightly
in one hand, the picture of terror.

"Of course, his story was greeted with knowing looks and sly winks
behind his back; and he told it to all who would listen. He continued to
fiddle about the village as he had done before, but he was never quite
the same after that adventure; the haunted house seemed to have a
fascination for him, and it was noticed that he hung about it
frequently, though he never entered. And when he announced his intention
of spending the next New Year's Eve with the phantoms, the people knew
he was crazy and urged him not to do so. But he could not resist; early
in the evening of that last day of the year, he was seen making his way
towards the haunted house, his fiddle beneath his arm.

"He never came back!"




CHAPTER XII

THE DINNER-DANCE


"And I thought all along that Miss Phillips didn't care!"

Marjorie made the remark softly, almost as if she were talking to
herself instead of to Lily, as the girls sat together in their room
crocheting after supper. All the Scouts had pledged the hour of seven to
eight in the evening, unless something unusual was going on, to work for
the bazaar.

"Didn't care about what?" asked Lily. "Men?"

Marjorie laughed. "No, not that. I mean about Frieda's being lost."

"Yes, I thought it was funny, too, though, of course, I didn't expect
her to throw up her job and go on an aimless sort of journey to find
her. Miss Phillips has too much good sense for anything wild like that."

"She has done the wisest thing possible by using that private
detective," continued Marjorie; "but somehow, Lil, I don't think she'll
ever find her. I think it's sort of up to us."

"But how?"

"That I don't know, except to keep our eyes open."

"Oh, Marj!" exclaimed Lily, interrupting her, and changing the subject.
"Do you 'spose the mail's been sorted? It was late to-night, you know."

"What makes you so anxious?" teased Marjorie. "Hearing from Dick
Roberts?"

"Now Marj--don't be silly!"

"But you are expecting something?"

Lily toyed with her crochet needle, pulling out a long loop of the wool
and holding it over her finger. The baby's sweater that she was making
was almost finished.

"Guess I will run down to the office," she said, putting her work upon
the table; "I'll be right back."

By the time she returned Marjorie had forgotten all about the mail; her
thoughts were again with Frieda, imagining all sorts of horrors for the
ignorant, unresourceful girl, in some strange place.

"Three letters!" cried Lily, triumphantly. "I didn't open mine either; I
waited for you!"

Marjorie's eyes brightened; mail was always welcome.

"You have to guess the postmark, or who it's from!" teased Lily, holding
her hand over the letter.

"Princeton?" asked Marjorie, bending over her crochet to hide a blush.

"Nope!"

Lily tossed the missile into the other girl's lap, for she was too eager
to open her own two letters to cause any further delay. She and Marjorie
had each received square, khaki-colored envelopes, with the well-known
fleur-de-lis on the flap. They were from the Boy Scouts.

"A dance!" cried Marjorie, jumping up in glee, and dropping her crochet
upon the floor. "In honor of the hockey team!"

"Isn't it great, Marj? Who's inviting you?"

"David Conner! Who's your partner?"

"Dick!"

"Of course he is! I needn't have asked."

"John Hadley had better look out," remarked Lily; "or somebody else will
have his girl."

"I'm not anybody's girl!" protested Marjorie, indignantly. And then,
demurely--"Only father's!"

"A dinner-dance!" repeated Lily, reading her invitation for the third
time. "Marj, have you ever been to one?"

"Never!"

"How do you suppose they got Miss Allen's permission?"

"Oh, Miss Phillips saw to that! She can get anything she wants!"
returned Marjorie.

"I hope we beat Miss Martin's team, or we'll feel rather blue. And think
of so much in one day--a hockey game with them, and a dinner and a dance
with the Boy Scouts! And all the day before we go home for
Thanksgiving!"

"Who's your other letter from, Lil?" asked Marjorie, noticing the
envelope unopened on the table.

"Oh, I forgot! And I ought to be ashamed. It's from mama."

She read a few lines and her face lighted up happily. "Marj," she said,
looking up shyly, "mama and papa want you to spend the Thanksgiving
holidays with us. Can you? Oh, please----"

Marjorie threw her arms about Lily, squeezing her for joy.

"I'd love to! I've never been in New York. Oh, if father and mother will
only let me!"

"We'll go to the theater, and ride on the bus--and maybe invite John and
Dick there for dinner--and--and----!"

Marjorie let go of her room-mate, and went over to her desk. "I'm going
to write home this very minute," she announced, and seated herself to
begin the task.

The Boy Scouts had included thirteen girls of the hockey squad in their
invitation, and Miss Phillips, of course. Twelve of these girls were
Girl Scouts; Alice Endicott, who had not yet made up her chemistry
laboratory work, was still outside of Pansy troop.

The hockey game, the dinner-dance, and the holiday preparations made the
very air seem to tingle with excitement and anticipation. When the day
came, Marjorie made no attempt to reserve her energy for the later
events; she sang and danced about all morning with happiness. This year
she was well prepared to meet Miss Martin's team, not only individually,
for she was in good practice and excellent physical trim herself, but as
captain of her own team, she felt confident of her players.

The girls were out on the field early, practicing "passes," and warming
up for the game. Everyone on the team expected to play; but Helen
Stewart and Barbara Hill, besides one or two other moderately good
players, came in readiness to substitute should they be needed.

As the team from Miss Martin's approached the field, the critical
observer could mark the difference between these girls and those from
the home team. Long hikes, sensible clothing and food, and two weeks at
the Scout camp with exposure to all kinds of weather, had hardened Miss
Allen's girls and added something almost boyish to their bearing. And in
Marjorie they had an excellent captain, resourceful and confident of
success, whose calm assurance inspired them.

From the opening stroke when Marjorie, the center forward, sent the ball
at one bound across the field to her left forward, who dodged the
opposing half-back, the game seemed almost a walk-over for Miss Allen's
girls. Only once did Miss Martin's side make a goal, and then Lily
Andrews took all the blame for it upon herself.

"I thought it was too easy," she afterward explained to Marjorie, "and I
didn't work hard enough. It served me right, but I'm sorry for the
team."

At the end of the first half, with the score six to two in their favor,
Miss Phillips decided to give both the regular substitutes a chance. But
instead of making it easier for the opponents, it became more difficult,
for Helen Stewart had always been a good player, and Barbara Hill, who
had successful streaks, seemed to be particularly lucky. It was an easy
victory for Miss Allen's girls; the final score was fourteen to two.

"This decides me!" exclaimed Miss Martin, after she had congratulated
Miss Phillips and her team. "Now I am convinced of the value of a Girl
Scout troop."

"If you'd see our reports, you'd be still more convinced," remarked Miss
Allen, coming up behind her, and overhearing the remark.

"When can you come over and demonstrate?" pursued the visitor, turning
again to the gym teacher.

"Better wait till after Christmas, hadn't we?" suggested Miss Phillips.
"Does that suit you?"

"Perfectly," replied the other.

Marjorie and Lily lingered only long enough to avoid being rude to
their guests, and then hurried off to their room to prepare for the
party.

"Isn't it fun to be able to wear something besides the Scout uniform?"
remarked Lily, as she removed the muslin with which her pink
canton-crêpe was covered. "I don't believe the Boy Scouts have ever seen
me in anything else! And I'm going to curl my hair."

Marjorie smiled; Lily certainly did look better in pretty dresses, for
she was not the type of girl who could wear a uniform to advantage.

They dressed leisurely, and by half-past five were ready to go over to
the gymnasium, where they were to meet the other girls. They arrived
early, but Ruth and Mae and several others were already there.

"It doesn't seem like an athletic event," remarked Ruth, glancing at the
dainty dresses of the girls. "It seems more like a musical comedy."

"And that reminds me," said Miss Phillips, who had just come in,
charming in a gray georgette with a lavender girdle, and wearing a
bouquet of violets, "that reminds me that I would like the Scouts to
give a sort of musical comedy in the spring."

"Great!" cried Ruth. She had a passably good voice, and she knew
it--also, she knew that Marjorie could scarcely carry a tune.

By this time everyone had arrived, and they all started for the tea-room
in the village which the boys had obtained for the occasion. Marjorie
was curious to know who gave Miss Phillips her violets, but not daring
to tease her, she tried to content herself by whispering about it to
Lily.

If the girls, in their pretty party dresses, made a sensation with the
boys, the latter, in their turn, appeared very different in their neat,
dark suits to the girls, who were so accustomed to seeing them in their
official uniforms. There were only thirteen boys present, who had been
chosen according to their standing, and Mr. Remington, the Scoutmaster.

The girls descended the stairs, after leaving their wraps in the
dressing room, and each boy sought his own particular partner to escort
her to the dining-room. Two long tables, each seating fourteen persons,
were beautifully decorated with yellow crêpe-paper, favors, and large
bunches of chrysanthemums in the center. The lights, too, were covered
with yellow paper.

"It's lovely!" cried Marjorie with delight. "And hockey season's over,
so we can just eat and eat!"

It was a typical Thanksgiving dinner, with turkey and brown gravy, and
cranberry sauce. There was only a simple salad but everybody was
expected to eat both mince pie and ice-cream, and to finish with nuts,
raisins and candy.

"I'll never be able to dance a step," sighed Lily at the conclusion of
the feast, as she languidly stirred her coffee.

"We're not going to, for a while," answered David. "For we have other
entertainment."

"What?" asked Ruth, overhearing the conversation, and always eager for
novelty.

"A fortune teller!" he replied. "She is going to tell all the girls'
fortunes!"

Marjorie clapped her hands. "What fun! Nothing could possibly be nicer,"
she said, happily.

"And will she answer questions?" asked Lily.

"One question for each girl!" said Dick.

"I know what mine will be!" declared Marjorie, without the least
hesitation.

"'Does Princeton miss me?'" teased Ruth.

"Wrong again, Ruth," said Marjorie, shaking her head.

The fortune teller, a real gypsy, arrived in a few moments, and the
party adjourned to the dance room to listen. Sitting down upon the floor
near the fireplace, she produced a soiled pack of cards; then,
addressing the girls one by one, she painted glorious futures for them,
with ocean trips, "dark" or "blond" men, letters, and inheritances. It
was all good fun, and most of the girls did not take her seriously.
Their favorite question was, of course, "Will I get married?" to which
the woman invariably answered "Yes"--or, sometimes, "Twice!"

But Marjorie's question was a little different.

"Where is Frieda Hammer?" She asked it seriously, trembling in spite of
herself.

The fortune teller half closed her eyes, and there was intense silence
for a moment. Then she replied slowly,

"New York!"

"Oh, thank you!" cried Marjorie, believing in spite of her better
judgment. "And we'll find her, Lil!" she added, glancing significantly
at her room-mate.

Around nine o'clock the dancing began, David Conner had naturally
arranged Marjorie's program to give himself the first dance.

"Did you know Jack invited me home with him for Thanksgiving?" he asked,
watching her closely, hoping to see an expression of pleasure cross her
face.

But her eyes did not change.

"That's nice," she replied. "I'm sorry I won't be there--I've accepted
an invitation to go home with my room-mate."

David looked disappointed. Did Marjorie still care for John Hadley, to
the exclusion of all other boys? He could not help wondering about it,
and, somehow, felt vaguely jealous.

The hour and a half of dancing passed all too quickly, and the girls
were summoned by Miss Phillips to get their wraps. As the boys joined
them to accompany them back to school, David sought Marjorie, hoping to
have her to himself. But he did not find her conversation very
satisfactory, for her mind seemed far away, and he was relieved to have
Lily and Dick join them.

Marjorie had enjoyed her evening, but now she was eager to be alone with
Lily, to discuss, in private, what the fortune teller had said about
Frieda's whereabouts.

"And I really can't help attaching some importance to what she said,"
she remarked, when the girls were finally alone. "Oh, Lil," she added,
"just suppose we should find her! This very week, perhaps!"

"But New York's a big place, Marj!" observed Lily, rubbing her eyes,
sleepily. "So don't get your hopes too high!"




CHAPTER XIII

THE THANKSGIVING HOLIDAYS


Seven o'clock came all too soon for Marjorie and Lily, as they opened
their eyes at the sound of the rising bell.

"Don't you wish we could stay in bed?" yawned Marjorie, glancing at the
clock.

"We can to-morrow; mama will let us have breakfast in bed every single
morning, if we like."

"Oh, Lil, that sounds too good to be true! I know we'll have a wonderful
time."

There were only three hours of classes; after an early luncheon, school
was dismissed. Everybody took the one-o'clock train for home.

"Frieda saved me the trouble of expressing my canoe home," remarked
Marjorie, when the girls were comfortably seated together in the train.
"But how I wish I'd find it--and her, too!"

"Maybe we shall," said Lily. "Don't forget the fortune teller!"

"But New York's pretty big, isn't it?" Having lived all of her life in
a small town, Marjorie had only a vague idea of the size of the great
city.

Lily laughed good-naturedly. "Wait till you see it," she said. "It's
simply tremendous--and so crowded and confusing."

"Poor Frieda!" sighed Marjorie.

Mrs. Andrews's chauffeur met the train, bringing the former's regrets at
not being present in person.

"Mama's out so much," explained Lily. "Teas and charity work, you know."

As Marjorie entered the big limousine, she realized that she had never
ridden in so luxurious a car before. She glanced at the soft upholstery,
the bouquet of real flowers, and felt the warmth of the artificial heat.
Lily's parents were obviously rich, although the girl evidently gave it
little thought now. But Marjorie remembered how impressed her room-mate
had been with the fact when she entered Miss Allen's, and suddenly she
decided that, had she known all this, she would not have blamed her so
severely.

Then the streets claimed her attention. They were filled with traffic of
all kinds, which she watched silently. Her thoughts flew to Frieda
Hammer; she wondered what were her impressions as she entered this
great, noisy confusion, that is called New York. How would she feel
herself, if she had come all alone--with no Lily to direct her, no car
to meet her, no friends to entertain her? Alone, with little or no
money in her purse, and no qualifications to fit her for work! She
shuddered at the very idea; a sort of despair seized her, so that for
the instant she suffered vicariously as acutely as if she were the other
girl in the situation.

But Lily's voice brought her back to reality.

"That was the Grand Central Station, where we came in," explained the
New York girl. "And this is Sixth Avenue."

"And you live in an apartment, too, don't you, Lil?" asked Marjorie, her
gaze resting upon her companion. "Do you know, I've never been in an
apartment!"

"It's an apartment-hotel," corrected Lily. "We don't even get our own
meals!"

Half an hour later, the girls were sitting in Lily's dainty boudoir,
sipping chocolate and enjoying a glorious hour of pure idleness.

"Are we doing anything to-night, Lil?" asked Marjorie, leaning back
contentedly against the cushions on the window seat. "Not that I think
we need to----" she hastened to add, lest her hostess might attribute
her remark to impoliteness.

"Yes, we're going to the theater," replied Lily, laughingly. "It's a
musical comedy. I hope you will like it."

"I'm sure I will. Do you know, Lil, I've never been in a real theater in
my life!" She paused a moment, and then blurted out, unexpectedly,
"Suppose Frieda should be a chorus girl! Do you think we'd recognize
her, with all her paint and powder, if she were?"

Lily smiled at the other's simplicity. Evidently Marjorie had no
conception of the great number of theaters in New York, or of the
difficulty, for a novice, in obtaining a part in a show. And the idea of
Frieda Hammer--rude, awkward, and uncouth--on the stage, was absolutely
grotesque.

"I hardly think she'd be able to get the job, Marj," she replied,
succeeding in hiding her amusement. But in order to forestall any more
such remarks, she decided to change the subject.

"We're going to the game to-morrow," she announced, "with papa and mama,
and----"

But Marjorie was only politely enthusiastic.

"We surely won't see Frieda there," she remarked. "Isn't it dreadfully
expensive?"

"Not only that, but she wouldn't be interested. Of course, Frieda Hammer
wouldn't understand football! But I'll tell you who will be there!"

"Who?"

"Guess!"

"The boys?"

"Yes; John Hadley and Dick Roberts!"

"Oh, I'm awfully glad!" exclaimed Marjorie. "I haven't seen John for
ages."

And in the conversation that followed, the Girl Scouts' runaway ward was
forgotten.

Thanksgiving day was bright and clear, and just cold enough to give a
bracing tingle to the air. The boys arrived only a few minutes before
the time to start for the game, and among so many people, Marjorie and
John exchanged only the most formal greetings.

During the automobile ride, and later at the game, it seemed to Marjorie
that John was unusually quiet. Perhaps, she decided, it was because he
was with strangers,--or perhaps it was because he had changed. She knew
that he was working his way through college, and she wondered whether
the responsibility was weighing him down. Or perhaps, she thought, he
was no longer interested in so youthful a person as herself.

But to John Hadley, Marjorie Wilkinson was the same merry, charming girl
who continued to hold first place in his affections.

Mrs. Andrews invited the boys to dinner after the game, and they
accepted gladly. It was not until after the meal was over, and Marjorie
and John were dancing in the hotel ball-room that the girl lost her
shyness and felt herself back again on the old familiar ground with him.

"May I come to see you at Christmas time?" he whispered, as they glided
across the floor.

"But I'm not sure that I'll be home," replied Marjorie, thinking of
Frieda Hammer, and wondering whether she might not try to trace her
again at that time, if she failed now.

"Are you going far away?" he pursued, in a woeful tone.

"I don't know. But you can write!"

The young people danced until the first intermission, when Mrs. Andrews
rose to go, and the girls, after saying good-bye to the boys,
accompanied her to the apartment.

"I looked at every waitress in the dining-room," said Marjorie, when she
and Lily were alone in their room, "and I tried to see all the people I
could on the streets to-day, but none of them looked like Frieda!"

"Oh, Marj! You're hopeless!" replied Lily, in exasperation. "Here I
expected you to rave about John Hadley, or at least the football game,
and the very minute he's gone, you begin on that girl again!"

"Do I bore you, Lil? Or do I seem unappreciative?" asked Marjorie,
penitently.

"No, you old dear!" laughed Lily, relenting. "By the way, what is it you
want to do to-morrow?"

"Go shopping!" replied Marjorie happily, for the idea of the novel
experience was pleasing to her.

Mrs. Wilkinson had given her daughter some money with which to go
shopping, and the girls planned their trip for Friday. Mrs. Andrews
decided to send the chauffeur with them, allowing them to go otherwise
unaccompanied, for she knew how much pleasure it would afford them to
go alone.

Early after lunch the following day, the girls started on their
expedition. After they left the car and entered the shops, Marjorie
wanted to proceed slowly, stopping everywhere to look at displays and to
examine the beautiful things spread alluringly before their eyes. She
really bought little; the experience was so new to her that she could
scarcely make up her mind what to choose.

At quarter after four Lily looked at her watch.

"I'm dead, Marj!" she announced. "Let's go and get some hot chocolate,
and then go home."

"All right," agreed Marjorie reluctantly. "But I sort of hate to leave.
By the way, Lil, have you been noticing the salesgirls?"

"Not 'specially. Why?"

"I thought one of them might be Frieda."

"If you mention Frieda Hammer again," threatened Lily, "when I get back
to school, I'll go poison that fortune teller for getting you so worked
up."

"Oh, please don't, Lil!" begged Marjorie, good-naturedly.

She followed her hostess out of the brilliantly lighted department
store, across the street, and into a cozy, softly lighted tea-room. The
contrast between the glaring, noisy shops and this quiet, restful
retreat worked wonders with the tired girls. They seemed almost
immediately to imbibe the peaceful atmosphere, and to become refreshed.

"It's lovely!" exclaimed Marjorie, refusing even to look at the menu.
"Anything you order will suit me."

Although Marjorie had decided not to plague Lily again with the mention
of Frieda, she had by no means forgotten her. Accordingly, she followed
the proceeding she had adopted upon every occasion since she had entered
New York; she looked carefully at every young girl she saw, hoping that
it might prove to be Frieda.

As soon as her eyes became accustomed to the dim light, she peered
eagerly,--almost rudely, she was afraid--into the faces of the
waitresses. Suddenly, her heart stood still; at the far corner, near the
swinging door leading to the kitchen, stood a girl bearing a striking
resemblance to Frieda! Could Marjorie be dreaming--or was it possible
that the runaway had a double? She dared not trust her own eyes.

"Look, Lil!" she whispered. "Could that be Frieda, there?"

Lily followed the direction indicated by Marjorie, and saw a slim girl
in black, wearing a waitress's cap and apron. The girl was neat, and her
hair was tidy; indeed, one would have to stretch the imagination to
picture her as the one of the troop's adoption. And yet her
features--and something about her bearing were decidedly like Frieda.

"Oh, Frieda Hammer would never get a job in a place like this,"
remarked Lily, discouragingly. "They only employ refined girls here!"

Still not daunted, however, Marjorie half rose from her seat, but just
at that moment the waitress in question disappeared with a tray of
dishes.

Lily gave her order for hot chocolate with whipped cream, and fancy
cakes, to the waitress who stood at their table. "Does that suit you,
Marj?" she inquired.

"Yes, thanks!" replied Marjorie; but at that moment she would have
agreed to corned-beef and cabbage. She watched eagerly for the girl to
reappear; finally she was rewarded by seeing the two waitresses enter
together.

As her own girl came towards them, she leaned over and asked earnestly,

"Can you tell me the name of the waitress--over there?"

"Jennie Perkins," replied the girl, quietly.

Marjorie's face fell; she must be mistaken. Then an idea came to her;
perhaps it was Frieda, under an assumed name!

"Has she worked here long?" pursued Marjorie.

"I think so--but I've only been here a week myself, and she was here
when I came!"

The girl had disappeared again, and Marjorie turned reluctantly to her
refreshment. She kept watching the swinging door, hoping that the girl
would reappear and give her an opportunity to question her. But she did
not return before Marjorie and Lily had finished their chocolate, so
they were obliged to leave the shop, as much in the dark as ever.

The remaining two days passed without further adventure, and on Sunday
evening they were back again at Miss Allen's.

"I wonder whether the fortune teller was mistaken, after all?" thought
Marjorie.




CHAPTER XIV

THE CHRISTMAS BAZAAR


Two weeks had passed by, and the swimming team had been chosen during
that time. Four more girls, in addition to Alice Endicott, who was now a
Scout, were eligible for Pansy troop and were to be admitted that
evening. Three of them were freshmen: Dorothy Whitcomb, Gladys Staley,
and Mildred Cavin. And the fourth girl was Evelyn Hopkins.

Miss Phillips called the meeting to order, and then hastened through the
opening ceremony and necessary routine.

"There is much to do and to talk about," she said, after the preliminary
matters had been settled, "that I feel as if I can't talk fast enough.
But I think we shall consider the regular Scout business first.

"First of all, I wish to welcome the new girls with the sincere hope
that they will soon pass their Tenderfoot test and be registered as
regular members of Pansy Troop. If they all do, we shall then have
twenty-four girls, or three patrols.

"Accordingly, after the first of the year we shall re-divide into three
patrols, and the three Scouts with the highest standing--counting the
number of merit-badges, etc.--will be the three patrol leaders, and may
choose, in turn, the members of their respective patrols.

"Next, after the New Year, the second-class girls will study for their
first-class test; for during spring vacation I am going to take the
first eight girls who pass this test successfully, to Washington. The
expenses are to be provided by a wealthy friend of the troop!"

"Who?" they all shouted, curious. "Oh, it is too wonderful!"

But Miss Phillips refused to reveal the name of their unknown
benefactor.

"Now, about our Good Turn. Of course, to-morrow is the day of the
bazaar, about which we shall go into detail later; but now I want to
discuss what we shall do with the money. I have a report from Miss
Smith, the private detective."

At these words, Marjorie leaped to her feet. Forgetful of the formality
of the occasion, she asked, excitedly,

"Did she find Frieda?"

"Yes; but she lost her again. A girl answering to her description was
working, under an assumed name, as a waitress in a Fifth Avenue tea-room
in New York. But as soon as Miss Smith had collected her facts, and was
reasonably certain that the girl was Frieda Hammer, she disappeared."

"Oh, Lil!" gasped Marjorie, sinking into her seat. She could not even
explain what she meant to the others; only her room-mate realized her
tremendous disappointment.

"Now I have not paid my friend anything so far," continued Miss
Phillips; "but I do not feel like allowing her to go on using so much
time without remuneration, for she has to work to earn her own living.
So I want to know what you wish to do--drop the case?"

Marjorie was on her feet again, instantly.

"No, no, Captain! Please, not that! Can't we use the rest of the fête
money--and add some from the bazaar?"

But Ruth, as usual, opposed the idea.

"I move that we pay Miss Smith for her services, and then dismiss the
matter for once and all. If Frieda Hammer can get work, she certainly
isn't suffering, and there are a good many more worthy channels to which
we can apply our money. In my opinion, she never was any good!"

"Is there a second to Ruth's motion?" asked Captain Phillips.

"I second it!" said Barbara Hill.

"Any discussion?"

Then Lily, aroused to the support of Marjorie rather than of Frieda,
made an appealing speech, telling of the vastness of New York City, and
its great temptations. She mentioned the troop's responsibility toward
Frieda, at least until they could get her back home. She spoke
earnestly, and the girls were greatly impressed. Marjorie cast a
grateful look in her direction as Lily sat down.

The votes were taken, and the "nos" carried the day, probably rather
because Marjorie and Lily were more popular than Ruth and Barbara, than
because of any particular love on the part of the troop for Frieda.
Indeed, most of the girls disliked her heartily, and were angry at her
for stealing Marjorie's canoe; but that was Marjorie's affair, and if
she wanted to search for Frieda, they intended to stand back of her.

The rest of the evening was spent in discussing the Bazaar, and all the
while the girls worked busily with their needles, finishing odds and
ends that had been left till the last minute.

Miss Phillips had begun with the senior Scouts and had given first them,
and then the juniors, charge of the booths. The sophomores, with the
single exception of Marjorie Wilkinson and Lily Andrews, and all of the
freshmen, were to act merely as aids. The former two girls had been
assigned the "Baby Table" for the simple reason that there were not
enough upperclassmen to take charge, and they, of all the younger girls,
appeared most interested.

So anxious were they to have their booth look attractive, Marjorie and
Lily arose at six o'clock the morning of the bazaar, in order to
decorate it before breakfast. They secured white tissue paper, and with
this completely covered up all the dark boards. Here and there articles
were suspended by narrow pink and blue baby ribbon; and a great bowl of
pink roses stood on one side of the counter, while on the other side was
displayed a life-size doll, dressed in the most exquisite hand-made
layette. The effect as a whole was dainty and charming.

Soon after breakfast the other booths--for candy, sandwiches and
ice-cream, household goods, embroidery, basketry, toys, and what
not,--were all arranged, and Miss Phillips threw open the doors. Dressed
in their neat khaki uniforms, with spotless white aprons over their
skirts, the Girl Scouts presented an attractive appearance; and Captain
Phillips, gazing about her critically, felt that she had reason to be
proud of her girls and their accomplishments.

The morning was not a particularly busy one; only twenty or thirty
people from the village, besides a few of the pupils and teachers,
dropped in. Miss Phillips' expression began to grow more anxious as the
noon hour approached, and all the Scouts felt a trifle worried.

When the clock struck twelve, Marjorie picked up her almost empty candy
box for the tenth time to count the few coins that jingled forlornly
when she shook it. She knew what the result would be--she had sold only
two articles-but she repeated the process hopefully, as if by some
magic, the total might have increased. There were exactly two dollars.

"Do you suppose it is because our things aren't pretty?" she asked Lily,
although she really could not conceive of anything more exquisite than
the diminutive garments on the table.

But Lily reassured her. "You just wait!" she answered; "the big crowd'll
come this afternoon! Don't forget those wonderful posters Frances and
Edith made--they ought to bring the buyers!"

"I hope they do!" said Marjorie, somewhat cheered by the other girl's
words. "Especially after all the trouble we had putting them up!"

Both girls laughed at the recollection of climbing posts, entering
stores, and respectfully requesting shop-keepers to display their
home-made posters. A slight snowfall had added spice to the adventure,
and helped to make the experience one to be remembered.

During the lull that followed, the Scouts seized the opportunity to
leave their posts and rush over to the sandwich booth to purchase a
hasty luncheon. Through their patronage, the number of sales there was
increased, and the cash box returned an agreeably "full" sound when
shaken. Ruth Henry, who was serving as an aide at this table, looked
well satisfied.

Business at all the other booths, however, continued to be dull until
shortly after two o'clock, when the gymnasium door burst open, and what
appeared to be an endless succession of noisy, laughing girls crowded
in. It proved to be Miss Martin's entire seminary, turned out in a body
to support their sister school in its good work.

"Hurrah for the Girl Scouts!" they shouted, and proceeded to spend a
great deal of money in the purchase of both refreshments and Christmas
presents.

Unfortunately for Marjorie and Lily, however, very few of the girls were
interested in their booth, and therefore did not come over to buy. Three
or four girls, who boasted of baby-brothers or sisters, purchased caps
and fancy rattles; but the total value of their sales had hardly reached
ten dollars, when the visitors left the bazaar. Both Marjorie and Lily
were glad to see the other Scouts more successful than they had been
during the morning, but they despaired of making their own booth worth
while.

Toward half-past three, Ruth, who had been busy steadily until that time
at the sandwich table, sauntered over to visit the girls at the baby
booth.

"We're almost sold out," she remarked, carelessly. "How are you getting
along, Marj?"

"Not so good!" sighed Marjorie. "But I surely congratulate you!"

"We have over twenty-five dollars," continued the other. "But you ought
to have more because we have to sell sandwiches so cheap."

"I have only ten," admitted Marjorie, sadly.

"Only ten!" repeated Ruth. "Well, if that's all you're going to make, I
don't see why you should have so much say about what we do with the
money!" This last remark was added spitefully, it seemed to Marjorie.

The latter made no reply, however, and Ruth turned away.

"She certainly can be nasty, when she wants to be!" remarked Lily. "But
don't you care, Marj! Anybody could sell sandwiches--especially when our
own girls buy them!"

Marjorie shrugged her shoulders, and began to hum, in the attempt to
regain her cheerful spirits. But no one came near her table for almost
half an hour; then, about four o'clock, a dozen or more young married
women hurried over in her direction.

"Baby things!" exclaimed one. "You never can get them at Jones'!"

"I wonder why they don't keep them," remarked another. "Well, here's our
chance!"

The women, who were evidently coming from a tea or some such social
function, simply surrounded Marjorie's table and purchased lavishly.
They exclaimed admiringly over everything, and bought so fast that the
girls had to summon extra aides to help them. Finally, when they had
gone, Marjorie had a minute to count the contents of her cash box. She
had fifty-six dollars and twenty-five cents!

But her triumph was not yet over, for scarcely had she put the money
away when a slender little woman, who had all the while been watching
proceedings, approached, and called her to the side.

"I buy for Jones' store, in the village," she said quietly, "and I
should like to offer you fifty dollars for the remainder of your stock."

Marjorie listened incredulously, making no attempt to hide her joy at
the idea of the transaction. Glancing hastily at the clock, she saw that
it was half-past four, within half an hour of closing. She accepted the
woman's offer immediately.

"Thank you so much," she said. "You know it's for a good cause!"

"They are lovely things," remarked the buyer, sincerely. "Really, they
are just what I have been looking for."

With trembling fingers, Marjorie and Lily folded the snowy articles
gently and tied them into a bundle. It was simply wonderful to have
nothing left over.

"Half an hour, and nothing to do!" said Marjorie, squeezing Lily around
the waist. "Wasn't it the best luck, though!"

"Sh! Don't say anything! Let's pretend to be busy, and surprise Miss
Phillips when she calls for a report!"

"And Ruth Henry, too!" added Marjorie, wickedly.

At quarter past five the last purchaser left the gymnasium, and Miss
Phillips ordered the door to be closed.

"We'll leave things as they are," she said, "and come over to clear up
to-night. In the meantime, you are to go back to the dormitory and
prepare for supper. But there is one thing I want to know before you all
leave," she concluded; "and that is--how much cash you each have. Did
anyone, by any chance, sell out?"

"Yes, we did!" announced Ruth Henry, although the sandwich table had
really been in charge of Elsie Lorimer.

"Fine! How much?"

"Thirty-two dollars--and some change!" Ruth glanced triumphantly at
Marjorie.

"Anyone else?" inquired Miss Phillips.

"Yes," replied Marjorie. "Lily and I did. We have one hundred and six
dollars, and twenty-five cents."

But amidst all the congratulations that followed, Marjorie thought only
of one thing: that she had been able to answer Ruth's challenge! She had
made the most of any booth--and she felt privileged to have a say in
the direction to which the money should be applied! She would not be
afraid to urge again the cause of Frieda Hammer, and the Scouts' Good
Turn!




CHAPTER XV

THE SCOUT CHRISTMAS TREE


It was not until the following Friday evening, when each girl in charge
of a table had made her report, that Miss Phillips was able to add up
the total receipts from the sales at the bazaar. At last she looked up
with a happy smile.

"Four hundred and twenty-two dollars!" she announced; and the girls
broke into uproarious applause.

"Since this is our last meeting in the old year," she went on, "I
especially want the new girls to take their Tenderfoot tests. But before
that, and before we talk over the Christmas plans that Ruth Henry
suggested several weeks ago, I desire to read you some letters.

"I went to the office of our little local newspaper, _The Star_, and
asked whether any poor children had written to Santa Claus through them.

"The woman in charge was awfully nice; she smiled sort of tenderly, as
if all the children belonged to her.

"'Indeed we have,' she replied, opening a drawer. 'Look at this bunch.'

"And she handed me these"--Miss Phillips held up a handful of torn,
dirty pieces of all kinds of paper, except writing paper--"and I
discovered there were thirty-two of them, all so quaint and funny. So I
said I would put the matter up to you Scouts to-night, and report to her
to-morrow."

"Oh, let's give them a party, and a tree, and the presents they want,"
cried Marjorie, anxious for everyone to know that she did not want to
monopolize all of the money for Frieda.

"Read them, please, Captain!" begged Frances.

Miss Phillips opened two or three, selected one, and read slowly,
apparently encountering difficulty in the spelling:

     "Dear Santa Klaus:

     "Pleas send me a dol that opens hur ise with love Mary Connelly."

After that she read half a dozen or so, each one as laboriously composed
as the first, asking St. Nicholas to bring them the things nearest their
hearts.

"But when could we have the party?" asked the Captain. "It's too soon to
have it this Saturday afternoon, and next week the older children will
have school."

"Couldn't we have it at four o'clock?" suggested Ethel; "I should think
we could keep them out until half-past five, and then we could take them
home ourselves, because, of course, it would be too dark by then for
them to go alone."

They decided upon Thursday afternoon, for the girls were to leave Miss
Allen's at noon on Friday; and a hundred dollars was appropriated for
the party and the presents.

The time seemed all too short for the committee in charge; indeed, every
member of the troop served in some way. Miss Phillips took Frances and
Ethel to the city with her to select the presents and the tree
ornaments; four of the girls wrote the invitations, and half a dozen
were to attend to the refreshments and decorations. Lily Andrews,
because she was stout and jolly, was awarded the supreme honor of being
Santa Claus; and she spent much time preparing her costume.

At last everything was in readiness, and the Scouts gathered in the
gymnasium. A big tree stood in the center, glistening with tinsel and
shining with brightly colored balls. Underneath, attractively wrapped in
Christmas paper and ribbon, the presents were invitingly piled. Santa
Claus, with several of the girls who were to assist "him," was hidden in
Miss Phillips's office.

The guests--everyone of the thirty-two ragged little children, and
several additional younger brothers and sisters besides--arrived,
dressed in what was probably their best clothes--just as the little
Ruggles came to Carol's famous party in "The Birds' Christmas Carol."
Edith and Frances received them at the door and helped them remove their
coats and hats.

With exclamations of "Oh!" and "Ah!" they stood perfectly still, lost in
admiration of the Christmas tree. They had never seen such a lovely one
before.

"Will everyone please sit down upon the pillows?" asked Miss Phillips,
indicating a row of sofa cushions arranged around the tree.

Doris Sands and Emily Rankin gave out the popcorn and candy toys. The
children were too much awe-struck to think of talking. They just sat
still and gazed, all the while sucking their candy, and looking
expectantly at the alluring parcels under the tree.

In a short time, from the direction of the office, a great chorus of
song came:

    "Silent night, holy night,
    All is calm, all is bright----"

the famous old Christmas carol that children and grown people everywhere
love.

When the last notes of the song had died away, Edith Evans, the
story-teller of the group, related the pretty little legend of "Why the
Chimes Rang"--telling how a small boy, who had only ten cents to give
at Christmas time, gave it with his whole heart, and the magical chimes,
which sounded only for great gifts, and which had been silent now for
many years, rang out through the clear stillness of that Christmas
night.

There is perhaps no other Christmas story which contains the real
Christmas spirit so much as this one, with its simple message of
whole-hearted giving; and it did not fail to produce the desired effect.
The children were just in the mood of what followed: the appearance of
Santa Claus!

With a jolly "Ha! Ha!" and the ringing of sleigh bells, he came in
through the open door carrying a huge pack on his back, and was greeted
with tremendous applause.

Reaching into his pocket, he took out the notes and held them up to
examine.

"I got every one of your letters," he said, "and I hope you will all be
satisfied with your presents. I have tried to do the best I could. Ha!
Ha! Ha! Christmas is a jolly time!"

Santa's laughter was so real and his enjoyment so genuine that the
children beamed with happiness. It seemed as if their dreams had really
come true.

"Here's a package for Mary Connelly," he said, taking off his pack; "and
here's one for Peter Myers."

The children hesitated a moment, and then went forward to receive their
gifts. Edith and Frances brought the others out from beneath the tree,
and there were half a dozen left over, even after the unexpected guests
had been provided for.

"And a box of candy for everybody," concluded Santa Claus, reaching for
the pile of boxes, each wrapped in white paper, and handing them to his
helpers.

"And now I must be gone!" he said. "I've many places to visit before
Christmas day. A merry Christmas to all!" he cried, and as they
answered, "The same to you!" he vanished through the doorway. The
tingling of sleighbells announced the fact that he had gone.

The short winter day was drawing to a close, and the children suddenly
realized, as they were looking at their presents, that it was getting
quite dark. But in an instant, as if by magic, the tree was alight with
many gaily-colored electric bulbs, which gleamed and sparkled so
gloriously that they all gasped and gazed in wonder.

While the refreshments were being prepared, Ethel and Doris started a
game, to the winner of which a prize "stocking" was given. Just as this
was concluded, Miss Phillips called that they were ready.

Behind the tree there had been a row of screens to hide the
preparations. Now these were removed, and the most beautiful sight that
the children had ever seen appeared before their eyes. A table piled
with goodies of every kind decorated with holly and mistletoe and
Christmas candles and candies. Three large bowls in the center of the
table contained red strings which extended to every child's place.

The little guests sat down and pulled their red ribbons--and to their
great delight, each received another present. Then they began to eat.
There were chicken sandwiches, and cocoa with whipped cream, and
ice-cream, cake, candy, fruit, and nuts. The Scouts simply loaded their
plates, telling them that they might carry home what they could not eat.

They were having such a delightful party that they were all surprised
when six o'clock came, and Miss Phillips gave the signal for departure.
The Scouts put on their hats and coats, and, with their arms laden with
goodies, and gifts, and holly, the children returned to the village.

Lily reappeared, dressed in her Scout uniform, to accompany them. One of
the children, who had been looking at her closely for several minutes,
exclaimed abruptly,

"Santa Claus is a Girl Scout!"

The Scouts burst out laughing.

"He was this time," explained Edith, kindly; "for the real Santa had too
much to do, so he asked us to help him."

"You are _all_ Santa Clauses!" corrected the child. "I think Girl
Scouts are the most nicest people in the whole world!"

And Pansy troop, to the last girl, was satisfied with the work it had
accomplished and the real Christmas cheer it had brought to these
children's hearts.




CHAPTER XVI

THE VISIT TO HAMMERS'


The Christmas holidays had always meant a great deal to Marjorie. There
was not only the joy of the holiday season, and of giving and receiving
presents, but the pleasure of seeing the family and her old friends
again, of going to parties, and of entertaining. The preceeding year she
had given a house-party to the freshmen and sophomore members of the
sorority to which she belonged at that time, and they had all had a
lovely time. Ruth, who had never been a member of the secret society,
had been left out--a proceeding which so angered her as to cause her to
seek in some way to get even with Marjorie. And this had been the
beginning of all the trouble! Now as she looked back upon it, the whole
affair seemed childish; she realized that whatever parties she gave in
the future would include Ruth.

Marjorie's mother had told her that she might invite Lily, or any other
friend, to spend part or all of the holidays with her; and she had
received a lovely invitation from Doris's mother to go to their home
for Christmas week. But she had resolutely refused all these
suggestions; she had other plans--not of a social nature.

It was with this purpose in mind that she visited Miss Phillips the
night of the children's party.

"Could you possibly spare me a day during your holiday, Miss Phillips?"
she asked. "I want to go and see Frieda's mother."

"Why, what an idea!" exclaimed the teacher in surprise. "But do you
think she knows where her daughter is?"

"I think she must know something. And maybe she could tell us why Frieda
ran away. And----" Marjorie paused, shyly,--"and I want to get word to
her if I can that I don't mind her taking my canoe!"

"Marjorie, you're a strange girl!" remarked Miss Phillips, looking at
her quizzically. Then, "But have you asked your parents' consent?"

"Yes; papa said he would drive us over. But he also said that he
wouldn't let me go without you. And he was afraid it would be asking too
much of you!"

"Not at all. I could easily arrange to meet you. What day do you want to
go?"

"Whatever day suits you best."

Miss Phillips went to her desk and consulted an engagement pad.

"How about Friday--a week from to-morrow?" she suggested. "Then, if it
should rain, we could go Saturday."

"Fine!" concluded Marjorie, rising to go. But Miss Phillips detained her
for a moment.

"Marjorie, I want to thank you for your lovely gift. It was sweet of you
to do all that work for me."

The girl smiled, delighted that her favorite teacher was pleased. In
fact, Miss Phillips was not only her favorite teacher, but the only one
in whom she took any interest.

"I'm glad you liked it, Miss Phillips," she said, as she turned to leave
the office.

Marjorie and Ruth rode home in the train together. As soon as the girls
were away from Miss Allen's, and there was no longer any rivalry raging
between them, Ruth became her old self again, and expected to have
Marjorie once more as her best friend. But Marjorie was not to be so
easily won.

"Mother writes that there's a new family moved in next door to us,"
remarked Ruth, "and she says that the son--a boy a little older than we
are, seems very nice. I thought maybe I'd ask him over some night during
Christmas week, if you and Jack can come, too. We could play bridge, and
dance a little."

"That would be lovely," murmured Marjorie, in a preoccupied manner, for
her thoughts had flown in a different direction--to her own _one_
important plan for the coming week.

"How would next Friday suit?" suggested Ruth.

Marjorie shook her head decidedly. "Sorry, but I can't possibly!"

Ruth regarded her curiously. What plans could Marjorie have--so early?
No doubt it had something to do with John Hadley.

"If it's John, why, bring him along, and I'll try to get another girl,"
she ventured.

"No; it has nothing to do with John. I expect to be out of town."

"At Lily's?"

"No; I won't be visiting anybody."

"Oh, well," said Ruth, sulkily, "if you don't want to tell me, you don't
have to. I don't care."

"I can't very well tell you, Ruth," replied Marjorie; "and besides, you
wouldn't be interested."

"Then when can you come?"

"Tuesday or Wednesday, whichever you like."

The girls finally agreed upon Wednesday, and separated with the promise
to visit each other before then. But Ruth resented Marjorie's secrecy
and tried to imagine what her important engagement could possibly be.

Christmas, and the next four days passed happily and quickly, and almost
before she realized it, Friday had come, bringing to Marjorie her chance
for adventure.

Wrapped snugly in her mother's fur coat, and with the big robe tucked in
around her, she sat on the front seat of the machine that cold, clear
morning of the end of December. She was very happy; she felt, indeed,
that she was doing something worth while, and the prospect of a nice
long ride with Miss Phillips added not a little to her pleasure.

After they had driven about fifteen miles they met the Scout Captain,
and then continued on their way. Ten miles before they reached their
destination they stopped at a hotel for dinner.

"Suppose they don't live there any longer," remarked Marjorie. "All our
trip for nothing!"

"No, for we could probably get some information from Mrs. Brubaker,"
replied Miss Phillips. "But I don't think they'd move."

"It isn't likely," assented Marjorie.

It was two o'clock when they arrived at the Brubaker farm. The front
door opened, and Mrs. Brubaker appeared.

"Well, of all things!" she exclaimed, recognizing Miss Phillips and
Marjorie in the car. "This surely is a surprise!"

When they were all comfortably seated before the open fire, Mr.
Wilkinson explained their mission, and the good woman seemed amazed at
their news.

"We had no idea Frieda wasn't still at school. Her mother never said a
word. Oh, I'm so sorry!"

They talked a little while, and then leaving her father with Mr.
Brubaker, Marjorie and her Captain proceeded toward the tenant house
where the Hammers lived.

Mrs. Hammer did not recognize them at first. Then Miss Phillips
explained.

"We want to know if you have any news of Frieda, Mrs. Hammer," she said,
very politely.

"Come in," invited the older woman, holding open the door a little
wider.

"We haven't heard a word since she ran away," continued Miss Phillips,
as soon as they were inside, "except that a friend of mine saw a girl
answering her description in New York."

"That's where she is, I reckon," assented Mrs. Hammer, "but that's all I
know. From her onct in a while I get a letter, and can write to her care
of--what d'ye call it?--general delivery. But I can't write very good."

"Oh, may we see the letters?" asked Marjorie, eagerly.

"Yes--I don't mind. You people sure treated her white. I don't know
what's got into her."

The woman crossed the room, which was untidy and dirty, and pulled out a
drawer in the table. There, among heterogeneous trash, Marjorie noticed
several letters. Mrs. Hammer tossed them into Miss Phillips's lap.

"You can read them all," she said, "while I go look to the baby."

Miss Phillips noticed Marjorie's excitement, and politely handed her the
letters--there were three of them,--which the girl opened with trembling
fingers. Apparently, all of them were short.

"This must be the first," she said, and read aloud,

     "DEAR MA,

     "I ran away in that girl's bot becaus a girl insulted me. I brot my
     clothes and a pencil and I stayed at an empty hous to-night.

         "FRIEDA."

Marjorie put the paper back into the envelope with a sigh.

"That doesn't tell us a whole lot, does it?" she observed. "Except that
we know now for sure that the girl that old woman described at the empty
house was Frieda."

"But what does she mean about a girl insulting her?" asked Miss
Phillips, in a puzzled tone.

Marjorie frowned; she had no desire to tell tales about Ruth.
Accordingly, she related the story, but withheld the name of the girl
concerned.

"Frieda certainly must be skillful as a boatsman," remarked Miss
Phillips, "to be able to come that far."

"Yes," said Marjorie, opening the letter with the second earliest
postmark. Then, "Oh, listen to this:

     "I got to Trenton but befor I crossed the river I sold the bot for
     $20. I'm going to New York for to get work.

         "FRIEDA."

"Trenton!" repeated Miss Phillips. "Marjorie, we might be able to locate
your canoe if we search all the boat-houses and the river-front there,
and on the opposite side of the Delaware!"

"That's an idea!" cried Marjorie. "I'll ask papa----"

But she was too anxious to read the third and last letter to finish her
sentence. Hastily she pulled it from the envelope.

     "DEAR MA,

     "I'm in New York now and you can rite me care Gen. Del. My money is
     most gone. I got a waitres job.

         "FRIEDA."

"But she hasn't, any more!" protested Marjorie; "at least, if Miss Smith
is right!"

At that moment Mrs. Hammer returned with the baby, and Marjorie asked
her all sorts of questions to which she could not reply, but only shake
her head hopelessly.

"But aren't you the least bit worried?" asked Marjorie, picturing how
her own mother would feel under similar circumstances. For Mrs. Hammer
was certainly amazingly calm.

"Ach! she's old enough to take care of herself!" cried the woman
impatiently. "New York's a fine place--I'm glad she is there!"

Marjorie again thought of the great city as she had seen it when she
visited Lily at Thanksgiving, and she shuddered at the confusion and the
danger of it all. And to a country girl like Frieda, it must be even
more terrifying. But she said nothing further; Mrs. Hammer had no
conception of it, and probably never would have. She was relieved to see
Miss Phillips make a motion to go.

All during the ride home, she was unusually quiet, but it was not from
despair. The visit, she felt, had not been in vain; she had formulated a
plan which she meant to put into effect as soon as she reached home. She
would write to Frieda and tell her how much she wanted her to come back.
She would assure the girl that she did not mind about the canoe--she
would even make her a present of it. And she would be glad to send
Frieda the money for a return ticket if she would only promise to come
back!




CHAPTER XVII

RUTH FINDS THE CANOE


Ruth Henry had always been a pretty girl, but in the past year she had
grown even more attractive. Though small of stature, there was nothing
insignificant about her; indeed, she was of the striking type which
attracts immediate attention, even of the casual observer. Always
planning some activity, or involved in some scheme to further her own
interests, she was a creature of perpetual animation. This very vivacity
was one of her chief charms among young and old.

It was no particular surprise to anyone, therefore, that Harold Mason
was smitten by her at first sight. Here, he felt, was his ideal type of
girl: pretty, petite, feminine, yet combining with all those
characteristics a love of sport and adventure, and a spirit of daring
that was almost boyish. What a comrade! he thought.

The boy himself was far from unattractive. Raised in Virginia, he
possessed that unconscious charm of the Southerner that is always
particularly pleasing to women. He drawled his words, dropping his
"r's"; and he had a little habit of smiling at the end of his remarks.
Like Ruth, however, Harold Mason was an only child; and, like her, he
was spoiled. Possessing a car of his own--even though it happened to be
only a Ford sedan--he came and went as he pleased, with the consequence
that his studies had often suffered. Now, when he should have been in
college, he was merely finishing the latter half of his senior year at
High School.

"I tell you what, Ruth," he said on the second day of their holiday
(they felt by now as if they had known each other all of their lives),
"let's have a regular good time this week. Let's go somewhere every
single day!"

Ruth smiled faintly; she could not help being flattered by her conquest.

"Suppose I have other engagements?"

"Chuck them--ah--just for once!"

"And maybe mother won't let me."

"Well, tease her!"

"And then," added Ruth, "you haven't met Marjorie Wilkinson. She's
considered (by some) the most attractive girl at our school!"

"Oh, forget her! I've seen her, even if I haven't met her. Her type
doesn't appeal to me!"

Ruth laughed good naturedly, and surrendered. But she made one
reservation.

"I promised Jack Wilkinson I'd go to the movies with him on Friday."

Harold closed his lips tightly, and shrugged his shoulders.

"As you please," he said; "maybe I will ask Marjorie for that day."

"Then you'll get left!" retorted Ruth triumphantly. "She has a date,
too!"

"Well--then I'll ask Miss Maria!" he concluded, mentioning one who was
the typical "old-maid" of the town, and who unconsciously bore the brunt
of all the young people's jokes.

When Jack and Marjorie came over to Ruth's on Wednesday evening, Harold
found the girl to be just as he had expected: rather quiet and
diffident, even pretty, but not striking-looking; and he made no attempt
to become intimate with her. After they had tired of playing cards,
whenever Jack and Ruth saw fit to dance together, he offered to do
likewise with Marjorie, as a mere matter of form. But he did not find
her easy to talk to.

"Jack, what's Marj going to do on Friday?" Ruth asked as she poured the
cocoa from the chafing dish on the tea-table.

Marjorie looked up, amused. She was sincerely thankful that Jack knew as
little as Ruth about her coming adventure.

"You can search me!" replied the boy. "I did hear dad mention an auto
ride."

"Your father?" repeated Ruth. "Is that all? And here I was picturing a
secret meeting with an unknown lover----"

"Wrong as usual!" said Marjorie, a little sharply. "I told you that
before, Ruth."

Harold Mason looked up quickly, incensed at the tone Marjorie had
unconsciously used towards Ruth. In that instant he became her enemy; if
she and Ruth should be rival contestants in any cause again, he vowed to
himself that he would do all in his power to help the latter.

"Well, if it's nothing exciting, why don't you tell us about it?" said
Jack.

"It's a personal matter, Jack," said Marjorie; "I should think you and
Ruth would understand that by now!"

Apparently, Ruth was squelched. "I beg your pardon," she said humbly.
But the very next instant she winked at Harold, and he knew her well
enough to interpret the signal as a challenge against Marjorie.

"Don't make any engagement for Friday!" she whispered, as Harold left
the house with the others.

By pre-arranged signals, Ruth and Harold sat waiting in his car at
eight-thirty on Friday morning. The machine did not stand in front of
either Mason's or Henry's house; instead, it was drawn up before a
provision store, where, to the passer-by, it might appear to be waiting
while Mrs. Mason or Mrs. Wilkinson was making purchases inside.

The young people did not have to wait long, for a few minutes before
nine, Jack Wilkinson came hurrying towards them.

"They're gone!" he shouted. "The other direction--out the Main street."

In a second, he was inside the car, and Harold stepped on the starter
and released the emergency.

"How long ago?" he asked, as the machine began to move forward.

"Just long enough for me to get my things on and run over here. About
five minutes, I should say."

"Just Marj and your father?" asked Ruth.

"Yes."

"Is he a fast driver?" inquired Harold.

"Pretty fast, except in traffic," replied Jack.

"Well, speed up, Harold," urged Ruth. She leaned back against the seat
contentedly; it would be such a lark to worry Marjorie, especially since
she had been so secret about the whole proceeding.

"And what am I to do if we do catch them?" asked Harold.

"Just follow them, and make their lives miserable," laughed Ruth.

"I think it must have something to do with Miss Phillips," remarked
Jack. "I heard her name mentioned once or twice."

Ruth repressed an involuntary start.

Miss Phillips! So this was the scheme: Marjorie was merely courting
popularity with the Scout Captain! Probably her rival intended to
wheedle Miss Phillips into giving her the first-class test privately, so
that she might be the first in the troop to receive that honor! A hard
look came into Ruth's eyes; she was more resolved than ever to do all in
her power to make the other girl's project fail. But she said nothing of
all this to her companions.

They followed the main road for about five miles, passing several
machines, but never catching sight of the desired one. Harold had been
keeping to about thirty miles an hour, but as he reached the level road
and the open country, he let it out to thirty-five.

Ruth talked incessantly, telling the boys all about the Scout parties
and the hockey games. Although she had not mentioned Frieda Hammer, she
suddenly remarked,

"Wasn't it dreadful about Marj's canoe?"

"Yes," replied Jack; "who do you suppose stole it?"

"Don't you know?" exclaimed Ruth. "Why, that thief our Scout troop
adopted to reform. But it serves Marj right! She was the strongest one
for doing it."

Harold, who was in the dark about all this, was naturally curious to
hear the whole story, and Ruth recounted it as briefly as possible.

All this time the youthful driver was speeding his Ford at its very
limit, and gradually gaining upon a speck in the distance which
appeared to be a touring car.

"By George! that's our Buick!" cried Jack. "I'll just bet anything!"

But Harold could not go any faster, and the other car was making good
time. He continued, however, to keep it in sight, while Ruth
breathlessly urged him on.

The houses were closer together now, and Harold unconsciously slackened
his pace.

"Must we go slow?" asked Ruth, disappointed.

"Yes; the law's fifteen. But we'll take a chance on twenty-five!"

"Still, dad will have to slow up, too," remarked Jack, consolingly. "And
maybe we'll catch him on the open road again."

"It's almost like following elopers," laughed Harold. "I do love a
chase."

"So do I," agreed Ruth. Then, "Oh, see that bridge; do we have to cross
that?"

"Yes," replied Jack; "for that will take us into Trenton. And they must
be headed that way."

They slowed down before crossing the bridge when suddenly there was a
terrific report, like an explosion, which startled them so that they
almost jumped out of their skins. Harold applied the brakes quickly, and
swung the car sharply towards the side of the road.

"Good night!" he exclaimed; "a blow-out! I was a fool to leave that bum
shoe on the rear! And the spare is perfectly new!"

"We'll never catch them now!" mourned Ruth, dejectedly.

They sat gazing at each other helplessly.

"Well, we'll never catch them if we sit here all day; that's a sure
thing!" announced Jack, coming to life. "Come on, Mason! Let's break all
records for a quick change!"

They scrambled out into the road.

"Jerusalem!" exclaimed Jack, poking a finger at the jagged hole in the
flat tire, where the tread was so worn that the lining of the shoe was
exposed. "Look at that hole!"

He peeled off his coat and tossed it into the machine, and handed his
watch to Ruth, saying,

"Here, Ruth; time us, from now on."

Harold, following his example, was rummaging under the back seat for his
tools; he threw a kit and a jack out into the road calling,

"There you are, Wilkinson! You unscrew the rim-cleats, and I'll jack her
up."

"That's a funny-looking jack!" observed Ruth, looking at it curiously.

"It's a new kind," retorted Harold knowingly, thinking that Ruth, like
most girls, probably knew nothing about tools.

Jack glanced over his shoulder at the object; then dropped what he was
doing to examine it more closely.

"By George! Ruth's right! Where is the part that goes under the axle?"

Harold was out of the machine in a jiffy.

"Great snakes!" he howled, tearing his hair. "It does come off; and if I
can't find it under the seat, we're out of luck, that's all!"

He dived again into the car, leaving the other two staring at the
dismembered jack. They heard him fumbling around again, and, after a
minute, he slid out and sat upon the running-board.

"No use! I guess I left it home," he said.

"Then I guess I won't need this," said Ruth, handing Jack his watch.

Suddenly, the humor of the situation struck all three of them at once,
and they burst into shrieks of laughter.

"Well, catching them is now out of the question," said Jack, after the
merriment had subsided; "but we'll have to get home again somehow."

"Yes," agreed Harold, "the question is--how?"

"There must be a garage around here somewhere, and we could borrow a
jack," suggested Ruth.

"Shall I go ahead and look for one?" asked Jack.

"Oh, we'll stop a passing machine, and borrow one," said Harold.

"But none has passed us yet," protested Ruth, "and we might have to wait
here all day."

"I don't think so; there ought to be lots of traffic on this road; it's
a main highway. They just won't come because we want them to."

"There are several little houses down there," said Jack, indicating a
group of boat-houses along the banks of the river, about fifty yards
away; "perhaps one of them would have a jack."

"To jack up the boats with?" asked Harold, sardonically.

"It won't hurt to try, anyway," retorted the other boy. "Come on, Ruth!
We'll go ask."

To see Ruth walk away with Jack and leave him sitting there alone, was
too much for Harold.

"Jack! I say, Jack!" he called. "Come back a minute!"

The boy and girl retraced their steps.

"What do you want?"

"I was just thinking--you might crawl under the car----"

"Eh?"

"I say, _you_ might crawl under the car," repeated Harold.

"What for?"

"Jack 'er up!"

He jumped up from the running-board just in time to avoid the other's
clutches.

"Now, Harold!" protested Ruth. "As if this were not enough, you must
make it worse with bad puns."

"I won't do it again," promised Harold, with mock penitency. "But wait a
minute--I'm going with you."

He tossed the tools on the floor of the car and slammed the door.

"Jack, my boy," he resumed, "I really believe your idea is a good one,
an inspiration, a mark of genius; I verily believe we are on the eve of
a great discovery----"

"Oh, you dry up!" snorted Jack. "I don't really think we'll find one.
But it won't hurt to ask."

Upon closer inspection all of the boat-houses appeared to be deserted,
except the one farthest away. This was slightly removed from the others,
and more ramshackle looking; but someone was evidently there, for they
could hear the sound of hammering, which seemed to come from within.
Over the door hung a home-made sign, with the inscription:

    JOHN SLACK,
    BOATS FOR HIRE.

"See anything funny about that name?" asked Harold.

The others examined it more closely.

"He's got the "N" printed upside-down."

"Sure enough!" laughed Ruth. "Well, of all things!"

"Judging from the noise he's making," continued Harold, "John's business
isn't very slack!"

"Are you commencing again?" groaned Jack.

"That will do, Harold! You've said quite enough!" warned Ruth.

They halted before the open doorway, through which they could see an old
man bending over an upturned boat which he was repairing.

"Good day, Mr. Slack!" called Harold.

The man paused with his hammer in mid-air, and raised his head; a dirty
white beard which seemed to start at his eyes, grew down over his chest.

"Howdy! What can I do for you?"

"We've had a puncture," explained Harold, "and we want to know whether
you have a jack that we could borrow?"

The man shook his head.

"Never had no use for one," he replied.

Their faces fell; but as they turned to leave, the old man straightened
up, and called out,

"Hold on a minute! What kind of car you got?"

"A Ford," Harold told him.

"There's your jack, then," he said, pointing to a pile of lumber in one
corner of the room; "that there twelve-foot beam!"

"How?" queried the boy.

In reply, the man worked his arms up and down, as if he were operating a
lever.

"Just stick it underneath and hist on one end," he explained.

"Can it be done?" asked Harold, doubtfully.

"I seen it done onc't--I guess you fellers kin do it. Maybe not if you
had a bigger car--I dunno. Yer welcome to try. But you want to take a
block to stick underneath the axle when you get 'er raised."

Following his suggestion, the boys raised the beam to their shoulders,
and carried it back to the car, Ruth following with the smaller piece.
Placing one end of the timber beneath the axle and raising the other
end, they found that without effort they could lift the rear of the
machine sufficiently for Ruth to insert the block.

"Golly!" exclaimed Harold; "I believe we could lift a truck this way.
Pretty smart of old Santa Claus to think of it."

In a short time the change was made, the tools put away; and resting the
improvised jack along one side of the car, across the mudguards, they
returned with it to its owner.

"The job's done, Mr. Slack!" announced Harold, as they flung the beam to
the ground. "I'm very much obliged to you for your help."

He slipped a coin into the old man's hand.

"That's all right!" was the answer. "I'm much obliged to you. I wouldn't
have no use for a real jack," he repeated.

Meanwhile, Ruth was carrying on an earnest conversation in undertones
with Jack. She was directing his attention among the various small boats
which filled the long room, to a particular one in the far corner, which
was noticeable because of its bright green paint, and because it was the
only canoe among many row-boats.

"It certainly looks like Marjorie's," she was saying.

"Where did you get that canoe?" she demanded sharply, turning to the
boat-house keeper.

"I bought it from a young lady," he replied. "She paddled down the
river. I give twenty dollars for it."

"That canoe was stolen!" cried Ruth, indignantly, as if to accuse the
old man.

He thrust out his beard.

"How do you know?" he asked.

"I recognize it!" replied the girl.

He looked relieved and smiled.

"They's a good many models of the Oldtown canoe that looks like that
one, young lady."

The graceful craft was lying on its side so that the interior was
exposed more to their view than the sides.

"I'll identify it," said Ruth, undaunted. "There's a long scratch in the
paint, about an inch from the keel, near the middle--we got stuck on a
rock one day."

"You could find that on most any canoe," replied the man.

"Well--let me see--oh, there's candle grease on the inside, at each end!
That's from the Japanese lanterns we had there, the night of the
water-picnic," she told the boys. "And the name was painted on it in red
letters--_The Scout_!"

At this, the old man's eyes opened wide.

"I guess you're right, lady," he said. "She's called _The Scout_, all
right; but I don't know about the scratch and the candle grease--I never
noticed that!"

"Will you sell it back to me, if you're convinced?" asked Jack.

"Gimme what I paid for it, and she's your'n. Never was much good to me,
anyhow; I never hired it onc't--mostly too rough for a canoe in the
river."

"Will it be all right if I pay you five dollars now, and return with the
rest, say to-morrow, and get the canoe?"

"Suits me," agreed the other.

So the bargain was struck, and they crossed the room to examine _The
Scout_. There, sure enough, were the evidences as Ruth had given them.
At last, the canoe was found!

"I told you you were on the eve of a great discovery, didn't I?" said
Harold, as they were driving home.

"But you never would have found the canoe, if it hadn't been for me,"
corrected Ruth.

"Marjorie certainly will be glad!" remarked her brother.

"Marjorie!" cried Ruth; "why, I'd forgotten all about her--and the
chase!"

Then she fell silent for a long time. She was thinking of the medal of
merit Miss Phillips had offered for the finding of Frieda; and she could
not see why, if no one were successful, the finding of the canoe might
not be considered the next thing to the finding of Frieda. It would be
much better that Marjorie should never know about their pursuit of her.

Breaking her silence, she said,

"Promise me, both of you, that you won't tell Marj how we chased her?"

They both swore solemn oaths.

After supper, she and Harold strolled over to Wilkinsons' to tell
Marjorie the news of the canoe, for Jack had promised to say nothing
about it until they came. But they found her singularly unappreciative.

"I knew Frieda sold it before she reached Trenton," she remarked; "and I
intended to get papa to take me to find it to-morrow!"

"Of all the ungrateful people!" snapped Ruth, as they left the house.
"And we don't know yet where Marj went," she added.




CHAPTER XVIII

ALONE IN THE CITY


At heart, Frieda Hammer was not a bad girl. But for all these years her
moral sense had remained undeveloped. She was like a man who has worked
in a factory all his life, where the continuous roar of the machinery
dulls his sense of hearing, so that all the finer tones are lost upon
him. Frieda was so unaccustomed to the qualities of unselfishness and
friendliness, that when she came in contact with them she could only
mistrust them. Ruth Henry was the only member of the Girl Scout troop
that she could seem to understand, for she was the only one who was out
and out for herself. Marjorie Wilkinson was a puzzle to her, and always
had been.

And just as the man without an ear for music would not appreciate an
orchestra if he heard one, so this mentally-starved girl could not
understand the charity and sweetness of the Scouts. But gradually, under
the influence of her teacher, of Mrs. Johnson, and of her normal life,
she began to realize what it all meant. She secretly liked Marjorie,
but she was too proud to show it; instead, she decided to study hard,
and bring credit to the Scouts.

All this was before the Japanese fête. Then, that night, like a harsh
discord on one instrument breaking the harmony of an orchestra, she
heard Ruth's detestable remark: "Here comes Frieda Hammer--look out for
your jewelry!" her whole nature rebelled. Sick at heart, and regretting
that she had ever allowed the Scouts to persuade her to leave home, she
now wanted, more than anything else, to get away from them. She hated
them all, Marjorie included!

Her first thought was to leave immediately for home, but upon
remembering that while there she was always unhappy and wishing to be
elsewhere, it occurred to her that this was her opportunity to strike
out for herself. Casting about in her mind for some loophole of escape,
she hit upon the plan of stealing Marjorie's canoe, paddling down the
creek till it joined the river; and then, at the approach of some town,
of attempting to sell it for what she could get, and continuing the
remainder of her journey to New York by train. Why New York, rather than
any other city, she never stopped to consider; it stood out as the one
town to which anyone would wish to go.

That this way of traveling was much slower and more laborious than
setting out upon foot at the outset, never occurred to her; it seemed
like an easy way, less liable of detection, and it appealed to her love
of adventure. Once in New York, she calculated, she would become a
waitress in some "swell" restaurant, where she would make lots of money
to spend for clothes. A hired girl of the Brubakers who had been a
waitress in New York, once told her of the lavish tips she used to
receive; and the future, as Frieda pictured it, seemed particularly rosy
and independent. But to get there was the thing; once there--almost
anything might happen! Why, some rich man might fall in love with her
and marry her. That she was but fourteen, and neither attractive nor
cultured, never entered her head; she had always longed for adventure,
and she meant to have it.

Frieda would have put her plan into effect immediately, if she had only
possessed a little money. As it was, she was afraid to set out with an
empty purse. But when, over a week later, the Scouts sent her the cash
for her ticket home at Thanksgiving, it seemed as if all obstacles were
now removed.

Accordingly, she carried out her project the following day. She attended
school in the morning, and came home for lunch as usual, so as not to
arouse suspicion; but shortly after one o'clock, she slipped out with
her bag all packed. And her most precious possessions were Marjorie's
pink dress and sweater!

If she had carefully calculated her time, she could not have chosen a
more favorable hour for escape. All of Miss Allen's girls, and the
teachers as well, were at luncheon, and the public school children were
already back at their desks. Finally, one-thirty in the afternoon was
just the time that Mrs. Johnson invariably selected for her nap!

Cautiously watching the campus, she untied the rope, and stepped into
the canoe. It was a simple matter to paddle across the lake to the spot
where the small stream joined it; but it was a more difficult feat to
carry the canoe even a short distance on dry land. Frieda Hammer was a
strong girl, but had it not been for the thought of the price she could
get for it, and the distress its loss would bring to the Scouts, she
would have cast aside her heavy burden then and there. She wished, too,
that it had belonged to Ruth instead of to Marjorie, but she kept
assuring herself that she was glad to bring trouble to any member of
Pansy troop.

The distance, however, was short, and in a few minutes she was back
again on the water. She paddled on and on, encountering no further
obstacles, but was surprised at the speed with which the afternoon
seemed to pass. The shadows began to lengthen; and there was still no
sight of a river. She realized that soon she would be obliged to stop
for the night. Through the trees, over on the left bank of the stream,
she distinguished a house. Perhaps she might rest there for the night!

It was the "haunted house" which the Scouts later visited, but Frieda
did not know that. Had she heard the tale of the ghost, she would
probably have hesitated before remaining there alone all night; but no
such story troubled her imagination. She was thankful for the shelter
and protection, for the night was chilly.

Opening her bag, she took out the hasty lunch she had packed, and ate it
greedily. She was hungry and tired. A few minutes later, she was fast
asleep on the floor.

She awoke at dawn, thoroughly chilled, but refreshed, nevertheless, by
her night's sleep. She did not lose a moment in collecting her things,
and ran down to the creek. To her joy, she found the canoe just where
she had left it.

The remainder of the journey, the sale of the canoe to the boatman by
the river-front, and the ride to New York, were accomplished without
accident or delay, and the girl finally found herself in the great
city--the place of her dreams!

Perhaps it was Frieda's good fairy, or perhaps it was the answer to
Marjorie's prayers, that brought the strange girl to the attention of
the Traveler's Aid agent. Confused by the crowd, dazzled by the vastness
of the station, unable to tell one direction from another, she stood
bewildered, seeing steps on all sides. What should she do? She
hesitated; turned around, and bumped into this good friend.

"Excuse me," she said, in the manner her teacher had taught her at
school, "but could you tell me of a nice boarding house? I came here to
work."

The woman looked at her kindly, pitying her from the bottom of her
heart. To her, she was only a child, alone, strange, in the great city
of New York.

"Yes, I know of a nice boarding house," she replied. "But have you a
place to work?"

"Not yet!"

"Have you any money?"

"Over thirty dollars!" replied Frieda, to whom it was a princely sum.

Frieda was grateful, indeed, to be put upon the right car, and to have
in her hand the written directions to the boarding house which the agent
mentioned. In a short time she was established in her room--a bare
unattractive one on the fourth floor, not nearly so nice as Mrs.
Johnson's, but as good as she could afford. She meant to get work at
once; already she was beginning to appreciate what the Girl Scouts had
done for her.

She walked the streets for ten days, without success, looking for work.
And then, on the eleventh, just when her money was beginning to be
exhausted, she found it. Stating her age as seventeen, she obtained a
situation as waitress in an attractive little tea-room on Fifth Avenue.
Under ordinary circumstances she would never have been able to get such
a place, for the other girls were of a higher type, but two waitresses
had developed scarlet fever, and the proprietress was encountering
difficulty in replacing them.

Frieda was given a black sateen dress and a white cap and apron, and
instructed in the finer points of courtesy and service. She spent some
of her first wages for powder and rouge, and learned to twist her hair
up, according to the prevailing fashion. On the whole, she passed very
easily for seventeen or eighteen.

But as the days went by, she found her life singularly monotonous. The
proprietress paid the girls small salaries, expecting them to live on
tips. But Frieda Hammer received very few tips, for she was not a very
successful waitress. The regular patrons avoided her table, and the
newcomers were usually displeased with her service, and tipped her
grudgingly, or not at all.

Then, during the Thanksgiving holidays, she saw Marjorie and Lily, and a
great longing to go back seized her, a desire to study more, and to
accept the friendship these Girl Scouts so generously offered. But she
thought of the canoe and the money she had stolen, and, overcome with
shame, she disappeared into the kitchen to prevent the girls from
recognizing her.

About the middle of December she lost her situation, and was forced to
seek another, without even a reference. Christmas, which on the farm had
meant little except what Mrs. Brubaker had done for her family, took on
a new significance as she watched the shops and the decorations, and
preparations everywhere. In her imagination she saw the Christmas the
Girl Scouts would have, and thought of Mrs. Johnson; and in her heart
she was homesick for what might have been.

She secured a temporary position as wrapper in a department store, with
the understanding that she would be dropped after Christmas.

She spent Christmas day alone in her room--a small, bare attic, for she
could no longer afford the comforts of a boarding house. She would have
liked to go to the movies, but with no prospect of work, and not any too
much money on hand, she dared not risk the expense.

All during the following week she looked for work, but could find none;
for everywhere places were discharging, instead of taking on, girls.

And then the new year brought her the letter from Marjorie!

Marjorie had pictured Frieda now as a sullen, successful, working-girl,
ready to scorn any advances on her part. She dreaded lest the girl would
tear up the letter before she read it. But she never thought of her
hugging and kissing it, as a veritable bond between her and the rest of
mankind.

Frieda read the letter over and over, gradually developing a plan. She
would go back to Trenton, get work if possible, and save to buy back the
canoe. Then, when it was paid for, and she had enough money, she would
paddle back to Miss Allen's, return the fifteen dollars and beg the
forgiveness of Marjorie and the rest of the Scouts. The thought of
beginning all over again inspired her with happiness--the first real
happiness she had felt since her arrival in New York!

She next discovered a way to go to Trenton by trolley; and accordingly,
the next morning she paid her bill and started off. For the time being,
she seemed to have forgotten Ruth Henry; all that she thought of was how
Marjorie Wilkinson would receive her when she finally saw her.

She reached Trenton in the afternoon, and hunted a room. Fortunately,
she still had enough money to pay in advance. Leaving her belongings,
she set out in the direction of the boat-houses, to ascertain whether
the canoe was still there. But on her way she passed a large mill,
before the entrance of which hung a sign, "Girls Wanted;" and without a
moment's hesitation she went in, and secured trial employment.

With a light heart, she crossed the bridge to the other side of the
river. Walking down a short distance, she espied several old men along
the shore.

"There he is!" she thought, as she caught sight of the white beard that
had attracted her before. She looked around expectantly for the canoe,
but did not see it among the boats.

"Good afternoon!" she said pleasantly, adopting the manner she had been
taught to use in the restaurant. "Several months ago I sold you my
canoe. I wonder if I could buy it back at the same price?"

The man eyed her narrowly, while his mouth curled into a snarl.

"Your canoe, eh? _Your_ canoe! I happen to know you stole that canoe--it
never was yours!"

The girl recoiled as if he had struck her. How could he know? Were
policemen on her trail? She shuddered with apprehension. Then, drawing
herself up with dignity, she inquired haughtily,

"And from who did you get your information?"

"A gal and two boys in an auto stopped here to fix a puncture, and
suddenly the gal seen the canoe, and recognized it. 'Where'd you get
that?' she asked.

"'Some gal paddled up here in it and sold it,' I replied.

"'Wal it weren't her'n to sell,' the gal says. 'She's nuthin' but a
common thief--that's what she is!'

"And she paid me five dollars to save it for her, and the next day they
drove up with more money, and took it away.

"Now, I ain't sayin' nuthin' on you, but I advise you not to talk about
_your_ canoe no more!"

"Oh, indeed!" said Frieda, scarcely able to choke back the tears. And,
turning hastily around, she walked over to the bridge.

But she could never go back to the Scouts now; she as a "common thief;"
she had better stay and work alone!




CHAPTER XIX

THE SLEIGH RIDE


The first Scout meeting after the girls returned from the holidays was
teeming with excitement. Ruth Henry reported that she had found the
canoe; and received, to her delight, great applause. Marjorie revealed
what she knew about Frieda, omitting to tell about the letter she wrote
to the girl; and Miss Phillips informed them that they still had three
hundred dollars in the treasury.

"Now for the new patrols," she announced; "I know you are all
interested. The three girls with the highest Scout standing, besides
Edith Evans who will continue to act as Lieutenant, are Marjorie
Wilkinson, Helen Stewart, and Ruth Henry. Ethel Todd came fourth; if we
should get enough girls for a new patrol, she would be the leader."

When the clapping had subsided, these girls, with their Captain,
withdrew to choose patrol members. Ruth smiled; it was funny that she
and Marjorie who were rivals in everything, ever since they had come to
Miss Allen's, should again be opposed to each other.

The patrol leaders chose their members, not so much for their ability as
for their personality. For this reason, Helen Stewart's patrol included
the five senior Scouts, Vivien VanSciver, and two freshmen--Florence
Evans and her room-mate, Mildred Cavin. Marjorie's included Lily, Ethel,
Frances, Marian, Doris, Alice Endicott, and Daisy Gravers. And Ruth's,
of course, comprised her own following: Ada Mearns, Barbara Hill, Mae
VanHorn, Evelyn Hopkins and three girls she did not know so well--Anna
Cane, Dorothy Whitcomb, and Gladys Staley.

As soon as the patrols were announced, Miss Phillips talked to them
about keeping up the standards of each patrol: promptness, industry in
Scout work, etc., saying that whichever patrol won the highest standing
by the end of the year would be senior patrol the next year. For the
present, Helen's division was to have this honor.

"For two months now," continued the Captain, after the excitement had
died down, "we shall do nothing but Scout work. Each girl is to prepare
for the next test higher up.

"And, of course, you have not forgotten the trip to Washington. During
spring vacation, I shall take the first eight girls who have passed
their first-class test; so I want you all to get to work. All the girls
who were in the troop last year, and are now second-class Scouts, are
eligible. All who went to camp passed the first-aid division of the
examination; they are not required to take that over again. I should,
therefore, advise the following Scouts to get to work:

"Edith Evans, Elsie Lorimer, Emily Rankin, Mary Ridgeway, Frances
Wright, Ethel Todd, Marian Guard, Ada Mearns, Lily Andrews, Ruth Henry,
Doris Sands, Marjorie Wilkinson.

"I wish I could take all twelve," she concluded; "but I suppose it's
more fun because of the competition."

"I'm going to stay up every night, all night!" declared Ruth; "just
studying to pass!"

"So long as you don't kidnap any more children, Ruth, you're all right!"
tantalized Ada, who could never forget Ruth's vain attempt the previous
summer to pass the first-class examination.

Dismissing the subject, Miss Phillips remarked,

"You know, Miss Martin wanted our troop to come over and demonstrate
Scouting early in the fall, but I wouldn't go until we had three
patrols. Then, on account of the rush of Christmas time, we put it off
until after the new year. So--be prepared for a shock--we are going
to-morrow afternoon!"

"To-morrow afternoon!" echoed Ethel. "But Captain----"

"I know, Ethel; I realize I am asking a great deal. But listen to my
reasons:

"First, the date suits Miss Martin; second, it suits Mr. Remington and
the Boy Scouts; and third, it's going to snow."

The girls listened in open-mouthed amazement to these reasons. What
could the Boy Scouts, Mr. Remington, and the condition of the
weather--especially a stormy one--have to do with a trip to Miss
Martin's? But no one uttered a sound; the girls simply waited for an
explanation, for they all thought they had not heard their Captain
correctly.

Miss Phillips evidently enjoyed their consternation, for she made no
attempt to explain.

"Can everybody go?" she asked.

"_Must_ everybody go, Captain?" asked Ethel. "I had another
engagement----"

"Oh, if there is anything you can't break, like a dentist
appointment----"

"No, it's social!"

"Then you must choose for yourself. We should love to have you, but we
can get along without anyone except the three patrol leaders. But I am
pretty sure I can guarantee you a good time."

"I know it will be!" cried Ruth, her eyes dancing with anticipation.
"Don't we just remember how lovely all our Captain's other surprises
turned out to be?"

In the end, Ethel, as well as everybody else, decided to go. The
mention of a snowstorm and of the Boy Scouts proved too alluring to pass
by.

"Wear your Scout suits, take sweaters, and wear woolen caps and heavy
coats," Miss Phillips directed.

The weather man's prediction of snow was correct, for when the girls
awakened on Saturday morning, they found everything white. By the time
lunch was over, however, it had completely stopped snowing, and the
paths were comparatively clear.

The girls gathered expectantly in the hall, dressed according to their
Captain's directions.

"Are we going to hike?" asked Frances, looking about in vain for Miss
Phillips.

The jingle of sleighbells in front of the door gave an answer to this
question. Rushing outside, the girls beheld two sleighs, big enough to
carry all the troop. Miss Phillips herself was already seated in the
front of one of them, beside the driver, and was enjoying to the full
the Scouts' rapturous surprise.

"Now we understand about the snow!" cried Frances, jumping up eagerly
beside the Captain. "But where do the Boy Scouts come in?"

"They don't come in the sleigh at all," laughed Miss Phillips; "there
wouldn't be room!"

The girls knew it was no use to try to satisfy their curiosity by asking
their Captain questions. So they gave themselves up to the enjoyment of
the ride.

The air was now clear and bracing, the country beautiful, and the
sleighs seemed to fly along. Lily Andrews, who had always lived in New
York City, and one or two others, had never experienced the sensation
before; the smooth, gliding motion filled them with delight. All too
soon the hour passed, and they reached Miss Martin's.

"I wish it were twice as far!" cried Marjorie. Then, catching sight of
some girls of the other school, she changed her tone and called out a
greeting.

Miss Martin's whole school turned out to welcome them; they invited them
into their parlors, where steaming cocoa and cinnamon toast were served.
The girls were hungry, and, in spite of their protestations, somewhat
cold; but they soon warmed themselves before the cheerful fireplaces and
drank the hot cocoa.

It was nearly four o'clock when they began their demonstration. There
had been no special preparation; Miss Phillips announced that she would
call for events as she thought of them.

She summoned different girls for signalling, first-aid, knot-tying,
resuscitation, etc., including all the Scouts in the recitation of the
laws and pledge. To no girl did she give any special distinction and on
account of this Ruth was disappointed. She had hoped that Miss Phillips
would single out the Patrol leaders and place them in a position of
honor above all the others. Marjorie was well known to all the girls at
Miss Martin's because of her brilliant athletic record; Ruth wished the
girls to know that she was equally important. But Miss Phillips never
mentioned them.

As soon as the little celebration was over, the girls took the Scouts
over the school. Miss Martin's seminary was very much like Miss Allen's,
although not so progressive, or of quite so high a standard. More of the
latter's graduates attended colleges; but it was both older and larger
than Miss Martin's.

"You'll find that you never made a mistake in starting a troop,"
remarked Miss Phillips, after she had explained a great many details to
Miss Watson, who was to be Captain. "And it will be lots of fun for the
two schools. I have my plans all ready for this summer, but perhaps next
summer both troops could go to an organized camp together."

"What are we going to do this summer?" asked Ruth, who had overheard
part of the conversation.

"Wait and see!" replied Miss Phillips, mysteriously. "You will know
pretty soon!"

Regarding this almost as a rebuke, Ruth muttered disagreeably,

"Just so we don't waste any more money on thieves, I'll be satisfied,"
and turned away.

Miss Phillips did not overhear the remark, but Marjorie did, and it
brought tears to her eyes.

"Say, Ruth," she remarked, rather tartly, "why don't you win that medal
catching Frieda?"

Ruth shrugged her shoulders.

"I did more than anybody else by finding the canoe," she replied. "I
guess nobody else has a better claim to the medal than I have!"

After an early supper, the Scouts wrapped up warmly again, and climbed
merrily into the sleighs, bound, as they surmised, toward Miss Allen's.
The horses had been fed and rested; the snow on the road was packed
hard; the stars twinkled brightly, and the whole world glistened in the
star-light. But the ride was shorter than before, for after half an hour
the horses turned into a big gate. They were entering the grounds of
Episcopal Academy, the home of the Boy Scouts!

Before they had pulled up to a standstill, the doors were thrown open by
the boys, who were uttering great shouts of welcome. The girls jumped
joyfully to the ground.

"The Girl Scouts don't know what they're here for," laughed Miss
Phillips, while they were removing their wraps. "They think it's a
party!"

"Isn't it?" asked Marjorie, quite distressed.

"For some of the girls, but not for you!" replied the Captain,
significantly. "All the Scouts who wish to qualify for first-class test
are to take signalling with Mr. Remington. The rest of us will stay here
for games."

"Oh!" exclaimed Ruth, sinking down in her chair. "How could you,
Captain?"

"Why didn't you warn us?" demanded Ethel.

"I didn't want to make you nervous, or to spoil this afternoon's ride.
Now listen while I read the names of the girls who are to take the
test." And she proceeded to read the list of girls whom she had
previously announced as qualified. "I would like those twelve girls,"
she concluded, "to follow Mr. Remington to his office."

Marjorie arose with the others, and did as her Captain directed; but
with each step that took her nearer to the place of the examination, she
felt herself losing courage.

"Your handbook requires that you be able to send and receive semaphore
at the rate of thirty-two letters a minute," said Mr. Remington, when
they were all finally seated in the Boy Scout room; "but Miss Phillips
tells me the requirement has been lowered by National Headquarters to
sixteen. I shall, therefore, pass all of the girls who can receive at
the latter rate, but shall later test to see whether anyone can make the
higher record."

He proceeded to give the required examinations in both the semaphore and
the Morse codes, making them strict, as Miss Phillips had directed. Only
four of the twelve girls passed on both codes--Edith Evans, Ruth Henry,
Ethel Todd, and Marjorie Wilkinson. And, to Mr. Remington's amazement,
all of these girls passed the more difficult standard of thirty-two
letters a minute!

"I think you have all earned a chance to dance!" he said, leading the
way back to the big parlor where the rest of the young people were
enjoying themselves.

And Marjorie and Ruth both danced with happy hearts, for they felt that
the most difficult part of their first-class test was behind them, and
their trip to Washington practically assured.




CHAPTER XX

THE TRIP TO WASHINGTON


Miss Phillips had feared that more than eight girls would qualify as
first-class Scouts, and that, therefore, some would be disappointed at
not being included in the Washington trip; but she found that, as the
weeks went by, fewer girls than she had anticipated became eligible.
Under the rigid standards of the new handbook it was no easy matter to
become a first-class Scout. It was true that four girls had successfully
passed the signalling, but of these four, only Ruth had made an
acceptable map. For this reason it came about, just as she desired, that
she was the first Scout of Pansy troop to receive that honor.

When she was presented with the badge at the following Scout meeting,
she made no pretense at modesty. With a self-satisfied air, she strutted
forward in answer to her Captain's summons. "_The_ first-class Scout of
Pansy troop!" her manner announced, as plainly as if she had uttered the
very words.

"And I'll be the first Golden Eaglet!" she resolved, as she returned
after the presentation. For it was characteristic of Ruth Henry that she
always kept a goal in view.

Early in February, Marjorie, Edith, and Ethel fulfilled the requirements
and received their badges, outwardly more humbly, though secretly they
were as proud as Ruth. Their finer sensibilities, however, kept them
from openly gloating.

Two more weeks went by, and all the while Miss Phillips grew
increasingly anxious. The money was provided for eight; the opportunity
was precious! Would she be obliged to take only four girls because all
the other twenty Scouts, members of her own troop, were too lazy or too
stupid to pass the test? The idea was distasteful; at every meeting she
urged them on to increased activity.

A week later, she was partially rewarded, for Frances Wright and Lily
Andrews became first-class Scouts. Now Marjorie was happy; she could not
imagine a trip of this sort without her beloved room-mate. Lily,
however, was a plodder, and while she was never among the foremost
ranks, it was seldom that she was left out altogether.

"And now if we could only get Doris!" remarked Marjorie, when she and
Lily were privately celebrating the latter's victory. "The party
wouldn't be complete without her."

"She made a marvelous map at camp," commented Lily. "I wonder what is
keeping her back?"

"Signaling, I think. I say, Lil, couldn't we just make her practice till
she passes? We have two weeks yet!"

"Great idea, Marj!" agreed her room-mate; and the two girls hurried off
that very minute to put the plan into action.

Doris accepted the help gratefully, and practiced the letters steadily
until her ability had so materially improved that she felt qualified to
take the test. To the infinite satisfaction of all concerned, she
passed--two days before the girls were scheduled to leave. And, at the
same time, Helen Stewart fulfilled the requirements and brought the
party to the desired number of nine.

The girls preferred not to wear their Scout uniforms on the train, but
carried them along in case they might need them for some official
occasion. Miss Phillips said that she rather hoped there might be a
Scout rally while they were there, thus affording them a chance to meet
other Girl Scouts.

"How do you want to room?" she asked, as they were waiting in the
station. "A letter from the hotel says that there are three bedrooms and
a bath together on one side of the hall, and two--one is a single room
for me--on the other. Now who is rooming with whom?"

"Marj and I are together!" cried Lily, proudly.

"Frances and I," announced Ethel Todd.

"Doris and I," said Ruth.

"So Edith and Helen must be," laughed Miss Phillips. "Well, that works
out very well. Now she wants to come across the hall with me, and who
wants to stay on the other side?"

"Oh, let Lil and me be with you!" exclaimed Marjorie, eagerly; and as
she was the first to speak for the honor, none of the others protested.

With the exception of Edith and Miss Phillips, none of the party had
ever visited Washington before, and the trip from the start was filled
with interest. The girls watched everything out of the window, and
laughed and chatted all the way. Since it was vacation, and a party,
Miss Phillips permitted candy, and before they had gone very far Lily
produced a beautiful box which her father had sent to her that very day.

They reached the hotel in time for dinner Thursday evening. The rooms,
with their soft carpets, their luxurious chairs, pretty electric lights
and comfortable beds were a novelty to most of the Scouts.

Sitting at the hotel table, listening to the music while they ate, and
ordering from the menu cards, proved a delightful experience. The girls
could scarcely eat, so interested were they in looking around the big
dining-room, watching the people, and now and then catching sight of
themselves in the many mirrors about the walls; and all the while
conscious of the delicate odor of roses and the swinging rhythm of the
music.

"I think it would be fun enough to stay in a hotel for three days,"
remarked Ethel, sipping her consommé, "without doing another single
thing!"

"But our friend and benefactor wouldn't be satisfied with that,"
remarked Miss Phillips. "We are to see and learn things as well."

"Oh, please tell us who it is!" cried Ruth, almost swallowing her olive
in her haste to satisfy her curiosity.

"I dare not! I promised!"

"My, how you do love mysteries, Captain!" observed Ethel.

"Is it a man?" pursued Ruth.

Miss Phillips hesitated. "Yes, it is. I'll tell you that much. And I'll
tell you something more. He has promised to equip the girls for a canoe
trip this summer, if they win the Pioneer badge!"

"A canoe trip!" repeated Marjorie. "Oh, how wonderful!"

"It will be a nice change from regular camping," said Miss Phillips.
"But the pioneer test is a difficult one."

The girls discussed it for a while, and, after supper was over, went up
to their rooms. They were too tired even to go to the movies, but Miss
Phillips had brought cards, and they played a rubber of bridge before
seeking their beds.

They were up early the next morning to find the dining-room almost
empty. Again they had the fun of ordering "the things we don't get at
Miss Allen's," as they themselves put it, and the meal passed
pleasantly.

Most of the day was spent in sight-seeing. They visited the White House,
and the Capitol; stopped at the Smithsonian Institute and laughed over
the dresses the Presidents' wives had worn; took the elevator to the top
of Washington Monument; and, after luncheon, rode to Mt. Vernon. It
meant a great deal to them to see all the places they had read so much
about.

They came back to the hotel tired; but a bath, fifteen minutes' rest,
and fresh clothing, revived them; and at dinner they were as gay as
usual. In the evening they went to the theater.

On Saturday they took a sight-seeing bus about the city and ended up at
the Girl Scout Headquarters.

All of the girls were tremendously excited as they walked into the
office; it was the first time they had ever met other officers, or
visited any Scout office. Fortunately, Miss Phillips had insisted this
time that they all wear their Scout uniforms, and in these they felt
more at ease.

Instead of finding only one or two officials, the place was crowded with
them. The girls stepped back shyly, while Miss Phillips made the
advances.

"We are Girl Scouts from Miss Allen's Boarding School--in Pennsylvania,"
she explained; "we're seeing Washington, and, of course, we couldn't
miss the Girl Scout Headquarters."

The hostesses were most cordial, showing the girls everything, and then
inviting them to a big rally that afternoon.

"That reminds me," remarked one of the officers, who was evidently a
representative from National Headquarters in New York City, "I have a
list of Girl Scouts here, from all parts of the country, who want to
correspond with other Girl Scouts. Would you girls, any of you, like to
take some names?"

Marjorie was the first to accept the suggestion. "Oh, I would!" she
cried. "That would be lots of fun!"

The officer handed the list to her, and the girls all crowded about to
read the names, hoping that perhaps they might come across one that they
knew. But, recognizing none, they selected at random, while Marjorie
placed checks here and there in the list.

While she was still thus occupied, her eye fell suddenly upon a name
which seemed familiar. It aroused a vague sort of expectation within
her, as of some old association. Where had she heard it before: "Jennie
Perkins," Trenton, N. J.?

She wrinkled her brows for a moment, lost in thought. But her
uncertainty lasted only a second; in a flash, the significance of it
dawned upon her. That was the assumed name under which Frieda Hammer
must have worked at that Fifth Avenue tea-room! Could this
girl--evidently a Scout, and living in Trenton--possibly be Frieda?
Marjorie's heart leaped for joy, but she resolutely put down her hopes.
The whole thing was most improbable. The girl might easily return to
Trenton in quest of work, but Marjorie knew that her former dislike of
their troop, particularly of Ruth Henry, would prejudice her against
ever becoming a Girl Scout. And Frieda Hammer had never showed any signs
of sociability; she was the last girl in the world to desire to make new
friends by writing to unknown correspondents.

Still, Marjorie decided, she might as well select this name as any, for
all were unknown to her. She had nothing whatever to lose, and there was
one chance in a thousand that "Jennie Perkins" might be Frieda. Hastily
making a check beside the name, she returned the list to the officer.

Although Miss Phillips had intended to take the girls home after
luncheon, she changed her mind at their entreaties, and allowed them to
remain for the rally.

It was a magnificent sight to behold hundreds of Girl Scouts, all
dressed in uniform, gather together in the great hall, and to hear them
join, as in one voice, in the pledge to the flag and the oath of the
organization. More than one of the members of Pansy troop felt a
tightening sensation at their throats when the great throng of girls
sang the "Star Spangled Banner." The meeting brought to them an
impression that they would never forget, and prepared them in one way to
realize what it would mean to be part of a great organized camp.

They left the hall as soon as the address was over, in order that they
might make an early train home; for, instead of returning to Miss
Allen's school, each girl was to go to her own home, and Miss Phillips
was anxious that they all reach their destinations before dark.

The rally had been the most fitting conclusion that Miss Phillips could
have conceived. She realized this when she saw how deeply it had
impressed the girls.

"A glorious end of a glorious trip!" said Ethel enthusiastically, as
they got into the train.

And the shining eyes of the others confirmed their approval of her
opinion.




CHAPTER XXI

LETTERS


Marjorie could hardly wait until she reached home, so excited was she
about writing to the unknown Girl Scout. It would be a difficult matter,
too, for she wanted to write a general letter, and yet one which, if
Jennie Perkins should by any chance turn out to be Frieda Hammer, would
be appropriate.

The family were all so glad to see her and so anxious to hear about the
trip, that she at once gave up the idea of writing that night. Of
course, her mother would expect her to go to church the following day;
but after Sunday School she would undoubtedly be free.

But again her hopes were frustrated. Ruth sought her immediately after
class and walked home with her.

"Let's go for a walk, Marj," she said. "Harold's coming over for me at
your house, and I thought maybe Jack would go, too."

Marjorie frowned slightly; she did not particularly enjoy Harold
Mason's society, and she did so long to write that letter. But she did
not care to disclose any of her plans to Ruth; she had no desire to
encounter her ridicule.

"All right; if we don't stay out late. I asked mother to have an early
supper, for I want to write letters to-night!"

"John Hadley?" teased Ruth. "By the way, Harold knows him. He goes to
Princeton, too, now."

"He does! You never told me----"

"I never thought you were particularly interested in Harold Mason,
Marj!"

"Only as your friend, Ruth," laughed Marjorie.

The walk, just as Marjorie anticipated, was not particularly interesting
to her. Ruth monopolized the conversation, succeeding in keeping both
boys entertained by giving it a decidedly personal flavor. As Marjorie
was almost entirely left out, she became bored, and grew impatient to
get back. At last, when they were home, she told her mother she was
going to lock herself in her room that evening to avoid disturbance.

It was only after a great many attempts that she produced a letter which
met with her own satisfaction. She wanted it to be long enough, yet not
too long; appropriate for any Girl Scout, and also, if Jennie Perkins
should turn out to be Frieda, applicable and friendly towards the
runaway.

"I'm just going to send this," she thought; "there's no use writing it
over."

She held it up, however, and read it through for the third time.

     "DEAR JENNIE,

     "I hope you will excuse my using your first name right at the
     beginning, but since we are both Girl Scouts--really sisters, you
     know--I think it would be nice to get well acquainted right away!

     "What kind of a troop do you belong to? What is your flower name?
     And how many girls are there in it? It just seems as if I want to
     ask a million questions at once, but I will try to wait patiently
     till you answer.

     "Our Captain, Miss Phillips,--she is simply wonderful--took eight
     of us first-class Scouts to Washington for three days. We had a
     perfect time, lived in a big hotel, and saw all the sights and
     Saturday morning we went to the Scout office and it was there that
     I got your name so we could correspond.

     "And that reminds me, did you ever live in New York? I knew a
     girl--or rather I knew of her--and her name was the same as yours,
     who lived there once.

     "We went camping last year and had the loveliest time! If I ever
     meet you, I will tell you all about it but it would take too long
     in a letter. Next year our Captain says maybe we will take a canoe
     trip! Wouldn't that be fun?

     "I am crazy to hear about where you go to school and what class
     you're in! I'm a sophomore and I go to Miss Allen's boarding
     school.

     "We have another week of vacation here at home so I wish you would
     write to this address before I go back to school. Then I'll try to
     answer promptly, too.

         "Your Sister Scout,
         MARJORIE WILKINSON."

After the letter was posted, Marjorie waited breathlessly for an answer.
She watched for the postman faithfully, refusing to go away from the
house when he was due. But three days passed by without her hearing a
word.

On the fourth day, she became so restless and nervous that her mother
noticed that something was wrong, and asked what the trouble was.

"Nothing, only I'm corresponding with a Girl Scout in Trenton, and I
hoped I'd get a letter before I go back. And to-morrow's Friday--there
are only two days left."

Mrs. Wilkinson gazed searchingly at her daughter. Marjorie had always
been truthful, but this explanation did not sound plausible. Girls did
not usually get so worked up over letters from other girls whom they
had never seen. That part of the explanation was true, she knew; for
Marjorie could not conceal her eagerness for the postman, and her
depression when she received nothing. But Mrs. Wilkinson feared that her
interest had something to do with John Hadley, and she sighed. Marjorie
was too young to care seriously for anyone yet.

But Friday morning's mail brought the coveted letter. Marjorie seized it
eagerly and ran off with it to her own room. Assuredly, it would tell
her something about Frieda!

The handwriting was a trifle cruder than that of most girls of her own
age, but she hardly noticed that. Feverishly, she tore open the
envelope, and read,

     "DEAR MARJORIE,

     "I was very glad to receive your letter so soon, hardly hoping
     anyone would want to correspond right now. I guess when you hear
     that I am a mill girl you will not want to correspond. I have
     worked in Trenton going on four months now and I like it very much.
     I go to night school and there I met my girl friend and we started
     the Scouts here. I am only a tenderfoot now, hoping to be a
     second-class Scout before summer. Our troop never went camping yet.
     We are too poor.

     "Hoping that you will still want to write to me even though I do
     work, I am yours truly,

         "JENNIE PERKINS."

"But she doesn't say whether she ever lived in New York, or where she
comes from!" cried Marjorie, in despair. "I'm just as much in the dark
as ever!

"I'll just have to get it out of her, bit by bit. And maybe, even if she
isn't Frieda Hammer, Pansy troop could help her a whole lot."

So Marjorie decided to write to her again immediately, telling her more
about the troop, their hikes, and their good times. She posted the
letter Saturday morning. She knew, of course, that she and Ruth were
taking the Sunday train to Miss Allen's.

As they entered the main hall, Ruth remarked that they might as well
stop in the post-office.

"We probably won't get anything," she said; "but somebody might have
written here."

Marjorie's heart bounded with sudden joy when she beheld a letter in her
own mail-box. It was registered, too; evidently the post-mistress had
signed for it. Seizing it hastily, she looked expectantly at the
postmark. Her hopes fell; it was stamped "New York." She was
disappointed at this fact, but nevertheless she opened the letter
eagerly; for school girls do not receive registered letters every day.

The first thing that caught her eye was a well-known greenback.

"Money!" she cried. "Look, Ruth--twenty--thirty--thirty-five dollars!"

"Who from?" asked Ruth, with surprise.

Marjorie turned the paper over in which the bills were enclosed, and
discovered some writing, which she proceeded to read aloud, while Ruth
listened with increasing amazement:

     "From Frieda Hammer for canoe and carfare belonging to M. Wilkinson
     and Pansy troop Girl Scouts."

"And postmarked New York!" repeated Marjorie, not knowing whether to be
glad or sorry at its receipt. For she rejoiced that Frieda had paid back
the Scouts' money, but all her hopes of her unknown correspondent being
Frieda were dashed to the ground. For, undoubtedly, she concluded, the
girl was still in New York!




CHAPTER XXII

THE PIONEER BADGE


"I do not believe our benefactor, whoever he is, picked out the hardest
test in Scouting," remarked Ruth, as Captain Phillips finished
explaining the requirements.

"I agree with you, Ruth," assented Miss Phillips. "But we shall have a
hike every Saturday night during April to study and practice the
different requirements. The final hike, to learn how to build a lean-to,
will be to the Boy Scouts' cabin; for they are going to teach us.

"Now," she concluded, "there is one thing more I want to talk about--and
that is the money we have in the treasury. Counting what Frieda Hammer
just returned to Marjorie, there is about three hundred dollars--a
little more, perhaps. That is a lot of money for a troop like ours. And
since we earned it to use for our 'Good Turn,' I don't think it would be
right for us to spend it upon ourselves. But what do you all think?"

"I agree with you perfectly, Captain," said Edith Evans. "Just because
one plan failed, that is no reason why the troop should stop all of its
good work. I suggest that a committee be appointed to visit the local
charity organization, and find out where assistance is most needed."

But before anyone else could speak, Marjorie jumped to her feet.

"Captain, are we sure that we have failed with Frieda? Doesn't the very
fact that she returned the things she took, of her own free will, show
that wherever she is, she is progressing? You all know that the Frieda
Hammer we knew at camp would not have considered it wrong to steal, or
would even have thought of returning the goods! So it's just possible,
don't you think, that she may turn up? Couldn't we wait just a little
bit longer?"

Lily and Doris, who both knew how close the project was to Marjorie's
heart, spoke in favor of waiting until the first of June.

"That will still leave us time to spend the money before the seniors,
who helped to earn it as much as any of us, leave," put in Ethel, who
usually took sides with Marjorie in a discussion.

Ruth said nothing; she knew it would be of no avail. For by this time
she was beginning to realize Marjorie's popularity, and considered it
more discreet not to oppose her openly.

Accordingly, Marjorie got her way. She had two months left in which to
trace Frieda, and, if she found her, to offer her a new chance. The
whole affair had grown to be an obsession with her; it seemed as if she
desired it more than anything else in the world.

It was still very cold when the first Saturday in April arrived; but
Miss Phillips told the girls to be prepared to hike, no matter what the
weather might be. Early in the afternoon they started off, well
fortified against the cold.

"We are going to the cabin to-day," announced the Captain, as they
walked along in a group. "Mr. Remington and two of the boys will be
there to give us a lesson in the use of an axe."

"Which two boys?" asked Doris innocently, betraying the fact that she
was more interested in the boys than in learning woodcraft.

Everybody laughed.

"I won't tell you!" replied Miss Phillips, ever mysterious; and each
girl secretly hoped it was the boy she liked best.

"It certainly is cold for April," remarked Ethel.

"Yes; it's an east wind, too," observed Miss Phillips. "And in this part
of the country, that means rain."

"How do you know it's an east wind, Captain?" asked Marjorie.

"Well, I happen to know that we are walking towards the north, and since
I can feel it blowing against me on the right side, I naturally know it
to be an east wind," explained the Captain. "If I didn't know which
direction is north, I couldn't tell an east wind from a west wind. But I
can tell you how to determine which quarter the wind is from when it is
not blowing strong enough to feel it against you. There are several
simple ways: one is to watch the way smoke travels; another is to note
the movement of the treetops. But sometimes you have neither smoke nor
trees at hand; then the best method is to put your forefinger in your
mouth and moisten it, and hold it up in the air: the side which feels
coolest is the side the wind is blowing on. I've never known that way to
fail, in my own experience, even when there did not seem to be a breath
of air stirring."

All the girls who heard this description, immediately stuck their
fingers into their mouths and then held them in the air, to try it.

"Mine feels the same temperature all the way around," observed Ruth.

"Oh, that is because there is too much wind to-day," replied Miss
Phillips. "You can really tell better by that method when the wind is
just perceptible, than when it is strong."

They reached the trolley line, upon which they rode for several miles,
and then hiked the remaining distance. It was not yet three o'clock when
they arrived at the cabin.

"Hurray for the Girl Scouts!" shouted a familiar voice, and Dick
Roberts and Marjorie's brother Jack flung open the wooden door. Mr.
Remington, behind them, echoed a more dignified welcome.

"Did you bring the axe?" asked Marjorie.

The Scoutmaster pointed to a leather sheath, fastened to his belt.

"Here's my _Plumb_," he said; "it's the official Boy Scout axe. I always
carry it when we go into the woods."

"But, Captain Phillips," protested Doris, "you surely don't expect us to
wear those things in our belts, do you?"

"Not at teas and on shopping expeditions!" laughed Miss Phillips; and
the girls smiled at the idea of dainty Doris Sands decorated with such a
deadly weapon on her person. A bunch of violets seemed more appropriate
for her adornment.

Mr. Remington asked the girls to pay close attention while he explained
the general rules and precautions in the use of the axe. At intervals
during his talk, he called for demonstrations, first by Jack and then by
Dick, until all the important points had been emphasized.

"And now for volunteers!" he called, when his brief discourse was
finished.

Ruth Henry stepped forward bravely.

"It's pretty sharp," said Jack, handing the axe to her carefully.

Ruth picked it up, and lifted it boldly to her shoulder. Keeping her
eye on a certain spot in the log at which Mr. Remington directed her to
aim, she swung the axe too quickly. Her effort was good, but her grasp
not sufficiently tight; the tool slipped from her hand and fell swiftly
to the ground, missing her foot by only an inch or two.

"Ruth! Do be careful!" shrieked Doris. "Oh, I know we'll kill
ourselves!"

"No, you won't," said Mr. Remington, reassuringly. "Now, rest a minute,
and then try again."

This time, although she wielded the axe awkwardly, she managed to hit
her mark.

All that afternoon the Girl Scouts resolutely stuck to their task, until
their hands became sore and blistered, and their shoulders ached from
the exercise. Finally, Mr. Remington called to them to stop,
complimenting them upon their perseverance.

"But you will need a great deal more practice before you attempt to
build the shack and the fireplace," he concluded.

"I thought we would go out the next two Saturdays and practice what you
have taught us," said Miss Phillips; "and in the meantime, I will give
the rest of the Pioneer test. Then, the last Saturday in April, I will
bring all of the girls that have successfully passed the other
requirements, to try out in this."

"Very good," replied Mr. Remington. "The plan suits me. Let me know how
many girls you expect to have, and I'll bring the same number of boys,
and we'll make a picnic of it."

"And you girls all work hard!" said Jack, "for we want a big crowd. The
more the merrier!"

And, indeed, the Girl Scouts meant to work hard, for the passing of the
Pioneer test carried with it such a wonderful reward. Even the new
girls, who had all successfully passed their second-class tests by that
time, threw themselves wholeheartedly into the effort. The days flew
swiftly by; all too soon, it seemed to the girls who did not consider
themselves sufficiently prepared, the time for the announcement of those
eligible for the final test arrived. Of the twenty-four girls in the
troop, there were a number who had no expectation of being included
among the list, for one reason or another. Among this group were several
of the seniors, who expected to work during the summer, and, therefore,
did not try to pass the test; and several of the newer girls had found
the effort beyond them.

Miss Phillips felt, however, that she had reason to be proud of the
number of candidates who had qualified thus far. She read the list at
the Scout meeting on the Friday evening preceeding the final hike and
picnic with the Boy Scouts.

"I wish that we might include everybody," she said; "but I realize that
would be impossible. However, I congratulate the following girls:

"Edith Evans, Helen Stewart, Frances Wright, Ethel Todd, Marian Guard,
Ada Mearns, Lily Andrews, Ruth Henry, Doris Sands, Marjorie Wilkinson,
Anna Cane, Evelyn Hopkins, Florence Evans, Alice Endicott, Mildred
Cavin.

"Of course," added Miss Phillips, "this does not mean that you will all
fifteen pass the Pioneer test. Indeed, the worst is yet to come. But the
final decision rests with Mr. Remington."

The following day was mild and warm, and the girls were all in the
highest spirits. Arriving at the cabin, fifteen Boy Scouts greeted them
noisily, asking them provoking questions about the shack they intended
to build, vainly endeavoring to catch them. But the girls were well
prepared, and more or less confident of success.

"I never saw such progress," commented Mr. Remington, as he set the
girls to work. "Why, with a hundred years' practice, they might turn out
to be as good as my boys!"

"Mr. Remington," said Ruth, as she paused for a moment after putting a
stick in position, "won't you please remove these troublesome insects?
They retard my progress!"

"Insects!" repeated the Scoutmaster; "do you mean ants?"

"No," laughed Ruth; "big insects! Boys!"

"All right! Suppose you boys all go and collect stones for the
fireplace, so that the girls can set to work at that as soon as they
finish their lean-tos!"

"And won't we get a minute to rest?" asked Ada, lazily. She was
beginning to be tired already.

"Rest!" exclaimed Mr. Remington; "you surely didn't come here for that!
But you can take it easy at supper, for the boys are going to prepare
the whole meal for you."

It was almost dark when the weary Girl Scouts gathered about the
fireplace where the supper was to be eaten. Never did a meal taste so
good, for the girls thought they had never been so tired or so hungry
before. They talked little, but they were quite content. The lean-tos
and the fireplace were all finished; they were now enjoying not only the
satisfaction of achievement, but the anticipation of their great reward:
the summer's canoe trip. No wonder they were happy!

"Can't you tell us who passed?" begged Ruth, as they were finishing
their cookies.

But Mr. Remington shook his head.

"I don't know myself, Ruth," he replied. "I gave certain marks for
certain things. I shall have to add the averages up at home, and send
the list to Miss Phillips."

"Then we'll know to-morrow?" pursued Ruth.

"You'll know at Scout meeting next Friday!" declared Miss Phillips, in
the tone which everyone knew to be final.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE TRIP TO TRENTON


When Marjorie thought of what the passing of the Pioneer test would mean
to her, she felt that nothing could bring her more happiness than to
hear her own and Lily's name read from the list by their Captain at
Scout meeting that night. But when she perceived an attractive little
envelope in her mail that evening, and when she saw upon examination
that the postmark was Princeton, she experienced an even greater thrill
of anticipation.

The envelope proved to contain an invitation from John Hadley for his
club dance at Princeton. Marjorie uttered a little squeal of joy, and
wished that Lily were there to hear of her good fortune.

She turned around quickly, for someone was entering the office. It was
Ruth Henry!

"You look as if you'd struck a gold mine, Marj!" said the other girl.
"Whatever has happened?"

"Just a dance invitation. But a very nice one!"

"I seem to have a letter, too!" exclaimed Ruth, always anxious for mail.
"I wonder who from!"

"Why, it's the same shape as mine!" cried Marjorie, in astonishment.
"Could it possibly be from Princeton?"

"Very likely!" said Ruth, proceeding to open it.

"Do you suppose Harold Mason belongs to the same club as John Hadley?"
asked Marjorie.

Laughingly, they put the invitations together. They were identical--the
only dissimilarity being the boys' visiting cards.

"What fun!" said Ruth. "It will be so much nicer to go together."

"But how can we go?" demanded Marjorie, her face suddenly sobering.
"Miss Allen would never let us."

"We won't ask Miss Allen!" declared Ruth, boldly. "We'll just go home
over the week end--it's the second Saturday in May, you know--and ask
either of our mothers to chaperone us!"

The girls discussed the plan as they went in to supper. So excited were
they that they almost forgot that the list of those who had passed the
Pioneer badge would be read at Scout meeting.

But the other girls had not forgotten, and when Miss Phillips realized
their nervousness she decided not to delay the proceeding any longer
than necessary. Accordingly, as soon as the opening ceremony and
preliminary business was over, she made the announcement.

"I am afraid there will be some disappointments," she said, "but it
could not be helped. You have all been marked fairly, and I am sure you
would not want to pass too easily.

"And for the benefit of the girls who can't go on the canoe trip, I want
to say that the next summer I intend to take the troop to a big
organized camp where there are other Scout troops. And I shall include
everyone who wants to go, provided, of course, that she is at least a
second-class Scout.

"I congratulate the following girls, and request that they come forward
to receive the Pioneer badge:

"Edith Evans, Helen Stewart, Frances Wright, Ethel Todd, Marian Guard,
Lily Andrews, Ruth Henry, Marjorie Wilkinson, Doris Sands, Florence
Evans, Alice Endicott, Mildred Cavin, Evelyn Hopkins."

Amid the shouts of their companions, the girls stepped up to receive
their badges. None of the girls whose names had not been called seemed
really disappointed; probably they had all realized that they stood no
chance of passing the test. The successful Scouts had earned their
reward faithfully; there was no jealousy or envy among the less
fortunate.

Marjorie, therefore, was perfectly satisfied with the results. She had
lost her own canoe, but she had it back again, and now she was to have a
glorious trip during the vacation, accompanied by Lily and Doris, and
her beloved Captain. She was thankful, too, that Ruth had received the
badge; for, had she been left out, she might have made things
uncomfortable for the girls who had passed.

While Marjorie was waiting for an answer to her letter from her mother,
she was surprised to receive a letter from Jennie Perkins. It was just
another friendly letter, telling little about herself, and much about
her troop and its activities. Marjorie looked immediately for the
postmark, and was disappointed to find it again Trenton, and not New
York.

"We are going to hike to Princeton next Saturday," she wrote, "and
perhaps go through the college. Some of us have uniforms," she added;
"and some of us just have to wear our plain clothes. I am in this class
for I have not saved enough money yet to buy mine. But I want to get it
by June first, as that is my birthday."

Marjorie opened her eyes wide as she read these words; Jennie Perkins
would be at Princeton the same day she would--at least if her mother let
her go! What should she do? Tell her, and try to meet her? But now that
she was almost convinced that Jennie was not Frieda Hammer, she was not
so anxious to meet her; and if she were Frieda, under the assumed name,
the latter would probably avoid such a meeting.

"I don't believe I'll say anything," she finally decided; "for, even if
I were sure I wanted to meet her, how could I tell when I'd get to
Princeton? And a misunderstanding might spoil a very pleasant
correspondence."

Much to Marjorie's joy, Mrs. Wilkinson wrote that she and Mr. Wilkinson
would drive the girls to Trenton the afternoon of the dance, and make
arrangements to stay at some hotel there over night; and that the boys
could call for them there. The plan suited Marjorie perfectly; the
arrangement of staying in Trenton meant another hope of meeting
Frieda--or, rather, Jennie.

When Saturday came, and Marjorie and Ruth left the school together, it
seemed quite like old times; for recently they had not spent much time
together. Marjorie and Lily had become inseparable, while Ruth spent her
time with many different girls.

When they reached their destination, both girls were surprised to be
met, not by members of their own families, but by Harold Mason.

"And when did you come home?" asked Ruth, nevertheless beaming a
welcome.

"This morning; and John's with me. We mean to drive you girls over!"

"Isn't it pretty far?" inquired Marjorie, doubtfully. She could hardly
take in Harold's words--that John Hadley was actually visiting him. Why
had he not driven over to the station to meet them?

Reading Marjorie's thoughts, Harold explained that John was expecting a
long-distance call from Trenton.

"His mother is staying there with a friend, and as she is one of the
patronesses of the dance she will chaperone you girls. We thought we'd
drive over this afternoon and have supper with Mrs. Hadley's friend, and
then all go to the dance. And we'll all drive back here afterward--Mrs.
Hadley and John are to stay at our house."

"Lovely!" cried Ruth; for this program stretched the party over a longer
period than they had anticipated.

Marjorie had not seen John since the previous Thanksgiving and she
realized that she was becoming rather excited. When the machine drove up
to Mason's, he was on the porch to meet them.

"By George! this is great!" he cried, running down and opening the door
of the car. "I'm so glad to see you--both!"

He shook hands with Ruth and Marjorie, and the girls got out of the car,
Ruth running in next door to find her mother.

"It was lovely of you to invite me," said Marjorie, a little at a loss
regarding what to say after so many months.

"It was wonderful of you to come," he replied, sincerely. A sudden pang
of jealousy seized him. What had Marjorie been doing all this time? Had
another fellow cut him out? They had exchanged only two or three letters
during the whole year, and all of these had been very impersonal.

"If you don't mind," said Marjorie, turning to Harold, "I'd like to go
see mother. For I'll be with you people all afternoon and evening."

"Certainly," assented Harold; and John flushed at his own egotism in
expecting Marjorie to prefer his society to that of her own family.

A little after two o'clock the Ford sedan again drove up to Wilkinsons',
and Marjorie, with her little bag in her hand, appeared. Ruth was
already in the front seat with Harold, and John got out and assisted
Marjorie into the back seat beside him.

If John Hadley hoped for a tete-a-tete with Marjorie, he was greatly
disappointed, for both girls seemed to be plotting to keep the
conversation general. They asked all about college, and the club, and
the dance; Marjorie wanted to hear something about the towns of Trenton
and Princeton; and both girls talked animatedly about the summer's canoe
trip.

"And we both passed the Pioneer test!" explained Ruth, triumphantly.

"Great!" exclaimed John; and a minute description of the hike and the
test followed.

It was not long before they reached Trenton, but before the machine
crossed the bridge, it passed a certain dingy little boat-house, and
Ruth and Harold exchanged significant glances, unobserved by the
occupants of the back seat.

As the car continued along the principal business street, slowing down
for traffic, Marjorie noticed a big building at the corner, from which
a great crowd of girls were pouring. As they approached, she realized
that some of the costumes were strangely familiar; then in a moment it
dawned upon her that they were Girl Scouts!

"Oh, wait, wait!" she demanded, greatly excited. "Please stop! They're
Girl Scouts!"

"What if they are?" asked Ruth, coolly, regarding her in disdain. Was
Marjorie crazy?

"I want to get out! Oh, please stop!" begged the frantic girl.

Harold obediently pulled up to the curb, although he, too, shared Ruth's
opinion. It seemed silly--but it was beyond him to understand a girl.

"Aren't you going to get out, Ruth? Remember our fourth law!"

"Marj, that's silly. Just because we're 'sisters to every other Girl
Scout' is no reason why we should get out and make friends with a pack
of mill girls!"

"Well, then wait for me!"

And in a flash she was out of the machine and up the steps. Venturing
the Girl Scout salute, she asked the girls politely,

"Can anyone tell me whether Jennie Perkins belongs to this troop?" Her
voice trembled so that she could hardly speak.

"Yes--she's in the office, waiting for her pay envelope," replied one of
the girls. "Turn to the left once you're inside."

Marjorie needed no second invitation; in a second she had pushed open
the half-closed door. She stood face to face with Frieda Hammer!

"Frieda!" she cried, rushing to her, and throwing her arms about her
neck.

"Marjorie!" sobbed the girl, completely breaking down, and hiding her
head upon the other girl's shoulder.

In the brief glimpse that Marjorie had of Frieda, she saw how the girl
had changed. Her clothes were neat, and her hair was arranged
attractively. Moreover, she looked happy; the old, sullen, distrustful
look was gone. She was a real Girl Scout now, and the transformation was
marvelous. The miracle was accomplished, though by a far different
method from any Marjorie ever dreamed of.

Little by little Frieda told Marjorie the story of her struggle; then of
her work here, the Girl Scout troop which she had really started
herself, the saving of the money for Marjorie's canoe, which she had had
mailed in New York in order to mislead the latter, and finally of her
progress at night school.

"Why, it sounds just like a fairy tale," said Marjorie. "Now when will
you come back to us?"

"I want to work this summer, and then--if Pansy troop still wants to
help me--to go to full-time school in the fall."

"Indeed, we do want to help," said Marjorie passionately. "But you must
fulfill one condition: come to Miss Allen's before May first. After
that we were to give you up as lost."

"I will!" agreed Frieda. "Could I come next Saturday afternoon?"

"Yes; it's the day of the Scouts' out-door musical comedy. Promise me?"

"I promise!"

"Need any money for carfare?"

"No, thanks," replied Frieda, laughing. "And I expect to have my uniform
by that time. But don't tell a soul that you've seen me, till then!" she
entreated.

"Not a soul!" answered Marjorie.

Then, kissing her good-bye, she was gone as suddenly as she had
appeared.

"Did you have a nice time, Marj?" asked Ruth, rather disagreeably, as
Marjorie climbed into the car again. "You stayed long enough!"

"The best time I ever had in my life!" replied the happy girl,
emphatically and truthfully.




CHAPTER XXIV

MARJORIE'S TRIUMPH


When Mrs. Hadley afterwards spoke of Marjorie Wilkinson, she called her
"the girl with the shining eyes." For when the machine stopped in front
of the house in Trenton where she was visiting, and the young people ran
up the steps to greet her, Marjorie was still radiant from her great
discovery. For a time John's mother, who immediately took a tremendous
liking to the girl, attributed her joy to anticipation of the pleasure
that awaited her. But later she realized that the cause for it was
something deeper, something within Marjorie's heart.

John, too, admitted reluctantly to himself that he was not a part of her
happiness. It had, he realized, something to do with the Girl Scouts,
and especially with her brief visit at that factory. But what it could
possibly be, he had not the slightest idea.

The girls soon became entirely at home in their hostess's house, singing
and playing the piano until it was time to dress for dinner.

When Marjorie came downstairs again, dressed in the pale blue georgette
which she had worn at the sophomore reception, John Hadley thought he
had never seen anyone so beautiful. Suddenly he realized, although he
was only nineteen years of age, how tremendously he cared for this girl.
Working hard all year, partially earning his way through college, he had
little time to write to her; again he wondered what she had been doing,
and whether any of the other Boy Scouts had claimed her attention. With
a pang of jealousy, he became aware of the fact that she did not care
for him as he did for her--to the exclusion of all others of the
opposite sex. But John Hadley forgot that Marjorie was only
sixteen--three years younger than himself.

Neither of the girls had ever attended a college function of any kind
before, and they were thrilled with the experience. In spite of the fact
that many of the other girls wore bobbed hair, and all had short skirts,
they felt exceptionally youthful. Marjorie felt shy, too, and at the end
of almost every dance she brought her partner over to Mrs. Hadley's
corner, as if seeking her protection. The woman was subtly flattered; if
Marjorie had tried to win her affection, she could not have chosen a
more direct method. But she was all unconscious of the impression she
was making.

Although the affair was not to be over until twelve, the boys had not
filled out the girls' programs for the last dances. So, in accordance
with Mrs. Wilkinson's wishes, they started for home in the machine by
half eleven. To her surprise, Marjorie found that she was sleepy; and
making no attempt at conversation, she leaned back against the cushions.
In a few minutes she was fast asleep, her head resting against Mrs.
Hadley's shoulder.

Sunday passed quickly for the girls, for they were both tired out, and
their parents let them sleep late. At three o'clock they took the train
for school.

"Nothing but rehearsals!" yawned Ruth. "Don't you wish the operetta were
over?"

"Yes--and no," replied Marjorie, thinking of Frieda's promise. "I don't
mind rehearsing much. But, then, I haven't a big part."

"No; neither you nor I can sing wonderfully, can we? But didn't it make
you feel the least bit badly, Marj, after being heroine last year, to
have to take a back seat this time?"

Marjorie regarded Ruth with curiosity. This, in a nutshell, summed up
Ruth's character. She could never bear to "take a back seat."

"Not a bit! With basket-ball and everything, I was glad not to have to
work so hard. And then I've got my canoe again, you know!"

"Thanks to me!" said Ruth, proudly.

"Thanks to father!" returned Marjorie, a little sharply. It was tiresome
the way Ruth was always fishing for compliments.

"I say, though," observed Ruth, "I wish I could earn that medal for
locating Frieda Hammer. It would be the first medal of merit in the
troop!"

"Medal!" exclaimed Marjorie. "Goodness, I had forgotten all about it!"

"And had you forgotten all about her, too?"

"No, indeed," replied Marjorie, warmly. "She'll turn up some day. And if
she does, Ruth, you've got to forget that she ever stole anything. For
she's made it up, you know!"

Marjorie looked straight into Ruth's eyes, and seemed to pierce into the
hidden motives of her life. Ruth lowered her lids under the penetrating
gaze, and answered, somewhat doggedly,

"All right! Whatever you say!"

"Thanks, Ruth!"

The train arrived just on time and the girls went directly to their
rooms. Marjorie proceeded to tell Lily all about the dance.

"Is that what makes you look so happy, Marj?"

"Partly; but there's something else, too."

"Don't you want to tell me about it?" This softly, without curiosity.

"I'm dying to, Lil; but I'm so afraid it won't come true, I just don't
dare. It's too wonderful!"

"It's about Frieda."

"Lily Andrews!" cried Marjorie, aghast. "How did you ever guess it?"

"From your expression. I know you pretty well now, Marj!"

But Marjorie would not permit herself to tell even Lily; she had given
her word to Frieda that she would keep it a secret, and she meant to
keep her promise.

Saturday came with weather clear, warm, and beautiful. The operetta,
which was really a spring festival, was to be given in the open-air
amphitheater of the school, with the natural scenery of the woods and
the lake for a background. The Scouts, in their filmy white and green
costumes and flowing hair, looked like the fairy and wood-people they
were to represent. Ethel Todd had the leading part; Ruth and Marjorie
were merely in the chorus.

Marjorie dressed early, and, slipping a cape over her costume, went to
meet each train. Finally, on the last one to arrive before the play was
to begin, she was rewarded. A neat-looking Girl Scout in khaki uniform
stepped from the train and hurried towards her.

It was Frieda Hammer!

The girls kissed each other and went up the walk arm in arm. Marjorie
knew that Miss Phillips and most of the Scouts would be behind the
scenes at that time, so she took Frieda straight to her mother and
father. She merely introduced her as a "Girl Scout from Trenton," placed
her beside her mother and Jack, and went back of the scenes.

"May we have a little meeting after the play?" she begged Miss Phillips.
"Right here--it will only take a second! Oh, please!"

The Captain consented, for she was too busy to argue.

The operetta was charming, and splendidly performed; it was pronounced
the prettiest thing ever given at Miss Allen's. During the intermission
the Principal told the audience about the Scout canoe trip, stating that
the proceeds from this play would be used to buy food, and that an
anonymous friend had offered to supply the canoes.

After the final chorus was over, Marjorie appeared immediately--almost
miraculously, it seemed to Frieda--among the audience, and sought her
family. She was delighted to find Jack and Frieda laughing and chatting
pleasantly, quite as if they had known each other all their lives. Could
this be the same girl who had uttered such harsh words to Mrs. Johnson
last fall, and slammed the door in their faces? She had changed utterly;
suffering, responsibility, kindness, work, and the influence of the Girl
Scout principles in her life had all helped to accomplish it.

"I want you to come back and meet the members of our troop," she said,
taking Frieda's hand. "They are waiting--but they won't wait long."

She found the girls gathered around Miss Phillips, intoxicated with
their success, but impatient of the delay that kept them from joining
their friends in the audience.

"Captain! Girls!" interrupted Marjorie, out of breath from her haste and
excitement. "I want to introduce a Girl Scout from Pine Cone troop of
Trenton. But," she added,--"first of all she belongs to Pansy troop.
Miss Frieda Hammer!"

The girls could only gasp at these words; for it was not until after a
second look that they recognized the country girl their troop had tried
to adopt. The transformation was wonderful, the triumph complete! And
they all realized that it was Marjorie's!

"And you're a second-class Scout!" cried Ethel, noticing the clover on
her sleeve.

"And--own--a--pioneer--badge!" said Ruth, in amazement. "Why, you can go
on the canoe trip!"

"I only won it last Saturday," said Frieda. "Oh, I should love to go on
your canoe trip--but--I don't belong to Pansy troop!"

"You certainly do!" protested Lily.

"I tell you what I could do!" cried Frieda, with a flash of inspiration.
"Do you need a cook?"

"Indeed we do," answered Miss Phillips. "I said only yesterday that we
must get some one. Can you cook?"

"I think so!"

"Then you're hired!"

"Hurray for our new Scout!" they all cried, linking arms in a great
chain.

"And for our 'Good Turn!'" exclaimed Ruth. "It's done at last."

"By Marjorie Wilkinson!" added Miss Phillips. Then, under her breath,
"The Truest Girl Scout!"

The next volume in this series will tell of the Girl Scouts' Canoe Trip.

THE END




The Girl Scouts Series

BY EDITH LAVELL

A new copyright series of Girl Scouts stories by an author of wide
experience in Scouts' craft, as Director of Girl Scouts of Philadelphia.

Clothbound, with Attractive Color Designs.

PRICE, 65 CENTS EACH.

THE GIRL SCOUTS AT MISS ALLEN'S SCHOOL

THE GIRL SCOUTS AT CAMP

THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN

THE GIRL SCOUTS' CANOE TRIP

THE GIRL SCOUTS' RIVALS

       *       *       *       *       *

Marjorie Dean College Series

BY PAULINE LESTER.

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean High School Series.

Those who have read the Marjorie Dean High School Series will be eager
to read this new series, as Marjorie Dean continues to be the heroine in
these stories.

All Clothbound. Copyright Titles.

PRICE, 65 CENTS EACH.

MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE FRESHMAN

MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE SOPHOMORE

MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE JUNIOR

MARJORIE DEAN, COLLEGE SENIOR

       *       *       *       *       *

Marjorie Dean High School Series

BY PAULINE LESTER

Author of the Famous Marjorie Dean College Series

These are clean, wholesome stories that will be of great interest to all
girls of high school age.

All Cloth Bound          Copyright Titles

PRICE, 65 CENTS EACH

MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMAN

MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SOPHOMORE

MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL JUNIOR

MARJORIE DEAN, HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR

       *       *       *       *       *

The Blue Grass Seminary Girls Series

BY CAROLYN JUDSON BURNETT

For Girls 12 to 16 Years

All Cloth Bound Copyright Titles

PRICE, 65 CENTS EACH

Splendid stories of the Adventures of a Group of Charming Girls.

THE BLUE GRASS SEMINARY GIRLS' VACATION ADVENTURES; or, Shirley Willing
to the Rescue.

THE BLUE GRASS SEMINARY GIRLS' CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS; or, A Four Weeks'
Tour with the Glee Club.

THE BLUE GRASS SEMINARY GIRLS IN THE MOUNTAINS; or, Shirley Willing on a
Mission of Peace.

THE BLUE GRASS SEMINARY GIRLS ON THE WATER; or, Exciting Adventures on a
Summerer's Cruise Through the Panama Canal.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mildred Series

BY MARTHA FINLEY

For Girls 12 to 16 Years.

All Cloth Bound    Copyright Titles

PRICE, 65 CENTS EACH

A Companion Series to the famous "Elsie" books by the same author.

MILDRED KEITH

MILDRED AT ROSELAND

MILDRED AND ELSIE

MILDRED'S MARRIED LIFE

MILDRED AT HOME

MILDRED'S BOYS AND GIRLS

MILDRED'S NEW DAUGHTER

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price
by the publishers.

A. L. BURT COMPANY
114-120 EAST 23rd STREET     NEW YORK





End of Project Gutenberg's The Girl Scouts' Good Turn, by Edith Lavell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRL SCOUTS' GOOD TURN ***

***** This file should be named 24248-8.txt or 24248-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/2/4/24248/

Produced by D Alexander and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
