The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Little Girl in Old Salem, by Amanda Minnie
Douglas


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Little Girl in Old Salem


Author: Amanda Minnie Douglas



Release Date: March 1, 2007  [eBook #20722]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD SALEM***


E-text prepared by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, J. P. W. Fraser, Emmy, and
the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/c/)



A Little Girl in Old Salem


       *       *       *       *       *

   THE "LITTLE GIRL" SERIES

          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD NEW YORK.
          HANNAH ANN; A SEQUEL.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD BOSTON.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD PHILADELPHIA.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD WASHINGTON.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD NEW ORLEANS.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD DETROIT.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD ST. LOUIS.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD CHICAGO.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD SAN FRANCISCO.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD QUEBEC.
          A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD BALTIMORE.


       *       *       *       *       *


A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD SALEM

by

AMANDA M. DOUGLAS







[Illustration]



New York
Dodd, Mead and Company
1908

Copyright, 1908
by Dodd, Mead and Company

Published, September, 1908




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                   PAGE

        I TWO LETTERS                            1

       II THE LITTLE GIRL                       19

      III A STRANGER, YET AT HOME               36

       IV UNWELCOME                             52

        V MAKING FRIENDS WITH THE LITTLE GIRL   68

       VI GOING TO SCHOOL                       91

      VII CHANGEFUL LIGHTS OF CHILDHOOD        108

     VIII SORROW'S CROWN OF SORROW             128

       IX LESSONS OF LIFE                      143

        X A NEW DEPARTURE                      161

       XI THE VOICE OF A ROSE                  180

      XII CHANGES IN THE OLD HOUSE             194

     XIII A TASTE OF PLEASURE                  213

      XIV IN GAY OLD SALEM                     231

       XV LOVERS AND LOVERS                    248

      XVI PERILOUS PATHS                       270

     XVII THE FLOWERING OF THE SOUL            288

    XVIII THE PASSING OF OLD SALEM             296




CHAPTER I

TWO LETTERS


The Leveretts were at their breakfast in the large sunny room in Derby
Street. It had an outlook on the garden, and beyond the garden was a
lane, well used and to be a street itself in the future. Then, at quite
a distance, a strip of woods on a rise of ground, that still further
enhanced the prospect. The sun slanted in at the windows on one side,
there was nothing to shut it out. It would go all round the house now,
and seem to end where it began, in the garden.

Chilian was very fond of it. He always brought his book to the table; he
liked to eat slowly, to gaze out and digest one or two thoughts at his
leisure, as well as the delightful breakfast set before him. He was a
man of delicate tastes and much refinement, for with all the New England
sturdiness, hardness one might say, there was in many families a strain
of what we might term high breeding. His face, with its clear-cut
features, indicated this. His hair was rather light, fine, with a few
waves in it that gave it a slightly tumbled look--far from any touch of
disorder. His eyes were a deep, clear blue, his complexion fair enough
for a woman.

His father and grandfather had lived and died in this house. He had
bought out his sister's share when she married, and she had gone to
Providence. He had asked the two relatives of his father--termed cousins
by courtesy--to continue housekeeping. They were the last of their
family and in rather straitened circumstances. Miss Elizabeth was
nearing sixty, tall, straight, fair, and rather austere-looking. Eunice
was two years younger, shorter, a trifle stouter, with a rounder face,
and a mouth that wore a certain sweetness when it did not actually
smile.

Chilian was past thirty. He was a Harvard graduate, and now went in two
days each week for teaching classes. His father had left some business
interests in Salem, rather distasteful to him, but he was a strictly
conscientious person and attended to them, if with a sort of mental
protest. For the rest, he was a bookworm and revelled in intellectual
pursuits.

The day previous had been desperately stormy, this late March morning
was simply glorious. The mail, which came late in the afternoon, had not
been delivered, causing no uneasiness, as letters were not daily
visitors. But now the serving-man, with a gentle rap, opened the door
and said briefly:

"Letters."

Eunice rose and took them.

"An East Indian one for you, Chilian, and why--one from Boston--for you,
Elizabeth. It is Cousin Giles' hand."

Elizabeth reached for it. They were both so interested that they took
no note of Chilian's missive. She cut carefully around the big wafer he
had used. It was a large letter sheet, quite blue and not of over-fine
quality. Envelopes had not come in and there was quite an art in folding
a letter--unfolding it as well.

"Really what has started Cousin Giles? I hope no one is dead----"

"There would have been a black seal."

"Oh, yes, m'm;" making a curious sound with closed lips. "They are well.
Oh, the Thatchers have been visiting them and are coming out here for a
week--why, on Saturday, and to-day is Thursday. Chilian, do you hear
that?"

"What?" he asked, closing his book over his own letter.

"Why, the Thatchers are coming--on Saturday, not a long notice, and I
don't know how many. They have had a nice time in Boston--and Cousin
Giles has been beauing them round and seems to like it. He might have
sent you word on Tuesday, when you were in;" and Elizabeth's tone
expressed a grievance.

"And the house not cleaned! It's been so cold."

"The house is always clean. Don't, I beg of you, Cousin Bessy, turn it
upside down and scrub and scour, and wear yourself out and take a bad
cold. There are two guest chambers, and I suppose half a dozen more
might be made ready."

"That's the man of it. I don't believe a man would ever see dirt until
some day when he had to dig himself out, or call upon the women folks to
do it."

Elizabeth always softened, in spite of her austerity, when he called her
Bessy. The newer generation indulged in household diminutives
occasionally.

"Well, there is to be no regular house-cleaning. We shall want fires a
good six weeks yet."

"I don't see why Cousin Giles couldn't have said how many there were.
Let me see, Rachel Leverett, who married the Thatcher, was your father's
cousin. They went up in Vermont. Then they came to Concord. He"--which
meant the head of the house--"went to the State Legislature after the
war. He had some sons married. Why, I haven't seen them in years."

"It will be just like meeting strangers," declared Eunice. "It's almost
as if we kept an inn."

Chilian turned. "When I am in Boston to-morrow I will hunt up Cousin
Giles."

"Oh, that will be good of you."

He slipped his letter into the Latin book he had been going over, and
with a slight inclination of the head left the room. The hall was wide,
though it ended just beyond this door, where it led to the kitchen. The
woodwork was of oak, darkened much by the years that had passed over it.
The broad staircase showed signs of the many feet that had trodden up
and down.

Chilian's study was directly over the living-room, and next to the
sleeping-chamber. This part had been added to the main house, but that
was years ago. Bookshelves were ranged on two sides, but the windows
interfered with their course around, two on each of the other sides.
There was a wide fireplace between those at the west, and under them low
closets, with cushions--ancestors of useful window-seats. A large
easy-chair, covered with Cordovan leather, another curiously carved with
a straight narrow strip up the back, set off by the side carving. The
seat was broad and cushioned. Then one from France, as you could tell by
the air and style, that had been in a palace. A low splint rocker, and
one with a high back and comfortable cushions, inviting one to take a
nap.

The bookcases went about two-thirds of the way up and were ornamented by
articles beautiful and grotesque from almost every land, for there had
been seafaring men in the Leverett family, and more than one home in
Salem could boast of treasures of this sort.

Chilian stirred the fire, sending a shower of sparks up the chimney, and
put on a fresh log. Then he settled himself in his chair and fingered
his letter in an absent way. The last time Anthony wrote he vaguely
suggested changes and chances and the uncertainty of life, rather
despondent for a brisk business man who was always seeing opportunities
at money-making. Had he been unfortunate in some of his ventures? And it
was odd in him to write so soon again. Not that they were ever frequent
correspondents.

He opened the letter slowly. It was tied about with a thread of waxed
silk and sealed, so he cut about the seal deliberately; he had a
delicate carefulness in all his ways that was rather womanly. Then
unfolding it, he began to read.

Was this what the previous letter had meant? Was Anthony Leverett
nearing the end, counting his days, finishing up his earthly work, and
delegating it to other hands? There was something pathetic in it, and
the trust in the uprightness and honor that Anthony Leverett reposed in
him touched him keenly. But this part surprised and, at first, annoyed
him. He drew his fine brows in a repellent sort of frown.

          "Do you remember, Chilian, when you were a lad of
          eighteen, in your second year at Harvard, you came
          to Salem to recruit after a period of rather
          severe study? And you met Alletta Orne, who was
          four-and-twenty and engaged to me. In some sort of
          fashion we were all related. Your father had been
          like a father to me in my later boyhood. And, with
          a young man's fervor, you fell in love with her. I
          was sorry then for any pain you suffered, I am
          glad now; for there is no one else in the wide
          world I would as soon trust her child and mine to.

          "We had been away nearly three years, when we came
          back, and the baby was born in the house endeared
          to me by many tender recollections. You were away
          then, but on our second visit we were the most
          congenial friends again. I did not think then it
          would be our last meeting. I had meant, after
          making my fortune, to return and end my days in my
          birthplace. My greatest interest was in the
          commercial house I had established. My first mate,
          John Corwin, took my place and sailed the vessel.
          Then my dear wife died, and I had only my little
          girl left.

          "I could hardly believe six months ago that I must
          die. Should I return, or remain here and sleep
          beside the one who had filled my soul with her
          serene and lovely life and her blessed memory? I
          could not endure the thought of leaving her
          precious body here alone. So I chose to remain.
          And now I send my little girl to your care and
          guardianship without even consulting you. She is
          amply provided for, though the business this side
          of the world cannot be settled in some time. I
          send her with a trusty maid and Captain Corwin,
          because I do not want her to remember the end.
          Some day you can tell her I am sleeping beside her
          dear mother and that we are together in the Better
          Land. She has been separated considerably from me
          of late,--I have had to be journeying about on
          business,--therefore it will not come so hard to
          her, and though children do not forget, the sorrow
          softens and has a tender vagueness from the hand
          of time.

          "So I give my little girl to you. If so be you
          should marry and have children of your own, she
          will not be crowded out, I know. In the course of
          years,--for girls grow rapidly up to
          womanhood,--she may love and marry. Direct her a
          little here and see that no one takes her for the
          mere money. I want her to know the sweetness and
          richness of a true satisfying love."

All important papers, and a sort of diary Anthony Leverett had kept,
were to come in the vessel that would bring the little girl in the
charge of Captain Corwin.

Chilian Leverett sat for a long while with the letter in his hand, until
the log broke in the middle and one end fell over the andiron. Then he
started suddenly.

Had he been dreaming of the sweetness of the woman who had so captivated
his youthful fancy, almost a dozen years agone? He never thought she had
led him astray, and had no blame for her. Perhaps the love for her
betrothed had so permeated her whole being that she shed an exquisitely
fascinating sweetness all about. He was to her as if he had been her
betrothed's younger brother. And when the engagement was confessed he
allowed himself no reprehensible longing for the woman so soon to be
another's. All his instincts were pure and high, perhaps rather too
idealized, though there was much strength and heroism in the old Puritan
blood. Right was right in those days. Lines were sharply drawn among
those of the old stock.

But there had been years of what one might call living for self,
indulgence in studious habits and tastes and the higher intellectual
life, much solitary dreaming, although he was by no means a recluse. And
to have a little girl come into his life! He would have liked a boy
better, he thought. The boy would be out of doors, playing with mates.
And now he bethought himself how few small children there were in his
branch of the Leverett line. Some of the men and women had not married.
His brother and one sister had died in childhood. The first cousins were
nearly all older than he, many of them had dropped out of life. A little
girl! No chance to decline the trust--well, he would hardly have done
that. He knew Anthony Leverett had counted on a serene old age in his
native town. And he was not much past middle life. What had befallen
him?

Well, there was nothing to be done. He read the letter over again. Then
he turned to some papers to compose his mind. There was a stir in the
next room, his sleeping-chamber. He always opened the windows and closed
the door between. After the dishes were washed and the dining-room and
hall brushed up, Elizabeth came upstairs and made the two beds. When he
had gone to Cambridge she opened the door between. So she did not
disturb him now, but crossed the hall and inspected the two
guest-chambers. She had swept them a week or so ago and had settled in
her mind that they would do until house-cleaning time. To be sure, if
she cleaned them now they would need it when the guests were gone. And
Chilian had a man's objection to house-cleaning. It was hardly time to
put away blankets. She wished she knew how many guests there would be.

The rooms were full of old Colonial furniture that had been in the
family for generations. Every spring Elizabeth polished the mahogany
until it shone. She dusted now, though there was hardly a speck visible.
The snow through the winter had laid it, and the spring rains had not
allowed it to rear its head.

Chilian put on his coat presently and sallied out for his morning
exercise. The family had been connected with shipbuilding to a certain
extent, and there was the old warehouse where vessels came in with their
precious cargoes from civilized and barbaric lands. For at the close of
the Revolutionary War the men of note, many of whom had not disdained
privateering, found themselves in possession of idle fleets, that with
their able seamen could outsail almost anything afloat. So they struck
out for new ventures in unknown seas and new channels of trade.
Calcutta, Bombay, Zanzibar, Madagascar, Batavia, and other ports came to
know the American flag and the busy enterprising traders.

But the old Salem that was once the capital of the state, the Salem of
John Endicott and Roger Williams, of stern Puritanism, of terrible
witchcraft horrors, and then of the sturdy and vigorous stand in her
differences with the mother country, her patriotism through the darkest
days, was fast fading away, just as this grand commercial epoch was
destined to merge into science and educational fame later on, and give
to the world some master spirits. But as he wended his way hither and
thither in a desultory fashion, one thought almost like spoken words
kept running through his mind--"A little girl--a little girl in Old
Salem"--for the almost two hundred years gave her the right to that
eminence, and a little girl from a foreign land seemed incongruous. Not
but that there were little girls in Salem, but their life-lines did not
touch his. And this one came so near, for the sake of both parents he
had loved.

When he came in to dinner, he had made up his mind to say nothing of his
letter until the guests had come and gone. He did not wish to be deluged
with questions.

He hunted up Cousin Giles the next day, who was quite a real-estate
dealer, investing his own and other people's money in sound mortgages,
who had been a widower so long that he had quite gone back to
bachelorhood.

And he found three Thatcher cousins--a widow, a married one, and a
single one, the youngest of the family, but past girlhood. He was asked
to take luncheon with them and they proved quite agreeable and
intelligent, and much pleased at the prospect of seeing Elizabeth and
Eunice Leverett.

"We have been hunting up several of the Boston relatives," said Miss
Thatcher, with a kind of winsome smile. "Cousin Giles has been a good
directory. We've kept in with so few of them. Father hunted up some of
them while he was in the Legislature, but they are so scattered about
and many of them dead. Mother was your father's cousin, I believe."

Chilian gave a graceful inclination of the head.

"Elizabeth and Eunice visited us years ago, along after the war when I
was first left a widow," explained Mrs. Brent. "Henry went all through
it, but was worn out, and died in '88. But I've two nice sons, who are a
great comfort. Father was very good to them and me. And they're both
promising farmers."

"I tell her that's a good deal to be thankful for," remarked Cousin
Giles.

"It is indeed," commented Chilian.

"And I have a lad who is all for study and wants to come in to Harvard.
He has been teaching school this winter. His father's quite set against
it, and I don't know how it will end. He will be only nineteen in
August, and his father thinks he has a hold on him two years longer."

Mrs. Drayton looked up rather appealingly.

"If his mind is made up to that, he will work his way through," said
Chilian, and he thought he should like to know the boy.

"You see the next two are girls and they can't help much about a farm.
Father really needs him. And I seem to stand between two fires. His
teaching term will end in May, but he has planned to take the school
next winter. He has made quite a bit of money."

Chilian thought he would be a lad fully worth helping, and made a mental
note of it. He liked the mother.

It was settled that they would reach Salem about noon in the stage, the
only mode of conveyance, and they parted with a pleased friendliness.

Chilian rehearsed the interview at home to the great delight of the
household. Indeed, he had been very well pleased with the prospective
visitors and he felt rather thankful for the respite from the shadow the
coming event was casting. A little girl! It did annoy him.

He did not allow it to interfere with his duties as host, however. The
three ladies had a most delightful visit at Salem, looking up points of
interest and hearing old history concerning the Leveretts. Chilian's
father had jotted down many facts. There were seafaring uncles, who had
brought home trophies; there were men in the family, who had died for
their country if they had not filled eminent positions; others who had.
How this branch of the family seemed to have dwindled away!

Serena Thatcher was more than pleased with her cousin, though she felt
somewhat awed by his attainments and his rather punctilious ways. Mrs.
Brent set him down as a good deal of a Miss Nancy. But the ladies had a
delightful time going over family histories and getting relationships
disentangled.

When the eventful day of parting came it brought a very real sorrow.
They made promises that they would renew their meetings and keep each
other in mind.

It was Saturday evening when the Leverett household sat around the
cheerful fire in the cozy room where the small family gathered on this
evening of the week with their work all done, after the fashion of the
past, still strictly observed by many of the older Puritan families. The
industrious ladies sat with folded hands. Sometimes Chilian read aloud
from a volume of the divines who had finished their good fight.

This night he was gazing idly in the fire, the lines in his face
deepening now and then.

"I suppose he _is_ tired with all the talk, and rambles, and confusion
of the week," Elizabeth thought, stealing furtive glances at him.

He straightened himself presently and made a pretence of clearing his
throat, as an embarrassed person often does.

"I have something to tell you," he began. "I thought I would not disturb
you while our relatives were here. We found enough to talk about;" with
a short half-laugh.

"And it tired you out, I know. We live so quietly that such an event
quite upsets us," Eunice said in a gentle, deprecating tone.

"It was very pleasant," he added. "I was a good deal interested in
Anthony Drayton. But this is something quite different. Can you recall
that I had a letter from the East Indies the morning the word came from
Cousin Giles?"

"Why, yes!" Elizabeth started in surprise. "I had really forgotten about
it. Business, I suppose, with Anthony Leverett. Why, I think it is high
time he came home."

Chilian sighed. "I am afraid--though I cannot see why we should fear so
much to enter the other portal, since it is the destiny of all, and we
believe in a better world. He was hopelessly ill when he wrote and was
winding up some business matters. He is a brave man to meet death so
composedly. The only pang is parting from his child."

"Oh, his little girl! Let me see--she must be eight or nine years old.
What will become of her?"

"He makes me executor and guardian of the child. She was to start three
weeks after his letter with Captain Corwin in the _Flying Star_. That
will be due, if it meets with no mishap, from the middle to the last of
April."

"But she doesn't come alone!" ejaculated Elizabeth in surprise.

"Yes. He wishes to be buried there beside his wife. And he does not
want her to have the remembrance of his death. So he sends her with the
woman who has been her nurse and maid the last three years, an
Englishwoman."

"Of all things! I wonder what will come next! We seem in the line of
surprises. And it's queer they should happen together. A little girl!
Chilian, do _you_ like it? Why, it will fairly turn the house upside
down!"

There was an accent of protest in Elizabeth's tone, showing plainly her
unwillingness to accept the situation.

"One little girl can't move much furniture about;" with a sound of humor
in his voice.

"Oh, you know what I mean--not actually dragging sofas and tables about,
but she will chairs, as you'll see. And lots of other things. Look at
the Rendall children. The house always looks as if it had been stirred
up with the pudding-stick, and Sally Rendall spends good half her time
looking for things they have carted off. Tom and Anstice were digging up
the path the day we called, and what do you suppose they had! The
tablespoons. And I'll venture to say they were left out of doors."

"There are so many of them," Chilian said, as if in apology.

"And I don't see how we can keep this child away from them. It isn't as
if they were low-down people. Sally's father having been a major in the
war, and the Rendalls are good stock. Let me see--what's her name? Her
mother was called Letty."

"Cynthia. She was named for my mother." Chilian's voice had a reverent
softness in it.

"I always thought it a pretty name," said Eunice.

"And I've heard people call it 'Cyn.' I do abominate nicknames."

Elizabeth uttered this with a good deal of vigor. Then she remembered
she quite liked Bessy.

No one spoke for some moments. Chilian thought of the sister, whose
brief married life had ended in her pretty home at Providence, and how
she looked in her coffin with her baby sheltered by one arm. The picture
came before him vividly.

Elizabeth liked cleanliness and order. It was natural after a long
practice in it. Chilian's particular ways suited her. Year after year
had settled them--perhaps she had settled him more definitely, as he
liked the way. Eunice was thinking of the little girl who had neither
father or mother. She had some unfulfilled dreams. In her youth there
had been a lover, and a wedding planned when he came home from his
voyage. She had begun to "lay by" for housekeeping. And there were some
pretty garments in the trunk upstairs, packed away with other articles.
The lover was lost at sea, as befell many another New England coast
woman.

She had hoped against hope for several years--men were sometimes
restored as by a miracle--but he never came. So she sometimes dreamed
of what might have been, of home and children, and it kept her heart
tender. Anthony's little girl would make a sight of trouble, she could
see that, but a little girl about would be a great pleasure--to her at
least. She glanced furtively at Elizabeth, then at Chilian. She could
not comfort either of them with this sudden glow and warmth that
thrilled through her veins.

"Well, we will be through with house-cleaning before she comes," said
the practical and particular housewife. Chilian simply sighed. It was
the usual spring ordeal, and did end. But who could predict the ending
of the other?




CHAPTER II

THE LITTLE GIRL


Down at the wharf there was much bustle and stir. Vessels were lading
for various home ports, fishing craft were going out on their ventures,
even a whaler had just fitted up for a long cruise, and the young as
well as middle-aged sailors were shouting out farewells. White and black
men were running to and fro, laughing, chaffing, and swearing at each
other.

There lay the East Indiaman, with her foreign flag as well as that of
her country. She had come in about midnight and at early dawn
preliminaries had begun. Captain Corwin had been ashore a time or two,
looking up and down amid the motley throng, and now he touched his hat
and nodded to Chilian Leverett, who picked his way over to him.

"We are somewhat late," he began apologetically. "A little due to rough
weather, but one can never fix an exact date."

"All is well, I hope;" in an anxious tone.

"Yes; the child proved a good sailor and was much interested in
everything. I was afraid she would take it hard. But she is counting on
her father's coming. I don't know how you will ever console her when she
learns the truth."

"And he----" Chilian looked intently into the captain's eyes.

"I suppose the end has come before this. They thought he might last a
month when we left. It's sad enough. He should have lived to be ninety.
But matters went well with him, and he has been an honest, kindly,
upright man with a large heart. I've lost my best friend and adviser."

The captain drew his rough coat-sleeve across his face and looked past
Chilian, winking hard.

"There's a sight of business when we come to that, Mr. Leverett, but
now--will you go on board? The maid is a most excellent and sensible
person. They are in the cabin."

"Yes," he answered and followed with a curious throb at his heart--pity
for the orphaned child and a sense of responsibility he was conscious
that he accepted unwillingly, yet he would do his duty to the uttermost.

Already some officials were on hand, for at this period Salem was really
a notable port. Chilian passed them with a bow, followed the captain
down the gangplank, stared a little at the foreign deck-hands in their
odd habiliments, stepped over boxes and bales in canvas and matting full
of Oriental fragrance that from the closeness was almost stifling,
coming from the clear air. Then he was ushered into the cabin, that was
replete with Orientalism as well.

A rather tall woman rose to meet him.

"This is Mistress Rachel Winn, who has mothered the little girl for
several years, Mr. Leverett, her relative and guardian,
and--Cynthia----"

The child threw herself down on the couch.

"I want to go back home. I want to see my father, and Aymeer, and Babo,
and Nalla. I can't stay here."

"But perhaps your father will bring them when he comes. Don't you
remember he told you he lived here when he was a little boy, and what
nice times he had with the cousin he loved? And the cousin is here to
bid you welcome. Come and speak to him. We cannot go back at once, the
ship has to unload her cargo and take in ever so many other things. See,
here is Cousin Leverett."

She sat up, made a forward movement as if she would rise, but simply
stared.

"Yes, I am Cousin Leverett." He began advancing and held out his hand.

"And very glad to see such an excellent traveller as you have been,"
said the captain. "And such a nice little girl. You are an American
girl; you know your father told you that. And this is your native town.
Cousin Leverett remembers you when you were very little."

"But I don't remember you;" taking no notice of the proffered hand.

"Then you must get acquainted with me. And you must tell me about your
life and your father, whom I have not seen in a long, long time. Let us
shake hands."

She held out hers then and raised herself to her feet.

"Oh, how soft your hands are," she cried, "just like Nalla's. But they
are very white. Nalla's were brown."

"And who was Nalla?"

"She used to come and play with me and make chains out of shells, and
make bracelets and anklets, and dance. And she used to go to the Sahibs'
house and dance with snakes. I'm afraid of them. Are you?"

"Indeed I am, of the large ones," he said at a venture.

He fancied that he felt a gentle pressure of sympathetic approval. She
glanced up for an instant and her eyes transfixed him. They were a deep
wonderful blue, almost black at the pupil, then raying off a little
lighter. It made him think of a star in the winter midnight sky with a
halo around it. The lashes were long and nearly black. Otherwise she had
little claim to beauty just then. Her complexion had a tawny hue made by
sun and wind, her hair was light, but it had a peculiar sunburned tint,
though it was fine and abundant and hung in loose curls about her
shoulders. Her nose was the only Leverett feature--it was straight,
rather small, and had the flexibility that betrayed passing emotions.
The Leverett lips were thin, hers were full in the middle, giving a
certain roundness to the mouth.

"Are there any where you live?" hesitatingly.

"Any?" Then he recalled the subject they had touched upon. "Oh, no; you
seldom see them, and they are mostly harmless."

"Have you any little girls in your house?"

"No, I am sorry to say."

"There were two little English girls on shipboard at first. They went on
board another vessel after a while. I liked them very much. They knew a
great many things about countries. I can read, but I don't a great deal.
Sometimes father would tell me about America. There are a great many
countries in it, and once they had a big war. They had wars, too, in
India. Why must people kill each other?"

"There seem to be reasons. A little girl could not understand them all,
I think;" and how could he explain them?

"Oh, there is Captain Corwin!" She flew across the cabin with
outstretched arms, which she clasped about him.

"Well, have you been getting acquainted with--he will be your uncle, I
suppose. What title are you going to take with the child, Mr. Leverett?"

Chilian Leverett colored, without a cause he thought, and it annoyed
him.

"Are you going back to India to-day?" She was not interested in Chilian
Leverett's answer.

Captain Corwin laughed heartily and patted her shoulder.

"Not to-day, nor even next week. The cargo will have to be taken off,
little missy, and a new one stowed away. And I fancy there must be some
repairs. I shall stay in town and run down to Marblehead. So you will
see me quite often."

"And you are coming back again from India?"

"Oh, I hope so. More than once."

"You will bring father then. It is such a long while to wait;" and she
sighed.

The men exchanged glances.

"I want to see him so much. Couldn't I go back with you?"

"Don't you remember I told you the other evening he might start before I
reached India again? Don't you want to go ashore and see Salem? Ask Miss
Rachel to get you ready."

Rachel was beckoning to her. "Let us go up on deck," she said. "It's a
strange country to me as well as to you. And I fancy the men want to
talk."

She crossed the cabin slowly, not quite certain what she did desire
most, except to see her father.

"You will have a rather sorry task. But Captain Ant'ny would have it so.
He wanted to feel that she would be among friends. He had the fullest
confidence that you could manage wisely. There is a great box of
papers, instructions, etc. You are appointed her guardian and trustee.
I've brought boxes of stuff that the officers will have to go through.
But the legal matters you may take with you. He tried to make it as easy
as he could. She will have considerable of a fortune, and more to come
when matters get settled on the other side. A cousin of the Bannings
came out,--English are great hands to keep things in the family. But it
is one of the biggest importing houses out there and it owes its success
to the long and wise head of Captain Anthony. They want young Banning in
it and the matter was about settled when we came away, but the payments
will run over several years. All these papers will be sent to you. The
Bannings are upright business men, and I think you need have no fear.
But the child's fortune is to be invested on this side of the water. Oh,
you cannot realize what a trial it was to give up all thoughts of ending
his days here."

Captain Corwin brushed some tears from his honest, weather-beaten face.

"But if he had started earlier----"

"He would not believe the trouble would prove fatal. And when it was
declared there was so much to put in order. Then he could not bear to
think of leaving his wife alone there, though it's only the shell after
all, and, if we believe the Good Book, we shall see the real part over
there that was so much to us. But he could not explain the parting to
the child, though death is such a common thing out there. Yet it _is_
hard to believe our own can die. We are never ready for that. How you
will manage----"

The customs officers had come. Captain Corwin went out to meet them.
Chilian Leverett dropped into the well-worn leather-covered chair that
had been fine in its day. A heavy burthen had been laid upon him. He was
not fond of business. Cousin Giles might be of some assistance; he
grasped at the thought as if he had been a drowning man and this the
straw. And the child, somehow, was different from the average child, he
felt; though he was not certain what the average child would unfold day
after day. What would Elizabeth think? Eunice he could count on. Though
she yielded on many points in that tacit sort of way, she was by no
means an echo of her sister.

The three men entered the cabin. Chilian was no stranger to the
officials, who greeted him cordially and who sympathized with Captain
Anthony Leverett's untimely ending, as he was hardly past middle life.

"Why, it will be quite a change to have a child in your household," said
Josiah Ward. "But if she is like mine, I advise you not to give her the
run of your study. But there are two ladies to look after her;" and he
smiled.

It was surmised that Mr. Ward, a widower of two years' standing, had
glanced more than once in the direction of Miss Eunice Leverett.

Rachel came back at this juncture. The little girl had an accession of
shyness and would only nod to the strangers. Then they made ready to
leave the vessel. Chilian took his japanned case of important papers;
the rest of the luggage would be sent after inspection.

A primitive street it was in those days, and the fine wharves of the
present were rather rude if busy places. Over beyond they could see the
river,--South River,--and that was alive with various small craft.

"It seems almost like home," said Rachel Winn, pausing to take a survey.
"You do not find this rural aspect in India."

"How long were you there?" asked Chilian.

"Seven years. I went out with my brother, who had just married my
dearest friend. He died the third year, and she soon after married a
military man. Then I took charge of a little lame boy and was mostly up
in the mountains until he was sent to England, when Captain Leverett's
hospitable doors opened to me. Believe me, I was sorry to leave him at
this crisis. Yet it was his wish;" and she glanced at Cynthia.

"Why did we come away?" demanded the child passionately. "Oh, Rachel,
are you sure father will come? It takes so long, so long;" and there
were tears in her voice.

"Here we are!" exclaimed Chilian.

There was a white picket fence across the sort of courtyard that had a
broad paved path leading up to the front door, bordered by shrubs that
would presently be in bloom, and spaces between for smaller plants.
This was the delight of Eunice's heart. A square but rather ornate
porch, with fluted columns, supporting the outer edge of the roof, and
an elaborately carved hall-door with a fanlight overhead. The stoop
stood up some five steps, and at the sides there were benches for
out-of-doors comfort on summer nights. A brass knocker, with a lion's
head, announced visitors. Chilian, however, let himself in with his
latchkey. But both sisters met the party in the hall.

"And this is Anthony's little girl!" said Elizabeth. "Child, let me look
at you----"

But the child had a perverse fit at that moment and turned away her
head, to the elder's surprise and almost displeasure.

"This is Miss Winn," interrupted Chilian. "My household guardians and
cousins, Miss Elizabeth and Miss Eunice Leverett. I dare say our guests
feel strange to be on land, after such a long journey."

"It seems almost incredible that one can stand it, but we see them
starting every few days for distant ports. My farthest journey has been
to Providence; but, land alive! you don't know where that is, and it's
no great distance. Will you not come and have a cup of tea or coffee?"

"Thank you. We had breakfast not long ago, it seems."

"Let me take you to your room," said Eunice. "And I hope you will soon
feel at home with us. We are quiet people, but we shall endeavor to
make you comfortable. Cynthia, will you not shake hands with me?"

The soft, rather pleading voice attracted the child. She glanced up
shyly and then held out a tiny hand hesitatingly.

"She is rather backward at first," explained Rachel, who followed the
hostess up the broad stairway.

One of the guest-chambers had been set aside for their use after much
discussion as to whether one or two would be needed. A smaller one
opened into this, and a large closet was at the side.

"You can take off your things--I suppose your boxes, or whatever you
have, will be here presently. The bureau is empty and this chest of
drawers. We are rather old-fashioned people, and the house is the same
as it was in the time of Chilian's father. The captain made one visit
here, when the little girl was about four. It must have been hard for
him to lose his wife in a strange country like that. I suppose there are
not many Americans?"

"No; there are numbers of Englishwomen, wives of soldiers and traders,
though I think most of them long to get home. They do not seem to take
root easily."

"I shouldn't think they would, in that idolatrous country. The accounts
of heathendom are appalling. And that car of Juggernaut, and drowning
their poor little babies! They do not seem to make much of girl
children."

"Indeed, they do not, only as in some families they are wanted for
wives. But the devotion of mothers to their sons is wonderful."

Rachel had laid aside a silk coat that filled Eunice with a sort of
wonder, being brocaded with beautiful leaves and roses that seemed as if
they must have been worked by hand, they stood out so clearly. The child
appeared fantastically attired to her plainer eyes, and her slim arms
were weighted with bracelets. In her dainty ears were some splendid
sapphires.

"I do hope you will soon feel at home," Eunice said from a full heart,
if there was a rather awkward feeling about it. Yet she liked Miss
Winn's face. It had a kindly and intelligent aspect and was medium in
all respects. The social lines in the town, indeed in all the Eastern
towns, were not sharply defined as to mistress and maid. True, many
households preferred black servants; in not a few some elderly relative
looked after the household, or a bound-out girl was trained in
industrious ways.

There had been some discussion as to what sphere this Miss Winn would
occupy. If she was simply the attendant on an over-indulged child, an
uneducated person, as many of the English maids were who came over to
better their conditions or get husbands, it might be rather awkward. But
the woman was certainly well-bred and used her English in a correct
manner.

"Perhaps you will get to feeling more at home if you come down to the
sitting-room, since there is nothing to unpack;" with a faint smile.

Cynthia had been looking out of the window. "How queer it all is!" she
said. "I think I do not quite like it. And how funny one feels. I want
to go this way;" and she swayed from side to side.

"The motion of the vessel," interposed Rachel. "I have heard it took
days to get over it."

Meanwhile, downstairs Elizabeth had studied her Cousin Chilian.

"The child is not at all pretty," she began rather sharply. "And her
mother was considered a beautiful young woman, I believe."

"Yes; but a long voyage and shipboard living may not be conducive to the
development of beauty. And children seldom are at that age."

"The Goodell children are pretty, I am sure, with their fine
complexions. And the Bates girls. She has a furtive sort of look. Oh, I
hope she isn't deceitful and untrue. Those heathen nations, I believe,
are given largely to falsehood, and she has lived among them so long
without any mother's care. It seems as if a pretty girl like Alletta
Orne might have found some one at home to marry and reared her child in
a Christian land."

"Do not let us begin by borrowing trouble. It always comes fast enough."

"And I can foresee that we shall have plenty of it. Well, I suppose it
must be endured. There! my bread is light enough to go in the
oven--running over, likely as not."

So, when they came downstairs, Miss Elizabeth was in the kitchen,
immersed in her baking interest.

A large gray cat lay curled up on a cushion. Cynthia went straight over
to it, but it glanced at her with wild eyes, jumped down, and
disappeared through the doorway.

"Oh!" she exclaimed in accents of disappointment, glancing up at
Chilian.

"Pussy is not used to children. He always runs away from them. But I
think he will like you when he gets acquainted."

She turned to the window with a swelling heart. It seemed so cold and
strange. It was better on shipboard, she thought. She had come to know
the sailors quite well and Missy had grown to be a great favorite with
them. There was always something cheerful going on. They sang songs in
their loud clear voices, or whistled merry tunes. They danced as well.
She was quite used to the dancing-girls at Calcutta, and when they were
at Hong Kong or other ports. But the Indian girls pleased her best.

The sailors seemed always full of fun, even in the worst of times.
During some fearful storms she was safely housed in the cabin, and it
amused her to see the things pitch and roll as far as their chains would
allow them. Sometimes, too, they had to hold the food in their hands,
but she never knew the danger of the worst storms. Rachel would not
admit that she was afraid, and the captain said, "Yes, we're having a
stiff blow, but the _Flying Star_ has weathered many a gale before." And
here it was so very quiet. It looked dreary outside, with the leafless
trees. She liked the toss and tumult of the waves with their snowy,
jewelled crests, and the clouds scudding along the sky, which she
imagined was another sea full of ships. Often they went in port and
there was nothing left but the blue sky above--a great hollow vault. And
when the sun shone the real sea and ocean was in flames of such splendid
colors. There was no end of curious people at ports where they stopped
for supplies, there was always something strange, even when they were
days alone on the water. For the sunset and sunrise were never twice
alike. Then the moon from its tiny crescent to the great round globe
that illumined the world with her fairy richness and scattered jewels on
every crested wave. She had watched it turn the other way and grow
smaller and smaller until you saw it vaguely in the morning.

She was so interested in the stories they told about it, the signs and
wonders they ascribed to it.

"And was it ever a real world like that we have left behind?" she asked
of the captain. "Were there people in it? And land, and rivers, and
growing things, and flowers?" and her wondering eyes grew larger.

"No one can tell now. Some astronomers believe it a burned-out world and
the things we take for a man," laughing, "and the cow ready to jump
off, are remnants of roads, and forests, and mountains."

"You _can_ see the man in the moon," she returned decisively. "Sometimes
he laughs. And the cow has great horns. I should be afraid of them if I
met such a cow. Ours are so small and tame."

"You will see large ones in Salem. But I think, for the most part, they
are gentle."

She never wearied talking over the strange things. And so she came to
have her head filled with wonderful lore that indeed cropped out now and
then all her life long until she felt as if she had really been in
fairyland.

It seemed stranger here than on shipboard. The others were going through
the ceremony of getting acquainted. Rachel Winn's voice had a soft
sound, with an almost foreign accent. Eunice's, though low-pitched, had
a clear resonance. Now and then Chilian Leverett made a comment, or
asked a question, but she was not heeding them. Her heart and mind had
wandered back to her father and that wonderful land where nothing ever
seemed bleak, though in long hot droughts it was arid. But there were
always temples, and palaces, and picturesque huts, and women and
children in gay attire, old men kneeling somewhere, praying but keeping
a sharp lookout for alms.

Chilian Leverett had been watching the small face and wondering at the
changes passing over it. Now he saw some tears slowly coursing down the
pale cheeks, and his heart was moved with infinite pity.

Suddenly a robin alighted on the limb of a tree and began picking at the
buds. Then he held his head up straight, swelled out his brownish red
breast, and poured forth such a volume of melody that the effort fairly
made him dance with joy. Spring had surely come! It was the time of love
and joy, and all things made over new.

She turned a trifle. Her face was transfigured with delight. Her eyes
shone, though the tears were still wet on her cheek.




CHAPTER III

A STRANGER, YET AT HOME


Rachel Winn settled herself to the new order of things more readily than
the Leveretts. Or rather she seemed to take the lead in arrangements for
herself and her charge. She was after all a sort of nurse and
waiting-maid, though she had a fine dignity about it that even Elizabeth
could not gainsay. She was to be one of the family, there could be no
objection to that in the simple New England living. Though it was true,
times were changing greatly since the days of war and privation, and
perhaps the mingling of people from other states, the growing
responsibility of being part of a great commonwealth. Servants were
being relegated to a different position. Boston in a certain fashion set
the pace, though Salem held up her head proudly. Were not her seaports
the busy mart of the Eastern shore? Stores of finery, silks and laces,
and marvellous Indian embroidery went down to Boston and the houses were
enriched with choice china that in the next hundred years was to be
handed down as heirlooms. Fine houses were being built, choice woods
came from southern ports by vessels that believed they could find
fortunes nearer home than China or India. But they could grow no
spices, or coffees, or teas, and they must come from the Orient. No
looms could turn out such exquisite fabrics as yet, though housewives
were to be proud of their home-made drapery for a generation or two.

Chilian spent a large part of that first night inspecting his box of
papers. There was a journal-like letter in which Anthony Leverett had
jotted down many things he hardly dared say in his letter; indeed, there
was not sufficient space. As soon as he had learned the serious nature
of his disease, he had begun to put his house in order and consider the
future welfare of his child. Some lines touched Chilian deeply, the
trust and dependence he was not at all sure he could fulfil, but he felt
he _must_ rouse himself to the earnest endeavor. The father had a
passionate love for his child, he was making a fortune for her, counting
the years when he should return and have a home of his own, when Cynthia
would grow up and marry and there would be grandchildren to climb his
knees. India was no place for a woman child to grow up in, there were no
chances for education or accomplishment, and next to no society. After
all there was not, and never would be, such a country as the new world
that had struggled so long and bravely for her independence, and now had
only to go on developing her grand theories. Crowned heads might look on
doubtingly, but the foundation had been laid in justice and truth and
equality of right. It quite thrilled him that this man, amassing money
in a far-away land, could see so clearly and have no doubts about its
future greatness.

To Captain Corwin, his good, trusty friend, he had willed half the value
of the _Flying Star_. The money from his part was to be invested, as the
payments came in, in real estate in Salem, which was to be the shipping
mart of the New England coast, at least, and run a race with New York,
he thought. So with the stations at Calcutta and Hong Kong in the hands
of the Bannings. And there were treasures that would answer for a
wedding dowry when the time came. If possible, he would like Rachel Winn
retained; he had the highest confidence in her, and she had no relatives
to call her back to England. He had given her much of the family
history, and described the town and the people, so that it would not
seem so new and strange to her.

He was not asking all this as a favor. Chilian was touched by the
provision made for himself, which it would be quite impossible to
decline, he saw. True it would break in upon his leisurely, student
life, yet he felt he could not in honor refuse to accept the trust.

Rachel Winn studied the arrangements of the rooms at their disposal. Her
young mistress was not a child taken out of benevolence or relationship.
She must have her standing from the very beginning, and she fancied
Elizabeth was inclined to consider her a sort of interloper.

"If it makes no difference, I will take the small room," she announced
to her. "There are some pieces of furniture on the vessel that Captain
Leverett particularly wished her to keep, and as she grows older she
will cherish them----"

"That great room for such a child!" In her amazement, Elizabeth spoke
without thought. She was not used to seeing children set in the very
forefront. In her day, indeed, yet in some families the large open
garret was considered the place for children.

"You see, she was used to it at home--over there, I mean;" with a nod of
the head. "Her father's room was one side, mine on the other. Of course,
in a way I shall share it with her. I will keep it in order and look
after her clothes, and sew for her. But I prefer the smaller one."

Elizabeth was aghast. One of the best spare chambers, with the
furnishings that had come from England a hundred years before. On the
other side she and Eunice shared a plainly appointed room with some of
their very own belongings. There was still another, but the closet was
small. She had asked Chilian where they should be placed and he had
chosen this. It was his house, of course----

Whether it would have ended in a discussion could not to be told, for at
that moment a dray drove up with some boxes and a piece of furniture so
wrapped and protected that it was quite impossible to guess at its
name.

Chilian came out and ran lightly down the stairs; and then called
Elizabeth.

"Where had the boxes better go? They will have to be unpacked, I
suppose;" helplessly.

"There are more to come," announced the man. "Enough to set up
housekeeping, if the right sort of things are in them;" and he gave a
short laugh.

Miss Winn came downstairs. "Isn't there a garret to the house?" she
asked, looking from one to the other. "I packed them up, but I can
hardly tell----"

"Yes; we could store half the vessel's contents in it. Well, not exactly
that. A ship's hold is a capacious place. Yes, the boxes might go there.
Have you any idea what this is?"

"A sort of desk and bookcase. A very handsome thing the captain set
great store by."

The men shouldered the boxes and Elizabeth convoyed them. Silas was
spading up the garden and came at the call.

It was a work of some labor to get the article out of its secure
casings. It disclosed a very handsome piece of furniture in the
escritoire style, carved and inlaid not only with beautiful woods, but
much silver. Chilian surveyed it with admiration.

"That must stand in the parlor," he decided. "But some one must come and
help. I'm afraid I am not sufficiently robust. Silas, see if you can't
find the Uphams' man. He was working there a short time ago."

"If there's more to come, it is hardly worth while to clear up," began
Elizabeth. "I hope it will soon follow."

Chilian directed the two men, who found it still quite a burthen.
Elizabeth opened the parlor shutter unwillingly, and the men set it in
the middle of the floor.

There were two large rooms held almost sacred by both sisters. They were
separated by an archway, apparently upheld on each end by a fluted
column. Both rooms had a wide chimney-piece, the mantel and its supports
elaborately carved and painted white. Two windows were in each end,
draped with soft crimson curtains. The floor was polished, with a rug
laid down in the centre. It was furnished in a manner that would have
delighted a connoisseur, but Elizabeth did not admire the
conglomeration. They were family relics and seemed to have little
relation with one another, yet they were harmonious. There was a
thin-legged spinet, with a Latin legend running across the front of the
cover, which was always down. The chairs were not made for lounging,
that was plain; and the sofa, with its rolling ends and claw feet, had
been polished until the haircloth looked like satin. A dead and gone
Leverett bride had imported that from London.

When the East Indian article had been consigned to an appropriate space,
it looked as much at home as if it had lived there half a century. Then
the parlor was shut up again, the mat in the hall shaken out, the front
door bolted. Miss Winn had asked for a hammer and chisel that she might
open one of the boxes.

"Take Silas. That is a man's work," said Chilian.

Cynthia was in the sitting-room, where it was still chilly enough to
have a fire. Eunice was knotting fringe for a bedspread, and it
interested the child wonderfully. She was not a little shocked to find a
child of nine knew nothing about sewing, had never hemmed ruffles, nor
done overseam, or knit, or it seemed anything useful.

"Why, when I was a little girl of your age I could spin in the little
wheel."

"What did you spin?"

"Why, thread, of course, linen thread made from flax."

"Were you a truly little girl?" in surprise.

"Why, child, don't you know anything?" Then Miss Eunice laughed softly
and patted the small shoulder, looking kindly into the wondering eyes.
There was no hurt in her tone and the words rather amused.

"I know a great many things. I can read some Latin, and I know about
Greece and its splendid heroes who conquered a good deal of the world.
There was Alexander the Great and Philip of Macedon. And Tamerlane, who
conquered nearly all Asia. And--and Confucius, the great man of China,
who was a wise philosopher, and wrote a bible----"

"Oh, no; not a bible!" interrupted Miss Eunice, horrified. "There is
only one Bible, my dear, and that is the Word of God."

"But the other is the bible of the Chinese, and some of them believe
Confucius was a god."

"That is quite impossible, my dear;" in a rather decisive, but still
gentle tone.

"And there is Brahma, and Vishnu, and there are ever so many gods in
India. The people pray to them. And temples. When they want anything
very much, they go and pray for it. There was a woman whose little son
was very ill, and if he lived he was going to be a great prince, or
something, and she gathered up her precious stones and her necklace and
took them to the temple for the god. Father sent an English doctor, but
they wouldn't let him see the little boy. He was so pretty, too. I used
to see him in the court."

"And did he live?" Miss Eunice asked, much interested.

"No; he didn't. And the father beat her for losing the jewels."

"You see, those gods have no power."

"Did you ever pray for anything you wanted very much?"

Cynthia's bright eyes studied the placid face before her.

"Yes," the lips murmured faintly.

"And did you get it?"

A flush stole over the puzzled countenance.

"My dear, God doesn't see as we do. And He knows what is best for us,
and gives us that. Maybe our prayer wasn't right."

"How can you tell when a prayer is right or wrong?" inquired the young
theologian.

"Why, you have to leave that to God;" in a low, resigned tone.

"I didn't want to come here. I wanted to stay with father. I didn't know
there was any one beside, and I do not believe any one will ever love me
so well. But he promised to come when the business was all done. So I
prayed to the God of father's Bible, and I went to the temple with Nalla
and put down a half-crown--it was all the money I had. But"--her eyes
filled with tears and her voice had a break in it--"father begged so,
and I came. But if Captain Corwin does not bring him next time I shall
go back. I can't live without him."

The mild blue eyes of Miss Eunice filled with tears as well. She was not
sure this had been the wisest course. The absolute truth was always
best. But she temporized also in a vague fashion.

"Yes; you can tell then. And you may come to like us so well you may
stay content."

"Oh, if he comes! Then it will be all right. And you think I ought to
pray for that?"

It was a cruel strait for Miss Eunice and staggered her faith. She was
not to lead astray or harm "one of the least of these." But the child
_was_ a heathen with no real knowledge of the true God. Like a vision
almost, Miss Eunice looked back at her own childhood, and the awful,
overshadowing power she believed was God, who wrote down every wicked
thought and wrong deed, and would confront her with them at the Judgment
Day. She prayed nightly, often in the night, when she woke up, and she
was no surer of God's love than this little heathen child.

"It is right to pray for the things we want, but to be resigned if God
doesn't see fit to give them to us."

"Then the prayers are thrown away. And do you know just what God is?"

"My dear!" in a shocked tone, "no one can tell. It is one of the
mysteries to be revealed when we see Him as He truly is at the last day.
A little girl cannot understand it. I do not, and I have sought the
truth many years. Now I am trusting, because I feel assured He will do
what is right. Tell me something about your life with your father."

"Oh, things were so different there. Houses, and there were always
servants, so you didn't ever need to fan yourself. Babo and Nalla were
always about. Babo used to take me out in a chair that had curtains
around and a big umbrella overhead. Sometimes Chandra went with him. And
the streets were funny and crooked, and houses set anywhere in them. I
liked going up in the mountains best, it wasn't so hot. And the trees
were splendid, and beautiful vines and flowers of all sorts. Mrs. Dallas
went the last time. She had two girls and a big boy. I did not like
him. He would pinch my arms and then say he didn't. I liked the girls,
one was larger than I. And we swung in the hammocks the vines made. Only
I was afraid of the snakes, and there are so many everywhere. Alfred
liked to kill them."

She shuddered a little and glanced about the room with dilated eyes.

"They come into your houses sometimes. Nalla used to catch them and
sling them hard on the ground, and that stunned them. And we used to
make wreaths of the beautiful flowers. Agnes Dallas knew so many stories
about fairies, little people who come out at night, when the moon
shines, and dance round in rings. They slip in houses, and the nice ones
do some work, but the wicked ones sour the milk, and spoil the bread,
and hide things. And, sometimes, they change children into a cat, or a
rabbit, or something, and it is seven years before you can get your own
shape again. Do you have them here?"

"There is no such thing. That is all falsehood," was the decisive
comment.

"But--Agnes knew of their coming. And she had seen them dancing on the
grass. But if you speak or go near them, they disappear."

Miss Winn came out to the sitting-room.

"Oh, you are here," she said. "I thought you were out of doors. You
ought to take a run. What a wonderful garret you have upstairs, Miss
Eunice. But I am afraid we shall fill it up sadly. There were so many
things to bring. I do not believe we shall find use for half of them. I
want a few mouthfuls of fresh air. I suppose I can walk up the street
without danger of getting lost if I turn square around when I return?
Don't you want to come, Cynthia?"

Cynthia was ready.

"You had better wrap up warm. It gets chilly towards night."

"It was a long stretch on shipboard. We stopped at several ports,
however. But I am glad to be on solid ground. Come, child."

She had brought down a wrap and hood. Cynthia was glad of something new,
though she liked Miss Eunice.

They turned a rather rounding corner and went on to a sort of
market-place, where sweepers were gathering up the débris after the
day's sales. They glanced about the city. Salem had made rapid strides
since the grand declaration of peace, but at the end of the century it
was far from the grandeur the next twenty years would give it.

"There are no palaces and no temples," said Cynthia, rather
complainingly. "And how white all the people are. Do you suppose they
have been ill?"

"Oh, no; they have been housed up during the winter, and the climate is
cold. And, you know, they are of a different race. This part, New
England, was settled mostly from old England."

"Are you going to like it, Rachel?"

"Why--I don't quite know. You can't tell at once about a strange place."

"Miss Eunice is nice. But she has some queer ideas."

"Or is it a little girl, named Cynthia Leverett, who has queer ideas
that she has brought largely from a far-off country?"

The child laughed. Then she saw some girls and boys playing tag in the
street, laughing and squealing when they were caught, or when they
narrowly missed. And some empty carts went rattling by, with now and
then a stately coach, or a man on horseback, attired in the fashion of
the times. The sun suddenly dropped down.

"We had better turn about," declared Miss Winn. "It will not do to be
late for supper."

The walk had not been straight, but her gift of locality was good. They
passed the market-place again, made the winding turn, and found the
lighted lamps gave the house a cheerful aspect.

Miss Eunice had put away her knotting and begun to lay the cloth when
Elizabeth entered, her face clouded over.

"I'm sure I don't see why Providence should send this avalanche upon us
to destroy our peace and comfort," she began almost angrily. "The
Thatchers' visit was pleasant, though that made a sight of clearing up
afterward. And we had hardly gotten over that when this must happen. I
was going to put that white quilt in the frame, but the garret will be
turned upside down for no one knows how long! Such a mess of stuff, and
more coming. There's enough in this house without any more being added
to it."

"But it was natural Captain Anthony should want his child to have
something belonging to him, maybe her mother, too. And goodness knows
there's room enough in the garret. It isn't half full with his traps,
and there's some of ours. And there's the loft over the kitchen."

"Well, we want some place to dry clothes in rainy weather. And when I
sweep I want to move things about, not sweep just in front of them, and
have the dust settle in rows behind. Chilian didn't know what a lot
there would be, though he might have looked it over on the ship. When it
is all through, the house will need a thorough cleaning again. And what
_do_ you think, Eunice! She's going to put the child in that big bed and
she sleep in the little one! The best room in the house! I'm sorry they
have it."

Eunice was roused a little.

"That doesn't seem the proper thing. But maybe she thought--I do suppose
the child has had the best of everything."

"I don't believe in pampering children. And I don't altogether like the
woman. I do wonder if we will have to keep her. A girl of nine is old
enough to look after herself, and begin to keep her own clothes and her
room in order."

"It's been very different out in India. And I do suppose Anthony was
over-indulgent, she having no mother to train her."

"We'll have our hands full, Eunice, when the tussle really begins."

"Oh, I do not think she will be hard to manage. She seems rather
shy----"

"Those eyes of hers ain't so deep for nothing. She hasn't the Leverett
mouth, and those full lips are wilful and saucy, generally speaking.
Letty Orne was a pretty girl, as I remember. Strange, now, when you come
to think of it, that the child should have been born in this house. But
she'll never have any beauty to spare, that's certain. For the land
sakes, Eunice, look at the time and you dawdling over the table. I'm
tired as a dog after a long race."

Elizabeth dropped into a chair. In her secret heart Eunice knew that
when her sister was tired out she was fractious; she loved her too well
to say cross words.

"Shall we have fish or cold meat?" she asked mildly.

"Oh, I don't care! Well, fish. There will be meat enough for to-morrow's
dinner if it isn't meddled with."

The fish was salted down in the season, soaked a little, laid in spiced
vinegar for a few hours, cut in thin slices, and was very appetizing.
Eunice went about with no useless flutter, she stepped lightly and
never made any clatter with dishes. The tea china, thin and lovely, the
piles of white bread and brown, molasses gingerbread and frosted sugar
cake, stewed dried fruit and rich preserves, made an inviting-looking
table. Chilian came in and made himself neat, as usual, then the guests.

Cynthia was very quiet. Twice Miss Winn answered a question for her. She
scarcely ate anything. Then she said wearily:

"I am so tired and sleepy. Can't I go to bed?"




CHAPTER IV

UNWELCOME


Miss Winn and her charge went down to the ship the next morning with
Chilian Leverett. Elizabeth inspected the rooms. She was not meddlesome,
nor over-curious generally, but with a feeling of possessorship and
responsibility in the house, she wanted to know how far she could trust
the newcomers. The beds were well made, but closets and drawers were
rather awry. She did begrudge the best chamber, and wondered whether it
would not be possible to change them about presently. True, they seldom
had guests.

Then a new load of boxes came, with two trunks, and several more pieces
of furniture. The latter were left standing in the hall. The garret had
been a sort of fetich with Elizabeth. There were dried herbs hanging to
the rafters in their muslin bags, so as not to make a litter and mostly
for the fragrance. There was not a cobweb anywhere. On one side of the
sloping roof were ranged their own trunks and chests, two of cedar, in
which woollen clothes and blankets passed the summer, securely hidden
from moths. In one gable were miscellaneous household articles, a few
chairs good enough to be repaired, a more than century-old cherry table,
spinning-wheels, a bedstead piled high with a feather bed, and
numberless pillows, for Elizabeth thought it her duty to make a new pair
every year, as they kept a flock of geese that spent their days in a
small cove on South River.

The interloper boxes could make a row down the cleared side. That left
the centre, the highest part, clear for drying clothes, which probably
would not be needed until winter. But careful Elizabeth planned ahead
for every emergency. True, the emergency did not always fit the plans,
but it gave her tense spirit a rest.

The Salem air was fragrant, with all manner of sweet springtime
odors--the ship was not. Things that had been stored in the hold came up
with a certain old smell and a little mustiness. First, Cynthia held her
nose and made a wry face. But it was delightful to run about and
exchange greetings with the sailors, who seemed merry enough over their
work.

"Well, missy," said the captain, catching her in his arms as she ran,
"how do you like living on dry land? You haven't lost your sea legs yet,
that's plain."

"It's very queer. There are just tiny leaves coming out on the trees,
and a few curious white flowers, little bells, coming up in the garden,
and crocus in pretty colors. But I don't like it very much. Miss Eunice
is nice and has such a soft voice. And the houses are so funny and shut
up, and there are no servants about, nor any one praying on the corners
and holding out a basin for rice; and no piles of fruit for sale."

"No; this isn't the time of year for fruit;" and there was a funny
twinkle in the captain's eye. "Just wait until August and September."

Cynthia considered. "That is three and four months away. Father will be
here then;" with a child's confidence.

"And there are berries earlier, and cherries, and then some sugar pears.
Oh, you will be feasted. And you'll like Cousin Leverett, when you come
to get acquainted with him. You will go to school, too, and know lots of
little girls. You won't want to go back to India."

"Unless father shouldn't come. Oh, he surely will, because, you see, I'm
praying ever so many times a day."

"That's right;" with a cheerful nod.

"When are you going back?"

"In about a month, I calculate."

She sighed and looked out over the great stretch of waters. "What is
that long point down there?" she asked suddenly.

"That's Salem Neck, and there is Winter Island. They are always building
ships down there and turn out some mighty fine ones. And fishing;
there's a sight of cod, and haddock, and mackerel, and all the other
fish in season. They salt them and take them half over the world. And
there's a rope-walk you'd enjoy seeing, leastways you would if you were
a boy. And there are some stores. We have lots of goods consigned to the
Merrits. Salem's a big place, now I tell you!"

"Bigger than Calcutta?"

"Sho' now! Calcutta can't hold a candle to it."

The captain's cabin was being dismantled for repairs and cleaning. She
glanced in it. How many days she had spent here! Everything was in
disorder, yet there was a certain home remembrance that touched the
child's heart, and brought tears to her eyes.

"Oh, are you here?" It was Chilian Leverett's voice, and he held out his
hand. She looked so bright now and there was a little color in her
cheeks, an eager interest about her. He was afraid she was going to be a
rather dull child.

"Yes; it's almost like home, you know; only when we lived here it wasn't
so topsy-turvy."

"Did you feel queer when you woke up this morning?" thinking it his duty
to smile.

"Oh, I didn't know where I was. It seemed as if I was being smothered in
something. And it didn't toss and rock. Oh, there were some birds
singing." She laughed gleefully. "Then I saw Rachel, and it came to me
in little bits, but it seems such a long, long while since yesterday
morning."

"Where is Miss Winn? I want to see her a moment."

"She has been looking over some things as they came up from the hold,"
said the captain. "Oh, here she is!"

Chilian took her aside for a moment. It was necessary for him to go in
to Boston and he wanted to make a few suggestions, so that any of
Elizabeth's strictures might not offend. He began to perceive the child
and her attendant were not exactly welcome guests.

"How long do you suppose she will stay?" Elizabeth had asked of him
rather sharply. "For, when we are once settled, I do not think there
will be any real necessity for keeping Miss Winn."

She had been considering it at intervals through the night, and was
impatient for what she called an understanding.

Chilian had often given in to her on points that did not really affect
him. He hated to bicker with any one, especially women.

"My dear Elizabeth," he began, "the child has been consigned to my
charge until she comes of age. I should not have chosen the
guardianship, but it seems there is no other relative who can attend to
all matters as well. She is to be no dependent, only for whatever love
we choose to give her. Anthony has made an ample allowance for her,
indeed such a generous one that it irks me to accept it. If it makes too
much work for you and Eunice, we will have some help. Miss Winn is to
look after her, that was her father's wish; so there will be no change.
Of course, it alters our quiet mode of living, but perhaps we were
getting in too much of a rut and needed some shaking up;" smiling
gravely. "Try and make it as comfortable for them as you can. There is
plenty of room in the house for us all."

Then there was nothing before them but acceptance. In a way she had
known it, but there was a vague idea seething in her mind that if the
maid could be dismissed, she and her sister could train the child in a
better manner, and instil some Salem virtues in her that yet held a
little of the old Puritanic leaven; like industry, economy, forethought.
She still believed in the strait and narrow pathway.

That Chilian should take the matter so philosophically _did_ surprise
her. To him there seemed something so pitiful in the hope held out to
the little girl, yet after all could it have been managed any more
wisely? She would not know what the acute pang of death was. And her
longing would become less, there would be a vagueness in her sorrow that
would help to heal it. This would be her home. He had been living all
these years for himself, was it not time that he espoused some other
motive? That he began to be of real service?

He finished his talk with Miss Winn. Cynthia was hopping over some coils
of cable, and he watched her agile, graceful movements, half smiling.

"Come and tell me good-bye," he said, holding out his hand. "I am going
in to Boston."

"In a vessel?"

"No; though I suppose that would be possible. I am late for the stage,
and must go on horseback."

"Where is Boston?"

"Oh, some eighteen miles--rather southerly. It is a big city, and the
capital."

"When are you coming back?" with a daintily anxious air.

"Oh, by supper-time."

"Well;" nodding.

"What shall I bring you?"

"Nothing at all. We have twice too much now, Rachel says. Only--be sure
to come back."

"If I did not, what then?"

"If you did not come back, I should go to India with Captain Corwin. I
like Miss Eunice a little, but your other lady doesn't want me," she
replied with a frankness that was amusing, it was so free from malice.

"Good-bye until to-night, then."

She put her hand in his. Then she reached up tiptoe. "Kiss me," she
said. "Father always did and he said, 'Be a good girl.'"

"Be a good girl." Chilian kissed the soft red lips and then went his
way. There was not much caressing in the restrained New England nature
of that day, especially among those who had grown up with few family
ties. His mother had died while he was yet quite a boy.

"Let us go back now," said Rachel presently. "I believe I have found all
our goods. Miss Leverett will be appalled."

The child repeated the word. "What does it mean?" she asked.

"Astonished, surprised."

"Why, _they_ have a houseful of things;" in protest.

"Then there is the less room for ours."

"But there is ever so much room in the garret."

"I almost wish we were going to live by ourselves in a little house,
like some we saw yesterday."

"Who would cook the dinner and wash the dishes?"

"Oh, I could;" laughing.

"Only us two? It would be lonesome."

"We are not likely to."

"Don't go straight home. Let us find the market again. I didn't half see
it last night."

"It wasn't night exactly. Yes--we must learn to find our way about, for
we cannot stay in all the time. This is Essex Street. Let us turn here."

The market was in its glory this morning. The stalls were ornamented
with branches of evergreens, the floors sifted over with sawdust. There
were vegetables and meats, but no great variety. There was no sunny
south, no swift train to send in delicious luxuries. The cold storage of
that day was being buried in pits and being brought out to light as
occasion required.

There were other stalls, with various household stores. Iron-holders,
tin kettles, whiskbrooms, pins (which were quite a luxury), crockery
ware even. Wagons had come in from country places and customers were
thronging about them.

The people interested Miss Winn, and the chaffering, the beating down in
prices, was quite amusing. Here a woman was measuring some cotton goods
from her chin to the ends of her fingers; here sat a cobbler doing odd
jobs while some one waited. Altogether it was very entertaining, and it
was dinner-time when they reached home.

"Mr. Leverett has gone to Boston," announced Miss Leverett. "We must
have our dinner without him."

"Yes, he was down on the ship," said Miss Winn. "Do you often go to
Boston?"

"I am much too busy to be gadding about," returned Elizabeth sharply;
"though we have connections there, and I once spent several years in the
city."

"I don't suppose it is at all like London. Eastern cities are so
different--and dirty," she added.

"Boston is very nice, quite a superior place, but we do not consider it
much above Salem," Miss Elizabeth said, with an air. "We have nearly all
of the East India trade. To be sure, there is Harvard at Cambridge, and
that calls students and professors. Cousin Chilian is a graduate. He
could have been an accepted professor if he had chosen."

Then the conversation languished. They were hardly through dinner when
the next relay of goods arrived.

"Cynthia's desk must go upstairs, I suppose. Her father had it made for
her birthday. Will Silas unpack again? There is a small cabinet of
teakwood that is beautifully carved. If you could find room in the
parlor for that. There were many other fine pieces that will no doubt be
sold, and it seems a great pity."

Elizabeth acquiesced rather frigidly, adding, "It is fortunate the house
is large, but one seems to accumulate a good deal through generations."

Cynthia went up in the garret with Miss Winn and was full of interest
over the old Leverett treasures. Here was the cradle in which Leverett
babies had been rocked, an old bit of mahogany nearly black with age.

"How funny!" cried Cynthia, springing into it, and making a clatter on
the floor.

"Don't, dear! Miss Elizabeth may not like it," said Miss Winn.

"As if I should hurt it!" indignantly.

"It is not ours."

"But we sit on their chairs, and sleep in their beds, and eat at their
table," returned the child. "Do you suppose they do not want us?"

"Our coming is Mr. Leverett's affair, and he is your guardian, so
whatever home he provides is right."

"Well, we can have a home of our own when father comes?"

"Oh, yes; when he comes."

"Well, then I shall not mind;" decisively.

Still she peered about among the old things. There were some iron
fire-dogs, a much-tarnished frame, with a cracked glass that cut her
face in a grotesque fashion, old dishes and kitchen furniture past
using, or that had been supplanted by a newer and better kind.

"Oh, dear! this is an undertaking!" declared Miss Winn, with a sigh. "I
do not believe you will ever use half these things; there are stuffs
enough to dress a queen."

It was beginning to grow dusky before she was through, though the sky
was overcast, and there would be no fine sunset. Indeed, the wind blew
up stormily. Cynthia had been viewing the place from the windows in the
four gables, though she had to stand on a box. There were South River
and the Neck and the shipping--the men, hurrying to and fro, looking so
much smaller that it puzzled Cynthia. And there was North River winding
about, and over beyond the great ocean she had crossed. There was old
St. Peter's Church, the new one was not built until long afterward, and
smaller places of worship. There was the small beginning of things to be
famous later on.

The wind began to whistle about and it grew cool, so they were glad to
go down to the cheerful sitting-room, where a fire was blazing on the
hearth.

"We shall have a storm to-night," said Miss Eunice, "our three days'
storm that usually makes its appearance about this time. Didn't you
'most perish upstairs? And what did you find to interest you?"

Cynthia had brought a stool and sat close to Miss Eunice, leaning one
arm on her knee.

"Oh, so many queer things. You don't mind if I call them queer, do you?"

"Oh, no; they _are_ queer. And when we are dead and gone some one will
call ours queer, no doubt. But we haven't many. When father died we were
on a farm just out of Marblehead. Things were mostly sold at a vendue,
for the two boys were going in the army. That was back in '78. Mother
and we two girls went to her mother's at Danvers. Elizabeth took up
sewing, but there were hard times, for the war stretched out so long,
and it did seem as if the Colonies would never gain their cause. But
they did. Brother Linus was killed, and later on I had a dear friend
lost at sea. Mother died, and we were sort of scattered about till we
came here. Cousin Chilian was very good to us. So you see we haven't
much to leave, but then we haven't any descendant;" and she gave a soft
little laugh. "Elizabeth has mother's gold comb, set with amethysts, and
a brooch, and I have the string of gold beads and some rings. A cousin
in London sent them to grandmother."

"Eunice, you might set the table," said Elizabeth, rather sharply. "I'm
making some fritters. They will taste good this cold night."

"Couldn't I help?" asked Rachel.

"Oh, you must be tired enough without doing any more. It's a good thing
you have all your belongings housed. The garret doesn't leak."

"Yes, I am thankful. I really did not think there was so much."

There was a savory fragrance in the sitting-room. Chilian came in,
looking weary with his long ride.

"It is almost wintry cold," he said, holding his hands to the fire.
"Have you had a nice day, little girl?"

"Yes;" glancing up with a smile.

They did justice to Bessy's nice supper. Chilian had seen Cousin Giles,
who sent remembrances to them all, and was coming up some day to see
Letty Orne's little girl. Chilian found there was a good deal of
business to do. For a while his days of leisure and ease would be over.

Then he brought out a Boston paper and read them some of the news. Miss
Eunice went on with her fringe. Elizabeth was knitting a sock for
Chilian out of fine linen yarn, spun by herself, and she put pretty
open-work stitches all up the instep. For imported articles were still
dear, and there was a pride in the women to do all for themselves that
they could. Cynthia leaned her head on Rachel's lap and went asleep.

"Do hear that rain! The storm has begun in good earnest."

It was rushing like a tramp of soldiers, flinging great sheets against
the closed shutters, and the wind roared in the chimney like some
prisoned spirit.

"Wake up, Cynthia, and say good-night."

Elizabeth watched the child. Her theory was that children should be put
to bed early and not allowed to lie around on any one's lap. There was
always a tussle of wills when you roused them. She drew herself up with
a kind of severe mental bracing and awaited the result, glad Chilian was
there.

Rachel toyed with the hair, patted the soft flushed cheek, and took the
hands in hers.

"Cynthia," she said gently, "Cynthia, dear, wake up."

The child roused, opened her eyes. "I'm so tired," she murmured. "Will
we never be done crossing the wide, wide ocean? And where is Salem?"

"We are there, dear, safe and housed from the storm. You have been
asleep on my knee. Come to bed now. Say good-night."

She stood the little girl up on her feet and put one arm around her.

It was against Elizabeth Leverett's theories that any child should go
off peaceably, with no snarling protest. Chilian raised his book a
little, hoping in the depths of his soul there would be no scene.

"Say good-night."

No child of Puritan training, with the fear of the rod before her eyes,
could have done better. She said good-night in a very sleepy tone, and
slipped her arm about Rachel's waist as they left the room together.

No one made any comment at first. Then Eunice said, in what she made a
casual tone:

"She seems a very tractable child."

"You can't tell by one instance. Children of that age are always
self-willed. And allowing a child to lie around one's lap, when she
should have said her prayers and gone to bed at the proper hour, is a
most reprehensible habit. And I don't suppose she ever says a prayer."

Eunice thought of the daily prayers for her father's safe journey. Would
that be set down as a sort of idolatry?

Chilian picked up his papers; he had grown fastidious, and rarely left
his belongings about to annoy Elizabeth. Eunice rolled up her work and
dropped it in the bag that hung on the post of her chair, straightened
up a few things, stood the logs in the corner and put up the wire
fender, so there should be no danger of fire; while Elizabeth set all
things straight in the kitchen.

Cynthia meanwhile was undressed and mounted the steps to the high bed.
Then she flung her arms about Rachel's neck.

"Oh, come and sleep in my bed to-night!" she cried pleadingly. "It's so
big and lonesome, that I am afraid. I wish it was like your little bed.
They were so cunning on the ship. I don't like this one, where you have
to go upstairs to get in it. Oh, do come!"

And Elizabeth Leverett would have been shocked if she could have seen
the child cuddled up in her attendant's arms. Theoretically, she
believed Holy Writ--"He hath made of one blood all nations." Practically
she made many exceptions.




CHAPTER V

MAKING FRIENDS WITH THE LITTLE GIRL


The northeast storm was terrific. The wind lashed the ocean until it
writhed and groaned and sent great billows up on the land. The trees
bent to the fierce blasts; many storms had toughened them and perhaps
taught them the wisdom of yielding, since it must be break or bend.
Silas sat in the barn mending tools and harness and clearing up
generally; Elizabeth spent most of the first day clearing up the garret
again, and looking with a grudging eye on the new accession of boxes,
and sniffing up the queer smell disdainfully.

"One can't have the windows open," she ruminated, "and the smell must go
through the house. I don't believe it will ever get out."

More than one family in Salem had stores from the Orient. Many of them
liked the fragrance of sandalwood and strange perfumes. "God's fresh air
was good enough for her," said Elizabeth.

Eunice had finished her fringe and brought out some patchwork in the
afternoon--a curious pattern, called basket-work. The basket was made of
green chintz, with a small yellow figure here and there. It had a handle
from side to side, neatly hemmed on a white half square. The upper edge
of the basket was cut in points and between each one was a bit of color
to represent or suggest a possible bud of some kind. One had pink,
different shades of red, and a bright yellow. She had seven blocks
finished and they were in the bottom of the box. Eunice took them out
for the little girl, who spread them on the floor.

No one was thinking at that day of the mills that would dot New England,
where cotton cloths, calicoes, and cambrics would be turned out by the
bale. These things had to be imported and were costly. One could dye
plain colors that were used for frocks and gowns, and some of the hand
looms wove ginghams that were dyed in the thread beforehand.

"It will take forty-two blocks," said Miss Eunice. "Six one way, seven
the other."

"Then what are you going to do with it?" asked the child eagerly.

"Why, quilt it. Put some cotton between this and the lining, and sew
them together with fine stitches."

"And then----"

"Why"--Eunice wondered herself. There were chests of them piled away in
the garret--Chilian's mother's, and those they had made to fill in the
moments when housework was finished. She had a quiet sense of humor, and
she smiled. What were they laying up these treasures for? Neither of
them would be married, most of their relatives were well provided for.

"Well, some one may like to have them;" after a pause. "You must learn
to sew."

"Patchwork?"

It was absurd to pile up any more.

"You see," said the child, "no one needed them over there;" inclining
her head to the East. "You have a little bed and a pallet, and it is
warm, so you do not need quilts. And the poor people and the servants
have a mat they spread down anywhere and a blanket, but you see, they
sleep with their clothes on."

Eunice looked rather horrified.

"But they change them! They would--why, there would be soil and vermin."

"They go to the river and bathe and wash them out. They sling them on
the stones in a queer way. But some of them are very dirty and ragged.
They are not like the English and us, and don't wear many clothes.
Sometimes they are wrapped up in a white sheet."

"It is a very queer country. They are not civilized, or Christianized. I
don't know what will become of them in the end."

"It's their country and no one knows how old it is. China is the oldest
country in the world."

"But, my dear, there was the garden of Eden when God first created the
world. Nothing could be older than that, you know. Two thousand years to
the flood, and two thousand years to the coming of Christ, and some
people think the world will end in another two thousand years."

"I don't see any sense in burning it up, when there are so many lovely
things in it;" and Cynthia's eyes took on a deep, inquiring expression.
"That was what the chaplain used to say. Father thought it would go on
and on, getting wiser and greater, and the people learning to be better
and making wonderful things."

"My dear, what the Bible says _must_ be true. And it will be burned up.
You have a Bible?"

"The chaplain gave me a pretty prayer-book. It is upstairs."

"We do not believe in prayer-books, dear." The tone was soft, yet
decided. "We came over here, at least our forefathers did, that we might
worship God according to the dictates of our conscience. We tried to
leave the prayer-books and the bishops behind, but we couldn't quite.
You must have a Bible and read a chapter every day. Why, I had read it
through once before I was as old as you."

Cynthia simply stared. Then, after a pause, she said:

"Did you sew patchwork, too?"

"When I was eight I had finished a quilt. And I learned to knit. I knit
my own stockings; I always have. And I braided rags for a mat. Mother
sewed it together."

"And your clothes--who made those?"

"Well--mother made some. But a woman used to come round fall and spring
and make for the girls and boys, though father bought his best suit. He
had one when he was married; it was his freedom suit as well----"

"Why, was he a prisoner?" the child interrupted.

"Oh, no;" smiling a little. "Boys had to be subject to their fathers
until they were twenty-one. Then they had a suit of clothes all the way
through and their time, which meant they were at liberty to work for any
one and ask wages. He had been courting mother and they were married
soon after, so it was his wedding suit. He had outgrown it before he
died, so he had to get a new one. Mother sold that to a neighbor that it
just fitted."

"Tell me some more about them." Cynthia was fond of stories. And this
was about real folks, not the fantastic legends she had heard so often.

"Well--he and mother worked, she had been living with a family. Girls
did in those days, and were like daughters of the house. Father went to
work there. They were married in the spring and in the fall he took a
place on shares; that is, he had half of everything, and they divided up
the house. A year or so afterward it was for sale, and he bought it, and
we were all born there, and there was no change until he died. That was
a sad thing for us. He'd been buying some more land, and the place
wasn't clear. Another man stood ready to buy it, and mother thought it
best to sell. You see there was a good deal of trouble between us and
England, who wanted to get all the money she could out of the Colonies,
and wasn't willing to send troops to protect us from the Indians, and we
had to sell our produce and things to her, and presently the Colonies
wouldn't stand it any longer, and there was war. Some people were
bitterly opposed to it, some favored it. Then we wouldn't take the tea
she insisted on our buying, and there was the Stamp Act. And Salem
really made the first armed resistance. You must go out some nice day to
North Bridge. The British troops marched up from Marblehead to seize
some arms they heard were stored here. General Gage sent them. But the
people had word, for a Major Pedrick rode up to give the alarm, and they
hid them in a secure place. Colonel Leslie headed the British troops to
make the search. But the people of Salem turned out strong and met the
colonel and declared that he was marching on private property, not on
the King's highway, that the lane and the bridge were private property,
where he had no right. You see, war had not been declared and the people
had a right to defend their own. So they would not allow them to cross
the river and make a search. But, finally, they agreed, if the draw over
the river could be lowered and they allowed to march a few rods, they
would withdraw. Of course, they saw nothing suspicious and came back,
keeping their word. Otherwise, I suppose, that would have been the first
battle of the war. We were not living here then, but Cousin Chilian's
father lived in this very house."

"And the arms were really there!" Cynthia drew a long breath.

"Oh, yes! They were ships' cannon going to be mounted for protection.
Some day Cousin Chilian may take you over to the bridge and tell you all
about it. There was a romance about a girl said to be in love with a
British officer, but you are too young for such stories."

If she had not been, the entrance of Elizabeth and Miss Winn would have
checked the garrulity of Eunice. Cynthia had been laying down the small
diamond-shaped pieces, making a block.

"Why do you let the child muddle over those pieces, Eunice? The carpet
may not be clean," said Elizabeth sharply.

"And it is getting dark, so we had better put them all up. Mercy! how it
still rains. Why, it seems as if there would be another flood."

"That can never happen. We have the promise."

"That the whole world will not be destroyed. But parts of it may suffer.
You and Cynthia are fortunate not to be in it;" and Eunice raised her
eyes to them, with a certain thankfulness.

It had not stopped yet in the morning, but the wind was veering to the
south, the air was not so cold and the rain much gentler. Cynthia
wandered about like an unquiet spirit. It was cold up in their room.
Chilian had proposed a fire, but Elizabeth had negatived it sharply.

"There ought to be room enough in the dining-room and keeping-room for
two extra people," she said decidedly.

He felt sorry for the little girl with her downcast face, as he met her
on the landing.

"Don't you want to come and visit me?" he asked, in an inviting tone.

"Oh, yes!" and the grave little face lightened.

The blaze was brighter here than downstairs, she felt quite sure. And
the room had a more cheerful look. The table was spread with books and
papers, and, oh, the books that were on the shelves! The curious things
above them suggested India. There really was the triple-faced god she
had seen so often, carved in ivory, and another carving of a temple. She
walked slowly round and inspected them. Then she paused at a window.

"How much it rains!" she began. "I don't see how so much rain can be
made. When is it going to stop?"

"I think it will hold up this afternoon and be clear to-morrow, clear
and sunny."

"I like sunshine best. And little rains. This has been so long."

"And we haven't much to amuse a child. When it clears up we must find
some little folks. Does it seem very strange to you?"

"I haven't lived with big women much, except Rachel. And the houses are
so different. You get things about, and the servants pick them up. There
are so many servants. Sometimes there are white children, but not many.
Their mothers take them back to England. Or they die."

She uttered the last sadly, and her long lashes drooped.

He wondered a little how she had stood the climate. She looked more like
a foreigner than a native of Salem town.

"What did you do there?" He hardly knew how to talk to a little girl.

"Oh, a great many things. I went to ride in a curious sort of cart--the
natives pulled it. Then the children came and played in the court. They
threw up balls and caught them, ever so many, and they played curious
games on the stones, and acrobatic feats, and sung, and danced, and
acted stories of funny things. Then father read to me, and told me about
Salem when he was a little boy. You can't really think the grown-up
people were little, like you."

"And that one day you will be big like them."

She pushed up her sleeve. They were large and made just big enough for
her hand at the wrist, not at all like the straight, small sleeves of
the Puritan children. After surveying it a moment, she said gravely:

"I can't understand _how_ you grow. You must be pushed out all the time
by something inside."

"You have just hit it;" and he smiled approvingly. "It is the forces
inside. There is a curious factory inside of us that keeps working, day
and night, that supplies the blood, the warmth, the strength, and is
always pushing out; it even enlarges the bones until one is grown and
finished, as one may say. And the food you eat, the air you breathe, are
the supplies."

"But you go on eating and breathing. Why don't you go on growing?"

There was a curious little knot in her forehead where the lines crossed,
and she raised her eyes questioningly to him. What wonderful eyes they
were!

"I suppose it is partly this: You employ your mind and your body and
they need more nourishment. Then--well, I think it is the restraining
law of nature, else we should all be giants. In very hot countries and
very cold countries they do not grow so large."

He could not go into the intricacies of physiology, as he did with some
of the students.

"You did not go to school?"

"Oh, no!" She laughed softly. "The native schools were funny. They sat
on mats and did not have any books, but repeated after the teacher. And,
sometimes, he beat them dreadfully. There were some English people had a
school, but it was to teach the language to the natives. And then Mr.
Cathcart came to stay with father. He had been the chaplain somewhere
and wasn't well, so they gave him a--a----"

"Furlough?" suggested Chilian.

"Yes; father sent him out in one of the boats. He began to teach me some
things. I could read, you know. And I could talk Hindostani some--with
the children. Then I learned to spell and pronounce the words better. He
had a few books of verses that were beautiful. I learned some of them by
heart. And Latin."

"Latin!" in surprise.

"He had some books and a Testament. It was grand in the sound, and I
liked it. There were many things, cases and such, that I couldn't get
quite straight, but after a little I could read, and then make it over
into English."

When he was eight he was reading Latin and beginning French. Some of the
Boston women he knew were very good French scholars, though education
was not looked upon as a necessity for women. It seemed odd to him--this
little girl in Calcutta learning Latin.

"Let us see how far you have gone." Teaching never irked him when he
once set about it.

He hunted up a simple Latin primer.

"Come around this side;" and he drew her nearer to him. There had been
no little girls to train and teach, and for a moment he felt
embarrassed. But she took it as a matter of course, and he could see
she was all interest.

It had been, as he supposed, rather desultory teaching. But she took the
corrections and explanations with a sweetness that was quite enchanting.
And she could translate quite well, in an idiomatic fashion. Really,
with the right kind of training she would make a good scholar.

"Oh, you must be tired of standing," he said presently. "How thoughtless
of me. I have no little chairs, so I must hunt one up, but this will
have to do now. That will be more comfortable. Now we can go on."

She laughed at her own little blunders in a cheerful fashion, and made
haste to correct them. And then he found that she knew several of the
old Latin hymns by heart, as they had been favorites of the English
clergyman.

They were interrupted by a light tap at the door. He said "Come"; and
turned his head.

It was Miss Winn.

"Pardon me. We couldn't imagine where Cynthia was. Hasn't she been an
annoyance?"

"Oh, no; we have had a very nice time."

"But--had you not better come downstairs. Miss Eunice is sewing her
pretty patchwork again."

"Oh, let me stay," she pleaded. "Do I bother you?"

It crossed his mind just then that in the years to come more than one
man would yield to the sweet persuasiveness of those eyes.

"Yes, let her stay. She is no trouble. Indeed, we are studying."

Miss Winn was glad of his indorsement. Miss Elizabeth had been
"worrying" for the last ten minutes. She had crept softly up to the
garret, quite sure she should find the child in mischief. Then she had
glanced into the "best chamber," but there was no sign of her there.

"Very well," replied Miss Winn.

Cynthia drew a long breath presently.

"Oh, you are tired!" he exclaimed. "Run over to the window and tell me
how the sky looks. I think it doesn't rain now."

She slipped down, stood still for a moment, then turned and clapped her
hands, laughing deliciously.

"Oh, there is blue sky, and a great yellow streak. The clouds are trying
to hide the sun, but they can't. Oh, see, see!"

She danced up and down the room like a fairy in the long ray of sunshine
that illumined the apartment.

"Oh, are you not glad!" She turned such a joyous face to him that he
smiled and came over to the window that nearly faced the west.

"Better than the Latin?"

"Well--I like both;" archly.

He raised the window. A warm breath of delightful air rushed in, making
the room with the fire seem chilly by contrast. He drew in long
reviving breaths. Spring had truly come. To-morrow the swelling buds
would burst.

"We must have a little Latin every day. And occasionally a walk in the
sunshine. Twice a week I go down to Boston, but the other days will be
ours."

"I like your room," she said frankly. "But what sights of books! Do you
read them all?"

"Not very often. I do not believe I have read them all through. But I
need them for reference, and some I like very much."

He wanted to add, "And some were a gift from your dear father," but he
could not disturb her happy mood.

"Suppose we go down on the porch. It is too wet to walk anywhere."

"Oh, yes;" delightedly. "And to-morrow I will go down to the vessel
again and see Captain Corwin. I do not want it to rain any more for
weeks and weeks."

"No, for days and days. Weeks would dry us all up, and we would have no
lovely spring flowers."

"And a famine maybe. Do the very poor people sometimes starve?"

"I do not think we have any very poor people, as they do in India. We
are not overcrowded yet."

The rain had beaten the paths and the street hard, and it looked as if
it had been swept clean. In spite of it all there were cheering
evidences of spring.

"There are some children in that house," she exclaimed, nodding her
head.

"Yes, the Uphams. There are two girls and two boys, the oldest and the
youngest, who isn't much more than a baby. Bentley Upham must be about
twelve. Polly is next, but she is a head taller than you. Then there's
Betty. I am glad there will be some little girls for you to play with."

She looked eager and interested.

"Will you come in to supper? Chilian, you ought to know better than to
be standing in this damp air. And that child with nothing around her!"

"The air is reviving, after having been housed for two days." But he
turned and went in, leading the child by the hand.

The long, bleak New England coast winter was over, though it had
lingered as if loath to go. Springs were seldom early, no one expected
that. But this one came on with a rush. The willows donned their silver
catkins and then threw them off for baby leaves, the lilac buds showed
purple, the elms and maples came out in bloom, and the soft ones drew
crowds of half-famished bees to their sweet tassels. The grass was
vividly green, iridescent in the morning sun, with the dew still upon
it. Snowdrop, crocus, hepatica, and coltsfoot, wild honeysuckle, were
all about, the forsythia flared out her saucy yellow, the fruit buds
swelled. Parties were out in the woods hunting trailing arbutus that has
been called the darling of northern skies, that lies hidden in its nest
of green leaves, silent, with no wind tossing it to and fro, but
betrayed by its sweetness.

There were other signs of spring at Salem. The whole town seemed to
burst out in house-cleaning. Parlor shutters were thrown open and
windows washed. Carpets were beaten, blankets hung out to air, those
that had been in real use washed. Women were out in gardens with
sunbonnets and gloves, a coat of tan not being held in much esteem, and
snipped at roses and hardy plants. Men were spading and planting the
vegetable gardens, painting or white-washing fences. All was stir and
bustle, and tired folk excused themselves if they nodded in church on
Sunday.

Cynthia made pilgrimages to the _Flying Star_ that had been her home for
so long. The storm had wrought great havoc with some of the shipping,
and big boys were out gathering driftwood. The _Gazette_ had some
melancholy news of "lost at sea." But Captain Corwin thought he had
weathered worse storms.

"She is picking up mightily," he said to Miss Winn, nodding toward
Cynthia. "Shouldn't be surprised if she favored her mother, after all.
Only them eyes ain't neither Orne nor Leverett. Don't let her grieve too
much when the bad news comes."

Eunice and Chilian had taken her to call on the Uphams. And though she
was quite familiar at home, here she shrank into painful shyness and
would not leave Eunice's sheltering figure.

"Children get soonest acquainted by themselves," declared Mrs. Upham. "I
suppose you will send her to school. If she's not very forward, Dame
Wilby's is best. She and Betty can go together. Why, she isn't as tall
as Betty--and nine, you said? Granny was talking the other day about the
time she was born. She's a real little Salem girl after all, though
she's got a foreign skin, and what odd-colored hair! We've started Polly
to Miss Betts. I want her to learn sewing and needlework, and she's too
big now to company with such children. Why, I was almost a woman at
twelve, and could spin and knit with the best of them. Miss Eunice, I
wish you'd teach her that pretty openwork stitch you do so handy.
Imported stockings cost so much. They say there's women in Boston doing
the fancy ones for customers. But I tell Polly if she wants any she must
do them herself."

Mrs. Upham had a tolerably pleasant voice. She always talked in
monologues. Betty edged around presently and would have taken Cynthia's
hand, but the child laid it in Miss Eunice's lap, and looked
distrustful.

Chilian was as glad as she when the call ended. He did not seek the
society of women often enough to feel at home with them, though he was
kindly polite when he did meet them.

"Did you ask about the school?" was the inquiry of Elizabeth that
evening.

"Yes; she thinks Dame Wilby's the best for small children. And Cynthia
knows so little that is of real importance, though she reads pretty
well," said Eunice.

"Yes, she must get started. I shall be glad when the _Flying Star_ is
off and she isn't running down there with the men. I don't see what's
got into Chilian to think of teaching her Latin. It had enough sight
better be the multiplication table."

So she proposed the school to Chilian. She had a queer feeling about his
fancy for the child. She would have scouted the idea of jealousy, but
she would have had much the same feeling if he had "begun to pay
attention" to some woman. The other matters had reached a passable
settlement. The "best chamber" was tidily kept, the little girl well
looked after to see that she troubled no one. Miss Winn kept her clothes
in order, but they had a decidedly foreign look, and of materials no one
would think of buying for a child. But the goods were here, and might as
well be used.

Miss Winn had made a few alterations in the room--softened the aspect of
it. She longed to take out the big carved bedstead, but she knew that
would never do. She made herself useful in many unobtrusive ways,
gardened a little, was neighborly yet reserved.

"I don't know what we would do if she were a gossip," Elizabeth
commented.

She broached the subject of the school to Chilian.

"Why, yes," he answered reluctantly. "I suppose she ought to go. She's
curiously shy with other children."

"She talks enough about that Nalla, as if they had been like sisters."

"You can notice that she always preserves the distinction, though."

"There's no use bothering with that Latin, Chilian. Next thing it will
be French. And she won't know enough figuring to count change. Girls
don't need that kind of education."

"But some of them have to be Presidents' wives. And some of them wives
to men who have to go abroad. French seems to be quite general among
cultivated people."

"It's hardly likely she'll go abroad. And she needs to be like other
people. I don't see what you find so entertaining about her. And you
couldn't bear children in your room!"

"She isn't any annoyance. Then she is so deft, so dainty. She touches
books with the lightest of fingers. She will sit and look at pictures,
and it quite surprises me how much she knows about geography."

"And nothing much about her native country. She can't tell the
difference between Pilgrims and Puritans. And she didn't know why we
came over here, and why it was not the same God in England, and if all
the gods in India were idols. Chilian, you shouldn't encourage her
irreverence. It looks pert in a child."

"She will get over these ways as she grows older and mingles with other
children."

"That is what I am coming to. She ought to begin at once. Betty Upham
goes to Dame Wilby. Her mother considers it excellent for small
children. She could go with Betty and there would be no fear of her
trailing off no one knows where."

Of course, she ought to go to school. He could manage a big boy on the
verge of manhood very well. But this woman-child puzzled him. She seemed
very tractable, obedient in a certain sense, yet in the end she seemed
to get, or to take, her own way. Suppressing one train of action opened
another. She had a sweet way of yielding, but a strong way of holding
on. A little thing made her happy, yet in her deepest happiness there
was much gravity. His theories were that certain qualities brought to
pass certain results. He forgot that there were no such things as pure
temperaments, and that environments made second nature different from
what the first might have been. The child puzzled him by her
contrariety, yet she was not a troublesome child.

"Well;" reluctantly.

"I'll see the Dame. And we will start her on Monday."

He nodded.

Elizabeth had another point to gain. She looked over her trunk of
pieces. Here were several yards of brown and white gingham, quite enough
for a frock without any furbelows. With the roll in her hand she tapped
at the partly open door. Rachel had laid out on the bed several white
frocks, plain enough even for Salem tastes.

"Cynthia's going to school on Monday," she announced. "And I thought
this would make her a good school frock. It won't be dirtysome. You see
children here _do_ dress differently. You'll get into the ways."

Rachel looked at the gingham. "I shouldn't like it for her," she said
quietly. "Her father always wanted to see her in white. That is new
every time it is washed. These things fade and then look so wretched.
Beside she will only outgrow these frocks."

"Children here keep their white frocks for Sundays," was the decisive
reply.

"She may as well wear these out. They were made last summer. She has not
grown much meanwhile. I should like to keep her in the way her father
desired."

"Then she must have a long-sleeved apron to cover her up. This will make
two. For those white things make an endless sight of washing."

"I have been considering that," said Rachel Winn quietly. "I wear white
a good deal myself. I noticed a small house on Front Street where there
were nearly always clothes on the lines, and I stopped in to inquire. I
felt it was too much laundry-work for your woman through the summer.
This Mrs. Pratt is very reasonable and does her work nicely. So I have
made arrangements with her. Captain Leverett made a generous allowance
for incidental expenses."

What Elizabeth termed Miss Winn's "independence" grated sorely upon her
ideas of what was owing to the head of the house, which was herself. It
was always done so quietly and pleasantly one could hardly take umbrage.
Cynthia was not exactly a child of the house. She was in no wise
dependent on her newly found relatives. Chilian had made that understood
in the beginning, when he had chosen the best chamber for them.

"You don't need to take boarders," she had replied tartly.

"I don't know as we are to call it that. I am the child's guardian and
answerable for her comfort and her welfare. The perfect trust confided
in me has touched me inexpressibly. I didn't know that Anthony Leverett
held me in such high esteem. And if I choose to put this money by until
she is grown--it will make such a little difference in our living----"

"Chilian Leverett, you are justly entitled to it," she interrupted with
sharp decision. "He's right enough in making a fair provision for
them--no doubt he has plenty. But I don't quite like the boarder
business, for all that."

"We must get some one to help you with the work."

"I don't want any more help than I have. Land sakes! Eunice and I have
plenty of leisure on our hands. I wouldn't have a servant around wasting
things, if she paid me wages."

They had gone on very smoothly. Eunice had found her way to the child's
heart. But then Eunice had lived with her dream children that might have
been like Charles Lamb's "Children of Alice." Elizabeth might have
married twice in her life, but there was no love in either case, rather
a secret mortification that such incapables should dare to raise their
thoughts to her. But she had some strenuous ideas on the rearing of
children, quite of the older sort. Life was softening somewhat, even for
childhood, but she did not approve of it.




CHAPTER VI

GOING TO SCHOOL


Elizabeth Leverett interviewed Dame Wilby beforehand. The woman came
half a day on Monday to wash and she hardly knew how to spend half an
hour, but when she found Miss Winn was going, she loftily relegated the
whole business to her.

Dame Wilby lived in an old rambling house, already an eyesore to the
finer houses in Lafayette Street, but the Dame was obstinate and would
not sell. "It was going to last her time out. She was born here when it
was only a lane, and she meant to be buried from here." Once it had been
quite a flourishing school; but newer methods had begun to supersede it.
It was handy for the small children about the neighborhood, it took them
over the troublesome times, it gave their mothers a rest, and kept them
out of mischief. And the old dames were thorough, as far as they went.
Indeed, some of the mothers had never gone any farther. They could cast
up accounts, they could weigh and measure, for they had learned all the
tables. They could spell and read clearly, they knew all the common arts
of life, and how to keep on learning out of the greater than printed
books--experience.

Dame Wilby might have been eighty. No one remembered her being young.
Her husband was lost at sea and she opened the school, worked in her
garden, saved until she had cleared her small old home, and now was
laying up a trifle every year. She was tall and somewhat bent in the
shoulders, very much wrinkled, with clear, piercing light blue eyes and
snowy hair. She always wore a cap and only a little line of it showed at
the edge of her high forehead. Her frocks were made in the plainest
style, skirts straight and narrow, and she always wore a little shoulder
shawl, pinned across the bosom--white in the summer, home-dyed blue in
the winter.

Some children were playing tag in the unoccupied lot next door. The
schoolroom door opened at the side. There were two rows of desks, with
benches for the older children, two more with no desks for the A B C and
spelling classes. The rest they learned in concert, orally. The dame had
a table covered with a gray woollen cloth, some books, an inkstand, a
holder for pens and pencils, and the never-failing switch.

"Yes," she answered to Miss Winn's explanation. "Miss Leverett was
telling about her. I was teaching school here when she was born, and
then the captain took her away to the Ingies again." Most folks
pronounced it that way. "Rather meachin' little thing--I s'pose it was
the climate over there. They say it turns the skin yellow. Let's see how
you read, sissy?"

She read several verses out of the New Testament quite to the dame's
satisfaction. Then about spelling. The second word, in two syllables,
floored her. Had she ciphered? No. Did she know her tables? No. The
capital of the state? That she could answer. When the war broke out?
When peace was declared?

"I'll ask Cousin Leverett," she answered, in nowise abashed by her
ignorance. "He tells me a great many things."

"You must study it out of books. I s'pose she's going to live here?
She's not going back to the Ingies? I heard the captain was coming
home."

"He is settling up his affairs," was the quiet answer.

Dame Wilby looked the child all over.

"You'll sit on that bench," she said. Then she rang the bell and the
children trooped in, staring at her. The little boys--four of them--were
on the seat back of her, on her seat she made the fifth. Betty Upham was
in the desk contingent.

They repeated the Lord's prayer in concert. Then lessons were given out.
The larger girls read.

"You can come and read with this class;" nodding to Cynthia.

She was not a regularly bashful child, but she flushed as the children
stared at her. They sometimes wore their Sunday white frock one or two
days at school. Cynthia was so used to her clothes, cared so little
about them that they were rarely in her mind. But this universal
attention annoyed her.

"'Tend to your books, children."

Cynthia acquitted herself finely, rather too much so, the dame thought.
She would talk to her about it. A girl didn't want to read as if she was
a minister preaching a sermon.

Then she was given a very much "dog's-eared" spelling-book to study down
a column. Another class read some easy lesson; a story about a dog that
interested her so much that she forgot to study. While the older
children were doing sums one little boy after another came up to the
desk and spelled from a book. One's attention wandered and the dame hit
him a sharp rap. Tables followed, eight and nine times; dry measure, and
then questions were asked singly. Some few missed. Cynthia followed the
spelling where they went up and down. Then the larger ones were
dismissed for recess.

"Cynthy Leverett, come up here and see how many words you can spell. You
ought to be ashamed, a big girl like you staying behind in next to the
baby class."

Cynthia's face was scarlet. Alas! She had been so interested watching
and listening she had not studied at all. But the words were rather easy
and she did know all but two.

"Now you take the next line and those two over again. See if you can't
get them all learned by noon."

The next little girl, who could not have been more than six, missed a
number. She had a queer drawl in her voice.

"What did I tell you, Jane Mason? And you have missed more than two.
Hold out your hand!"

The switch came down on the poor little hand with an angry swish.
Cynthia winched.

"Now you go back and study. No going out to play for you this morning.
Jane Mason, you're the biggest dunce in school."

The two other girls did better. Then the bell rang and the girls came in
with flushed and laughing faces.

Cynthia studied her two words over until they ceased to have any
meaning. At twelve they were all dismissed.

"Isn't she a hateful old thing?" said Janie Mason, when they were
outside of the door. "I wish I was big enough to strike back. I don't
like school anyhow. Do you?"

"I--I don't know. I have never been before."

Several of the other girls swarmed around her with curious eyes.

"What a pretty frock!" began Betty Upham. "I suppose it's your Sunday
best, with all that work."

"Betty said you were an Injun," said another. "I never saw an Injun who
didn't have coarse, straight, black hair, and yours is lightish and
curls. I'd so love to have curly hair."

"I'm not the kind of Indians you have here," she returned indignantly.
"I was born right here in Salem. I've lived in Calcutta and in China,
and been to Batavia, and ever so many places."

"Then you ain't an Injun at all! Betty, how could you?"

"Well, that's what some of them said. Maybe your mother was an Injun!"
looking as if she had fixed the uncertain suspicion.

"No, she wasn't. She lived here part of the time. She was born in
Boston."

They glanced at each other in a kind of upbraiding fashion.

"And you had to be put with the little children! Aren't there any
schools in that place you came from? It's a heathen country. Our
minister prays for it. Don't you have any churches either? What do
people do when they are grown up if they never go to school?"

"Are you coming stiddy?"

"Is Mr. Chilian Leverett your real relation?"

"Oh, tell me--have you any other frock as pretty as this? My sister
Hetty has a beautiful one, all lace and needlework. She's saving it to
be married in."

"Martha, I dare you to a race!"

Two girls ran off as fast as they could. Betty Upham caught Cynthia's
arm.

"I didn't say you were a real Injun. Debby Strang always gets things
mixed up. But it is something queer----"

"East India;" in a tone of great dignity.

"Where the ships are coming from all the time? Is it prettier than
Salem?"

"It's so different you can't tell. We do not have hardly any winter. And
there are vines and flowers and temples to heathen gods, and the people
_are_ yellow and brown."

"Do you suppose you will ever grow clear white?"

Cynthia had half a mind to be angry. Even Miss Elizabeth was fair, and
Miss Eunice had such a soft, pretty skin.

"There, that's your corner. You're coming this afternoon?"

"Oh, I suppose so."

Miss Elizabeth was all bustle and hurry. It was clouding up a little. It
hadn't been a real fair day, and the hot sun had dried the clothes too
quick. She liked them to bleach on the line, it was almost as good as
the grass. And Miss Drake couldn't stay and iron, they had sickness over
to the Appletons and she had to go there. Everything was out of gear.

"I'd help with the ironing, if you would like," said Miss Winn.

"Well, the ironing isn't so much;" rather ungraciously. "You see, there
were four blankets. I never touch an iron to them, but shake them good
and fold them, and let them lay one night, then hang them on the line in
the garret. The bulk of it was large. And a good stiff breeze blows out
wrinkles. The wind hasn't blown worth a Continental;" complainingly.

"Did you like the school?" Miss Winn inquired in the hall.

"No, I didn't. And I don't seem to know anything;" in a discouraged
tone.

"Oh, you will learn."

It was warm in the afternoon. Two of the boys were decidedly bad and
were punished. They positively roared. Cynthia spelled, and spelled, and
studied--"One and one are two," "one and two are three," and after a
while it dawned on her that it was just one more every time. Why, she
had known that all the time, only it hadn't been put in a table.

It grew very tiresome after a while. She asked if she couldn't have
recess with the big girls, but was sharply refused. In truth the good
dame grew very weary herself, and was glad when five o'clock came and
she could go out in the garden and recruit her tired nerves.

The stage was stopping at the door. Oh, how glad she was to see Cousin
Leverett. He smiled down in the flushed face.

"How did the school go?" he asked.

She hung her head. "I don't like it. I have to be with the little class
because I don't know tables, but I learned all the one times. That was
easy enough when you came to see into it. But--nine and nine?"

"Eighteen," he answered promptly.

"And you answered it right offhand!" She gave a soft, cheerful laugh.
"Oh, do you suppose I shall ever know so much?"

"There was a time when I didn't know it."

"Truly?" She looked incredulous.

"Truly. And I had quite hard work remembering to spell correctly."

"I studied two lines. This morning I missed two words, but this
afternoon I knew them all. And I can't write on the slate. The pencil
wabbles so, and then it gives an awful squeak that goes all over you.
And I can't do sums. And there's all the tables to learn. And I don't
like the teacher. I wish Miss Eunice could teach me. Or maybe Rachel
might."

"I might help you a little. But you read well?"

"She said it was too--too"--she wrinkled up her forehead--"too affected,
like a play-actor."

"Nonsense!" he cried disapprovingly. "We will see about some other
school presently. Would you like to take a walk with me? I'm tired of
the long stage-ride."

"Oh, so much!" She caught one hand in both of hers and gave a few skips
of joy.

"Let us go over to the river."

Of course, he should have gone in and announced their resolve. But he
was so used to considering only himself, and he realized that it must
have been a tiresome day to her. They went over Lafayette Street, which
was only a lane, and then turned up the stream.

Oh, how sweet the air was with the odorous dampness and the smell of
new growths, tree and grass. The sun, low in the west, slanted golden
gleams through the tree branches which chased each other over the grassy
spaces, as if they were quite alive and at merry-making. There were
sedgy plants in bloom, jack-in-the-pulpit, and what might have been a
lily, with a more euphonious name. Iridescent flies were skimming about,
now and then a fish made a stir and dazzle. Squirrels ran up and down
the trees and chattered, robins were singing joyously, the thrush with
her soft, plaintive note. She glanced up now and then and caught his
eye, and he felt she was happy. It was a delightful thing, after all, to
render some one truly happy. Perhaps children were more easily
satisfied, more responsive.

"Oh," he said presently, "we must go back or we will lose our supper,
and Cousin Elizabeth will scold."

"I shouldn't think she would dare to scold you;" raising wondering eyes.

"Why not?" He wondered what reason she would give.

"Because you are a man."

"She scolds Silas."

"Oh, that is different."

"How--different? We are both men. He is quite as tall as I."

"But you see--well, he is something like a servant. She tells him what
to do, and if he doesn't do it right she can find fault with it. But
you are--well, the house is yours. You can do what pleases you."

"Quite reasoned out, little one;" and he laughed with an approving
sound.

"It's curious that you scold people you like, and other people may do
the same thing and--is it because you don't dare to? If it is wrong in
the one place, why not in the other?"

"Perhaps politeness restrains us."

"I don't like people to scold. Miss Eunice never does."

"Eunice has a sweet nature. Doesn't Miss Winn ever scold you?"

"Well--I suppose I am bad and wilful sometimes, and then she has the
right. But when you do things that do not matter----"

Miss Winn was walking in the garden. Cynthia waved her hand, but walked
leisurely forward.

"I couldn't imagine what had become of you."

"It was my fault," interposed Chilian. "I met her at the gate and asked
her to go for a walk."

"And with that soiled apron!"

"That came off the slate. I hadn't any desk. It was hard to hold it on
my knee."

"You might have come in for a clean one. Run upstairs and change it."

But she was destined to meet Cousin Elizabeth in the hall. The elder
caught her arm roughly.

"Where have you been gadding to, bad girl? Didn't you know you must
come straight home from school? Here we have been worried half to death
about you, and I'm tired as a dog, trotting 'round all day. You deserve
a good whipping;" and she shook her. She would have enjoyed slapping her
soundly. But Chilian entered at that instant.

"She is going upstairs for a clean apron," he said. "I took her off for
a walk."

"She might have asked whether she could go or not," snapped Elizabeth.
"She's the most lawless thing!"

"It was my place. Don't blame the child!"

"Well, supper's ready."

She didn't have her apron on quite straight and her hair was a little
frowsy. Elizabeth had proposed it should be cut short on the neck for
the summer, but Miss Winn had objected.

"Such a great mop! No child wears it!"

Cynthia came in quietly and took her place. After her first cup of tea
Elizabeth thawed a little, enough to announce that two of the Appleton
children were ill, they thought with scarlet fever.

Chilian expressed some sympathy.

"And how was the school, Cynthia? We thought you might have been kept in
for some of your good deeds, as children are so seldom bad."

"I--I didn't like it," she answered simply.

"Children can't have just what they like in this world," was Elizabeth's
rejoinder.

"Nor grown people either," was Chilian's softening comment. Then he
changed the subject. He had seen Cousin Giles, who proposed to pay them
a visit, coming on some Saturday.

"Have you any lesson to learn?" he asked of Cynthia. "If so, bring your
book and come to my room."

"Oh, thank you!" Her face was radiant with delight.

Where had she left her book? Dame Wilby had told her to take it home and
study. Surely she had brought it--oh, yes! she had put it just inside
the gate under the great clump of ribbon grass. If only Cousin
Elizabeth's sharp eyes had not seen it. But there it was, safe enough.

She was delighted to go to Cousin Chilian's room, though she never
presumed. She seemed to have an innate sort of delicacy that he wondered
at.

The spelling was soon mastered. It was the rather unusual words that
puzzled her. Then they attacked the tables and he practised her in
making figures. Like most children left to themselves, she printed
instead of writing.

"Oh!" she cried with a wistful yet joyous emphasis, "I wish I could come
to school to you. And I'd like to be the only scholar."

"But you ought to be with little girls."

"I don't like them very much."

Then Miss Winn came for her. "You are very good to take so much
trouble," she said.

"Oh, I like you so much, so much!" she exclaimed with her sweet eyes as
well as her lips.

He recalled then the day on board the vessel, when she had besought in
her impetuous fashion that he should kiss her. She had never offered the
caress since. She was not an effusive child.

Her position at school was rather anomalous. A younger woman might have
managed differently. There was a new scholar that rather crowded them on
the bench. And the boy back of her did some sly things that annoyed her.
He gave her hair a twitch now and then. One day he dropped a little toad
on her book, at which she screamed, though an instant after she was not
at all afraid. Of course, he was whipped for that, and for once she did
not feel sorry.

"You're a great ninny to be afraid of a toad not bigger than a button,"
he said scornfully. "I'll get you whipped some day to make up for it,
see if I don't."

Thursday was unfortunate and she was kept in for some rather saucy
replies. When she returned they were in the sitting-room and had been
discussing some household matters. She surveyed them with a courageous
but indignant air.

"I've quit," she exclaimed. "I'm not going there to school any more."

She stood up very straight, her eyes flashing.

"What!" ejaculated Cousin Elizabeth.

"Why, I've quit! She wanted to make me say I was sorry and beg her
pardon, and she threatened to keep me all night, but I knew some of you
would come, at least Rachel."

"And I suppose you were a saucy, naughty girl!"

"What happened?" asked Chilian quietly.

"Why, you see--I went up to her table with the figures I had been making
on my slate. I'd done some of them over three times, for Tommy Marsh
joggled my elbow. Then I went back to my seat. We're crowded now, and I
went to sit down and sat on the floor. I do believe Sadie Green did it
on purpose--moved so there wasn't room enough for me to sit. And Tom
laughed, then all the children laughed, and Dame Wilby said, 'Get up,
Cynthy Leverett,' and I said 'My name isn't Cynthy, if you please, and I
haven't any seat to sit on if I do get up.' And then the children
laughed again, and I don't quite know what did happen, but I was so
angry. Then she said all the children should stay in for laughing. She
called me to the desk and I went. The slate was broken and I laid it on
the table. Then she said wasn't I sorry for being saucy, and I said I
wasn't. It was bad enough to fall on the floor, for I might have hurt
myself. Then she took up her switch, and I said: 'You strike me, if you
dare!' Then she pushed me in a little closet place, and there I staid
until after school was out. Then she said, 'Would I tell Miss Leverett
to come over?' and I said Mr. Leverett was my guardian and I would tell
him, but I wasn't coming to school any more, and that Tommy Marsh
pinched me and pulled my hair, and called me wild Indian. And so--I've
quit. You can't make me go again. I'll run away first and go on some of
the boats."

There was a blaze of scarlet on her cheeks and her eyes flashed fire,
but she stood up straight and defiant, when another child might have
broken down and cried. Chilian Leverett always remembered the picture
she made--small, dark, and spirited.

"No," he exclaimed, "you need not go back." Then he rose and took her
hand that was cold and trembling. "You will not go back. Let us find
Miss Winn----"

"Chilian!" warned Elizabeth.

He led Cynthia from the room, up the stairs. Miss Winn sat there sewing.
She clasped her arms about him, he could fairly feel the throb in them.

"Oh," she cried with a strange sort of sweetness. "I love you. You are
so good to me, and I have told you just the truth."

Then she buried her face on Miss Winn's bosom.

Chilian went downstairs. He laughed, yet he was deeply touched by her
audacity and bravery.

"Elizabeth," he announced; "I will see Mrs. Wilby. Let the matter die
out, do not refer to it. I did not think it quite the school for her. We
will find something else."

"Chilian, I must make one effort for you and her. Going on this way will
be her ruin. I should insist upon her going back to school and
apologizing to Mrs. Wilby. I wouldn't let a chit like that order what a
household of grown people should do and make them bow down to her. You
will be sorry for it in the end. You have had no experience with
children, you have seen so few. And a man hasn't the judgment----"

His usually serene temper was getting ruffled, and with such characters
the end is often obstinacy.

"If she is to make a disturbance here, become a bone of contention with
us, I will send her away. Cousin Giles is taking a great interest in
her. There are good boarding-schools in Boston, or she and Miss Winn
could have a home together under his supervision. There is enough to
provide for them."

"And you would turn her over to that half-heathen woman!" in a horrified
tone. "Then I wash my hands of the matter. Send her to perdition, if you
will."




CHAPTER VII

CHANGEFUL LIGHTS OF CHILDHOOD


Elizabeth Leverett busied herself about the supper. She felt as one does
in the threatening of a thunderstorm, when the clouds roll up and the
rumbling is low and distant and one studies the sky with presentiments.
Then it comes nearer, flirts a little with the elements, breaks open and
shows the blue that the scurrying wind soon hides and the real storm
bursts. She had believed all along that it must come.

She was not an ungracious or a selfish woman outside of her own home.
She was good to the sick and the needy, she gave of her time and
strength. In the home there was a sense of ownership, of the
self-appropriation so often termed duty. Everything had gone on smoothly
for years. She had settled that Chilian would not marry. Such a bookish
man, whose interests lay chiefly with men, did not need a wife when
there was some one at hand to make him comfortable. And that he surely
was. He understood and enjoyed it. He had only to suggest to have. Her
affection for him was like that for a younger brother. Even Eunice could
not minister so well for his comfort, though, like Mary of Bible lore,
she often added a delicate pleasure in listening to matters or
incidents that interested him.

Elizabeth had settled to the idea of a little heathen soul that she was
to lead aright. Missionary work in godless lands had not made much
advance and, having no mother, who was there to warn her of the great
peril of her soul? Seafaring men were not much given to thought of the
other world. Perhaps there was some grace for them in the hours of
peril, she had heard they prayed to God in an extremity; and there was
the dying thief. But on land no one had a right to count on this.

The child had changed everything. Even Eunice seemed to have lost the
sharp distinction. Miss Winn belonged to the ungodly, that was
clear--though she was upright, honest, neat, and in some ways sensible.
But her ideas about the child were foreign and reprehensible--dangerous
even. The child was no worse than others, not as bad as some, for she
had either by nature or training a delicate respect for the property of
others. She never meddled. She asked few questions even when she stood
by the kitchen table and watched the mysteries of cake and pie making
and the delicacies of cooking. It was the right to herself that annoyed
Elizabeth. People had hardly begun to suspect that children had any
rights.

"But if she went away? If she was swallowed up in the vortex of the more
populous city"--greater, Salem would not have admitted. "If the child's
soul was finally lost, would she be quite clear? Would she have done all
that she could for her salvation?"

She thought of it as she prepared the supper. She surveyed the
inviting-looking table and then rang the bell. Eunice brought in a
handful of flowers. Chilian came--and Miss Winn.

"Cynthia has gone to bed, she does not want any supper," was her quiet
announcement.

Elizabeth would have sent her to bed supperless, and approved of a
severer punishment.

Miss Winn asked some questions about Boston.

"I have quite a desire to see it," she added.

Yes, she would no doubt plan for a removal. Then the child would be
forever lost. And a Leverett, too, come of a strong God-fearing family!

The child, when she had hidden her face on Rachel's bosom, gave some
dry, hard sobs that shook her small frame. Rachel smoothed her hair,
patted the shoulder softly, and said "Dear" in a caressing tone. Then
had come a torrent of tears, a wild hysterical weeping. She did not
attempt to check it, but took Cynthia in her arms as if she had been a
baby.

"I'm not going to that school any more," she said brokenly, after a
while.

"What happened, dear?"

Cynthia raised her head. "It was very mean, as if I had done it on
purpose! Why, I might have hurt myself;" indignantly.

"How was it?" gently.

And then the story came tumbling out. She saw a certain ludicrous aspect
in it now, and laughed a little herself. "I couldn't help being saucy.
And I thought she was going to strike me. Tommy Marsh began to laugh
first. The slate broke----"

"Are you quite sure you were not hurt?"

"Well, my arm hurt a little at first, but it is all well now. But I
shan't go back to school,--no, not even to please Cousin Leverett, and I
like him best of any one."

"I'm going down to supper, dear. Shall I bring up yours?"

"I don't want any. I couldn't eat anything. And I can't have Cousin
Elizabeth's sharp eyes looking at me. Oh, I'm glad I am not her little
girl! I like you a million times better, Rachel;" hugging her
rapturously. "I think I'd like to have a glass of milk. And may I lie on
your little bed?"

"Yes, dear."

She was asleep when Rachel came up and it was past nine when she woke,
drank her milk, and went to bed for the night.

How gaily the birds were singing the next morning, and the sunbeams were
playing hide-and-seek through the branches that dance in the soft wind.
All the air was sweet and the little girl couldn't help being
light-hearted. She sang, too; not measured hymns of sorrow and
repentance, but a gay lilt that followed the bird voices. And she went
down to breakfast and said her good-morning cheerfully.

"That child has the assurance of the Evil One," Elizabeth thought.

Cynthia waylaid Cousin Chilian as he was going down the path.

"I meant what I said yesterday. I won't go to that school any more. If
there was some other--only--only I wish you could teach me until I could
get up straight in all the things, so the other children wouldn't laugh
when I made blunders. I suppose it does sound funny;" and a smile
hovered about the seriousness.

"We will consider another school," he returned kindly, smiling himself
at the remembrance of the tempest of yesterday.

She persuaded Rachel to go out to walk and they went over to the bridge.
She had been so interested in the story of it. Before it had faded from
the minds of men it was to be splendidly commemorated as a point of
interest in the old town.

"I like real stories," she said. "I don't understand about the war, but
it is fine to think the Salem men made the British soldiers go back when
all the while the cannon and other arms were hidden away. You don't
mind, Rachel, if the Colonists did beat England, do you? I'm a Colonist,
you know."

"That is long ago, and we are all friends now. I think the Colonists
were very brave and persevering and they deserved their liberty. I have
heard your father talk about the war."

"Oh, when do you suppose he will come? It seems so long to wait."

Rachel smiled to keep the tears out of her eyes.

Chilian Leverett made a call and a brief explanation to Dame Wilby. She
admitted she had been hasty, but the children were unusually trying. She
was getting to be an old body and maybe she hadn't as much patience as
years ago. Cynthia said so many odd things that the children _would_
giggle. She was slow in some things, and it seemed hard for her to learn
tables, but she was not a bad child.

So the tempest blew over. Elizabeth preserved a rather injured silence,
but Eunice was cheerful and ready to entertain Cynthia with stories of
the time when she was a little girl. Chilian arranged for her to spend
most of the mornings with him when he was at home. She liked so very
much to hear him read. The histories of that time were rather dry and
long spun out, but he had a way of skipping the moralizing and the
endless disquisitions and adding a little more vividness to people and
incidents. It inspired him to watch her face changing with every
emotion, her eyes deepening or brightening, and the slight mark in her
forehead where lines of perplexity crossed. Then they would talk it all
over. Often he was puzzled with her endless "whys" that he could not
rightly explain to a child's limited understanding. Sometimes she would
say, "Why, I would have done so," and he found her course would be on
the side of the finest right, if not what was considered feasible.

The spelling was a trial when the words were a little obscure. And
though she had a wonderful knack of guessing at things, she surely was
not born for a mathematician. He had a fine, quick mind in that respect.
But the Latin was a delight to her and she delved away at the difficult
parts for the sake of what she called the grand and beautiful sound. His
rendering of it enchanted her.

"I don't see any sense in educating her like a boy," declared Elizabeth.
"And she can't do a decent bit of hemming. She ought to work a sampler
and learn the letters to mark her own clothes. We did it before we were
her age. Chilian thinks you can hire people to do these things for you,
but it seems so helpless not to be able to do them for yourself.
Housekeeping is of more account than all this folderol. She can never be
a college professor."

"But women _are_ keeping schools," interposed Eunice.

"They don't teach Latin and all kinds of nonsense. That Miss Miller was
here a few days ago to see if we didn't want our niece--folks are
beginning to call her that--to see if we did not want her to take
lessons on the spinet. I was so glad she did not appeal to Chilian,
though he was out. I said, 'No,' very decidedly, 'that she had a good
many things to learn before she tackled that.' And she said she ought
to be trained while her fingers were flexible, and I said I thought
washing would make them flexible enough. And there's fine ironing."

"There's no need of either for her," protested Eunice.

"Oh, you don't know. There might be a war again. And a trouble about
money. I'm sure there is talk enough and the country raising loans all
the time, one party pulling one way, one the other. People are getting
awfully extravagant nowadays. Patty Conant gave seven dollars a yard for
her new black silk, and there were twelve yards. It broke pretty well
into a hundred, and there was some fancy gimp and fringe and the making.
Of course, there's going to be two weddings in the family, and I don't
suppose Patty will ever buy another handsome gown at her time of life.
Abner brought her home that elegant crape shawl, with the fringe and
netting nearly half a yard deep. Maybe 'twas a present, she let it go
that way."

"Of course, there's money enough among the Conants," Eunice commented
gently.

"As I said--one can't always tell what will come to pass, nor how much
need you may have for your money. But I'm thankful my heart is not set
on the pomps and vanities of this world. And children ought to be
brought up to some useful habits."

It was a fact that Cynthia did not take to the useful branches of
womanly living. She abhorred hemming--and such work as she made of it!
Miss Eunice groaned over it.

"But you ought to have seen what I did two or three weeks ago," and she
laughed with a gay ring. "Such stitches! When I made them nice on the
top, they were dreadful underneath, and the cotton thread was almost
black. What is the use of taking such little bits of stitches?"

"Why--they look prettier. And--it is the right thing to do."

"But you know Rachel can hem all the ruffles. And Cousin Elizabeth said
ruffles were vanity. I'd like my frocks just as well to be plain."

"There would have to be nice stitches in the hem."

"Rachel didn't sew when she was little. A great lady took her to
Scotland, to wait on her, to get her shawl when she was a little cool,
and fan her when she was warm, and carry messages, and drive out in the
carriage with her. They had servants for everything. And then--she was
ten years old--she sent her to a school, where she learned everything.
But she doesn't know all the tables and a great many other things."

"But she knows what fits her for her station in life."

Cynthia looked puzzled. "What is your station in life?" she asked with
an accent of curiosity.

"Oh, child, it is where you are placed; and the work of life is the
duties that grow out of it--and your duty towards God."

Cynthia dropped into thought.

"Then my duty now is to study. I like it; that is, I like a good many
things in it. And when my father comes home it will be changed, I
suppose. You can't stay a little girl always."

"But you will have to learn to keep house," returned Eunice.

"Oh, I'll have some one to do that. Men never have to cook or keep
house. Oh, yes; all the cooks on the ship were men. Wasn't that funny!"
she continued.

She laughed with so much innocent merriment that Miss Eunice laughed
too.

"I suppose you have to do various things in your life," she sagely
remarked, after a pause.

"Then you must learn to do the various things now."

"I believe I won't ever get married. I'll live with father always, and
we will have some one to keep the house, and Rachel will make the
clothes. And I'll read aloud to father. We'll have a carriage and go out
riding, and talk about India. I remember so many things just by thinking
them over. Isn't it queer, when for a long time they have gone out of
your mind? Oh, dear Cousin Eunice, what makes you sigh?"

Cousin Eunice took off her glasses, wiped them vigorously, and then
wiped her eyes.

"It is a bad habit I have." But she was thinking of the dream of the
little girl that could never come true.

The two days in the week that Chilian went into Boston were long to
Cynthia. She sat in his room and studied. He had given her a small table
to herself and a shelf in a sort of miscellaneous bookcase. He found
that she never trespassed and that she did really study her two hours,
sometimes longer when the task was not so easily mastered. There _was_
some of the old Leverett blood in her, but it had a picturesque strain.
She placed every book at its prettiest, and her papers were gathered up
and taken down to the kitchen when she was done with them. She was
beginning to write quite well.

Then in the afternoon she went to walk with Rachel to show her the
curious places Cousin Leverett had told her about. And there were still
beautiful woods around the town, where they found wild flowers and
sassafras buds.

Elizabeth was very much engrossed. She had cleared the garret spick and
span, scrubbed up the floor, wiped off her quilting frames, and put in
her white quilt, rolling up both sides so she could get at the middle.
There was to be a circle, with clover leaves on the outside. Then long
leaves rayed off from the exact middle. She had all the patterns marked
out. When that was done a wreath went around next--oak leaves and
acorns.

She had groaned over the time the little girl devoted to Latin, but she
never thought all this a waste of precious hours. She would never need
it and she could not decide upon any relative she would like to leave it
to. There was one quilt of this pattern in Salem and, though white
quilts were made, few could afford to spend so much time over them.
There were knitted quilts, with ball fringe around four sides, and the
tester fringed the same way. Old ladies kept up their habits of industry
in this manner when they were past hard work.

Eunice had finished her basket quilt and it was really a work of art.
But she was out in the flower garden a good deal in the early morning
and late afternoon. Cynthia sometimes kept her company, but she was not
an expert in gardening science. In the evening they sat out on the
porch, and a neighbor called perhaps. Or she walked over to South River
if it was moonlight. And, oh, how beautiful everything was!

But it was not all quilting with Miss Elizabeth. In July wild green
grapes were gathered for preserves. Cynthia thought it quite fun to help
"pit" them. You cut them through the middle and with a small pointed
knife took out the seeds. She tired of it presently and did not cut them
evenly, beside she was afraid of cutting her thumb.

Cousin Elizabeth went about getting dinner, which was quite a simple
thing when Chilian was away, and at night they had a high tea.

"I'll cut them," said Eunice, "and you can pick out the seeds. But maybe
you are tired;" with a glance of solicitude.

"Yes, I'm tired, but I'm going to keep straight on until dinner-time,"
she answered pluckily.

"You are a brave little girl."

But Cousin Elizabeth said, "Well, for once you have made yourself
useful."

There was a great point of interest just then for the people on this
side of the town. Front Street was the old river path that had followed
the shore line. One end was known now as Wharf Street, and was beginning
to be lined with docks. Up farther to what is now Essex Street there had
stood a house with a history. Its owner had been a Tory, and just before
the war broke out he entertained Governor Gage and the civil and
military staff. Timothy Pickering had been summoned to the Governor's
presence, but he kept his Excellency so long in an indecent passion that
the town-meeting had to be adjourned. Troops were ordered up from the
Neck and for a while an encounter seemed imminent. Later, when the
Colonists were in the ascendency, Colonel Browne's estate was
confiscated, and after the close of the war it was turned over to Mr.
Elias Derby. Now he was removing it to make way for a much finer
residence and, being a notably patriotic citizen, he did not enjoy the
stigma of a Tory house. Parts were carried away as curiosities, and
there were some beautiful carvings and fine newel posts that found a
place in new homes as mementoes. Afterward, Mr. Derby built the
handsomest and costliest house in Salem, with grounds laid out
magnificently.

Then came a very busy time. There was preserving that every housewife
attended to for winter use, pickling of various kinds, for there was no
canning stock in those days to eke out. There were some queer fruits
from India, and preserved ginger in curious jars that are highly
esteemed to this day, but they were luxuries. Then a house-cleaning
season, not as bad as the spring, but still bad enough. And flower seeds
to be saved, garden seeds to be dried, so the beautiful quilt was rolled
up in a thick sheet and put away for the present.

The little girl had made quite friends with the Upham children and went
over there to tea all alone, but she felt very strange. They played tag
and blind-man's buff, but Cynthia thought puss in the corner the most
fun. Bentley was a nice big boy and very well mannered. Polly talked
over her school and brought out her needlework, which was to be the
bottom of a white frock. It would be only two yards round and she had
almost a yard worked. Then she was making a sampler, with an oak and
acorn vine around it, and it was to have four different kinds of
lettering on it.

"I don't know when I shall get it done," she said with a sigh.

Betty declared Dame Wilby was crosser than ever and Priscilla Lee wasn't
coming back, nor Margaret Rand, and she was coaxing mother to let her go
elsewhere.

After a while Cynthia declared she must go home. Cousin Chilian had said
he would come for her, but the clock was striking nine and he had not
come. He sometimes _did_ forget.

Bentley took his hat and walked beside her in quite a mannish way.

"I do hope you will come again," he said. "You were so pleasant when you
were caught, and I do hate to have girls saying all the time, 'Now that
isn't fair,' and squirming out."

"But if you're playing you must take the best and the worst. I liked
puss in the corner and didn't mind being the left-out pussy. I thought
it was quite fun to hunt a corner again."

Then they met Cousin Chilian, who had been playing a rather prolonged
game of chess with a visitor. But Bentley kept on with them, and said
good-night with a polite bow, adding, "She must come again, Mr.
Leverett, we had such a very nice time."

"And wasn't he nice!" exclaimed the child eagerly. "He is like some of
the grown-up men. I like big boys much better than the little ones."

He smiled to himself at that.

Now there came cool nights and mornings, but the world was beautiful in
its turning leaves, the fragrance of ripening fruit, and the late
gorgeous-colored flowers. They took delightful walks and found so many
curious places. Sometimes Bentley Upham met them and joined in their
walks and talks. He thought the little girl knew a great deal. And that
she had been in India, and China, and ever so many of the islands, was
wonderful.

"Don't you ever sew?" he asked one afternoon, as they were rambling
about.

"I don't like it much;" and she glanced up with fascinating archness. "I
suppose I shall have to some day, but Cousin Leverett thinks there is
time enough."

"I'm glad you don't," in a hearty tone. "I don't have any good of Polly
any more. What with her white frock, and some lace she is making for a
cape, and forty other things, she never has time for a game of anything,
or a nice walk. And she doesn't care about study, though her lessons are
so different. I don't know another girl who studies Latin, and it's so
nice to talk it over. How rapidly you must have learned."

He looked at her in admiration.

"Oh, I knew some of it before I came here. There was a chaplain in
Calcutta who was--well, not exactly ill, but not well; and father took
him with us on the vessel when he went for certain things, and he staid
with us afterward. He used to read aloud, and it sounded so splendid!
Then he taught me. But Cousin Leverett said it wasn't quite right, so I
am going over it. And he is teaching me a little French."

"You know they think women don't need to know much beside housekeeping
and sewing. I just hate to hear about ruffles cut on the straight or
bias, and I couldn't tell what Dacca muslin, or jaconet, or dimity was
to save myself. And eyelet work and French knots and run lace--that's
what the big girls who come to see Polly talk about. But I like books,
and studies, and different countries. I'd like to travel. But I don't
know that I want to be a sea captain."

They found some queer old houses that were odd enough. Mr. Leverett said
they were almost two hundred years old, and that at first the place kept
the old Indian name, Naumkeag. But the Reverend Francis Higginson gave
it a new name out of the Bible--"In Salem also is His tabernacle." The
early pilgrims built a chapel at once.

"How close the houses are!"

It was a row that had survived the hand of improvement. There was a huge
central chimney-stack, big enough for a modern factory, and the house
seemed built around it. The second story overhung the first, and in some
of them were small dormer windows looking like bird houses. And the
little panes of greenish glass seemed to make windows all framework.

Cynthia was much interested in the Roger Williams house, and the story
of the old minister.

"Why, I thought religion made people good and pleasant----" Then she
checked herself, for often Cousin Elizabeth was _not_ pleasant. And she
seemed more religious than Cousin Eunice. And Cousin Chilian rarely
scolded or said a cross word--he never talked about religion, but he
went to church on Sunday; they all did. She studied the Catechism, she
could learn easily when she had a mind to, but she didn't understand it
at all. She shocked Elizabeth by her irreverent questions. There was the
old horn-book primer with--

          "In Adam's fall
           We sinned all."

"I don't see how that could be when we were not there!" she said almost
defiantly.

"It means the nature we inherited."

"But I don't think that fair!"

"You don't know, you never can understand until you are in a state of
grace. Don't ask such impertinent questions. You are a little heathen
child."

Then she asked Cousin Chilian what "a state of grace" meant.

"I think it is the willingness to do right, to be truthful, kindly,
obliging. It is all comprised in the Golden Rule--to love God with all
your heart and your neighbor as yourself, not to do anything to him that
you would not like to have done to yourself, and to do to him whatever
you would like him to do for you. That is enough for a little girl."

"That sounds like Confucius," she said thoughtfully.

But she went back to Roger Williams when Bentley said he was one of his
heroes.

"What did he do?" she asked, interested.

"Well, he founded the City of Providence. And if William Penn is to be
honored for founding a city of brotherly love, Roger Williams deserves
it for establishing a city where different sects should agree without
persecuting each other. You see, they banished him from Salem back to
England because he thought a man had some right to his own opinions, so
long as he worshipped God. So he went to Providence instead. He walked
all the way with just his pocket compass to guide him, and how he must
have worked to make a dwelling-place for himself and his friends in the
dead of winter! There were some Quakers already there, who had been
banished from other settlements, and they all resolved to be friendly.
Yes, I call him a hero!"

Cynthia studied the house with the little courtyard and the great tree
shading it.

"Polly said it was the Witch House," she remarked.

"That was because there were trials for witchcraft. You are too young to
hear about that," Chilian said decisively, with a glance at Bentley.




CHAPTER VIII

SORROW'S CROWN OF SORROW


Occasionally they went down to the warehouse, and while Chilian was busy
some of the captains or mates would speak to her. They knew about her
father and one sad fact she did not know. For she had settled in her
mind that Captain Corwin would bring him back and that it would take a
long, long while. So she tried to be content and if not teasing or
fretting was one of the ways of being good, she tried her utmost to keep
to that. She was too brave to tell falsehoods to shield herself from any
inadvertent wrongdoing, even if Cousin Elizabeth did sometimes say:

"You ought to be soundly whipped. To spare the rod is to spoil the
child."

She thought if anybody ever did whip her she should hate him all the
rest of her life. Servants and workmen were beaten in India, and it
seemed degrading. She did not know that Cousin Chilian had insisted that
she should never be struck. He was understanding more every day how her
father had loved her, and finding sweet traits in her unfolding.

She liked these rough bronzed men to touch their odd hats to her and
call her Missy. Some of them had seen her in Calcutta and knew her
father. And when she said, "It takes a long, long while to go there and
come back, but when Captain Corwin brings him he is going to live here
and will never go to sea any more"--"No, that he never will, missy;" and
the sailor drew his hand across his eyes.

Oh, how full the wharves were with shipping! Flags and pennons waved,
and white sails; others, gray with age and weather, flapped in the wind.
She liked to see them start out; she always sent a message by them in
the full faith of childhood. And there were the fishermen in the cove
lower down. Fishing was quite a great business.

Cousin Giles had made his visit and spent two whole days down in the
warehouse, when they had not taken her. But she helped Cousin Eunice cut
the stems of the sweet garden herbs for drying, and the others for
perfumery. There was lavender, the blossoms had been gathered long ago,
and sweet marjoram and sweet clover. She always gathered the full-blown
rose leaves and sewed them up in little bags and laid them among the
household stores. Everything was so fragrant. Cynthia thought she liked
it better than sandalwood and the pungent Oriental perfumes.

Then came the autumnal storms, when the vessels hugged the docks
securely at anchor. The house was chilly all through and fires were in
order. Some two or three miles below there was a wreck of an East
Indiaman, and for days fragments floated around. Some lives were lost,
and the little girl shuddered over the accounts.

All the foliage began to turn and fall. The late flowers hung their
heads. It had been a beautiful autumn, people said to pay up for the
late spring.

There had been a little discussion about a school again.

"She seems so small, and in some things diffident," Chilian said. "The
winters are long and cold, and she has not been used to them. Cousin
Giles thinks her very delicate."

"She isn't like children raised here, but she's quite as strong as
common. She oughtn't be pampered and made any more finicking than she
is. A girl almost ten. What is she going to be good for, I'd like to
know?"

Cousin Giles had not made much headway with her. He was large and strong
with an emphatic voice, and a head of thick, strong white hair, a rather
full face, and penetrating eyes. He had advised about investments,
though he thought no place had the outlook of Boston. But Salem was
ahead of her in foreign trade.

Chilian Leverett felt very careful of the little girl. For if she died a
large part of her fortune came to him. He really wished it had not been
left that way. There was an East India Marine Society that had many
curiosities--stored in rooms on the third floor of the Stearns building.
It had a wider scope than that and was to assist widows and orphans of
deceased members, who were all to be those "who had actually navigated
the seas beyond Cape of Good Hope, or Cape Horn, as masters or
supercargoes of vessels belonging to Salem." To this Anthony had
bequeathed many curiosities and a gift. There was talk of enlarging its
scope, which was begun shortly after this.

Matters had settled to an amicable basis in the Leverett house. Rachel
had won the respect of Elizabeth, who prayed daily for her conversion
from heathendom and that she might see the claims the Christian religion
had upon her. Eunice and she were more really friendly. She made some
acquaintances outside and most people thought she must be some relation
of the captain's. She had proved herself very efficient in several cases
of illness, for in those days neighbors were truly neighborly.

Cynthia did shrink from the cold, though there were good fires kept in
the house. This winter Chilian had a stove put up in the hall, very much
against Elizabeth's desires. Quite large logs could be slipped in and
they would lie there and smoulder, lasting sometimes all night. It was a
great innovation and extravagance, though wood seemed almost
inexhaustible in those days. And it was considered unhealthy to sleep in
warm rooms, though people would shut themselves up close and have no
fresh air.

Then the snow came, but it was a greater success in the inland towns,
and there were sledding and sleigh-riding. The boys and girls had great
times building forts and having snowballing contests. But the little
girl caught a cold and had a cough that alarmed her guardian a good deal
and made him more indulgent than ever, to Elizabeth's disgust.

She was not really ill, only pale and languid and seemed to grow
thinner. She was much fairer than any one could have supposed and her
eyes looked large and wistful. Chilian put some pillows in the big
rocking-chair and tilted it back so that she could almost lie down on
it.

"You are so good to me," she would say with her sweet, faint smile.

Bentley came in now and then of an evening, and she liked to hear what
they were doing at school. Polly, too, made visits; they had a
half-holiday on Saturday. She always brought some work, and Elizabeth
considered her a very industrious girl. She was going to a birthday
party of one of her mates.

"What do they do at parties?" inquired the little girl.

"Oh, they play games. There's stagecoach. Everybody but one has a seat.
He blows a horn and sings out, 'Stage for Boston,' or any place. Then
every one has to change seats. Such a scrambling and scurrying time! and
the one who gets left has to take the horn."

"It's something like puss in the corner."

"Only ever so many can play this. Then there's 'What's my thought like?'
That's rather hard, but funny. I like twirling the platter. If you
don't catch it when it comes near you, you must pay a forfeit. And
redeeming them is lots of fun, for you are told to do all sorts of
ridiculous things. Then there's some goodies and mottoes and you can
exchange with a boy. But Kate Saltonstall's big sister had a party where
they danced. Eliza wanted some dancing, but her mother said so many
people did not approve of it for children."

"And don't you have some one to come and dance for you?"

"Oh, what a queer idea! The fun is in dancing yourself with a real nice
boy. Some people think it awfully wrong. Do you, Miss Winn?"

"No, indeed. When I was a child in England we went out and danced on the
green. Everybody did. And when there were doings at the great
houses--like Christmas, and weddings, and coming of age--the ladies, in
their silks and satins and laces, came down in the servants' hall and
danced with the butler and the footmen, and my lord took out some of the
maids. I don't think dancing hurts any one."

"I'm glad to hear you say that, Miss Winn. They are talking of having a
dancing-class in school. I hope mother will let me join it."

"And they teach it in schools there."

"And why shouldn't they here?" said Polly.

To be sure. Cynthia was much interested and made Polly promise to come
again and tell her all about it. Old Salem was awakening rapidly from
her rigid torpor.

"I wonder if I could ever have a party," she said to Cousin Leverett
that evening. "When father comes home we might have what they did at the
Perkinses when they went in their new place--a house-warming. Is that
like a party?"

"About the same thing."

"Cousin Elizabeth thinks it wicked. Wouldn't she think dancing wicked?"

"I am afraid she would."

Cynthia sighed. No, she couldn't have a party here.

She waited quite eagerly for Polly's account. The little girl was in her
own room. Miss Winn had gone out to get some medicine. Cynthia tried to
be well sometimes, so she would not have to take the nauseous stuff. No
one had invented medicated sugar pills at that time. She liked Cousin
Elizabeth's cough syrup.

Polly was overflowing with spirits.

"Oh, I want to be big, right away. Bella Saltonstall was there and she's
going into company next winter, she says. And she showed us some of the
dancing steps and they just bewitch you. It's like this"--and Polly
picked up her frock in a dainty manner and whirled about the vacant
spaces in the room.

"But doesn't it tire you dreadfully? The girls in India stand still a
great deal more and just sway about. They come in and dance for you."

"Tire you! Oh, no. That's the great fun, to do it yourself. Bella said
it was--ex--something, and the word is in the spelling-book, but I never
can remember the long words. Oh, I just wish I was fifteen and wasn't
going to school any more. And then there's keeping company and getting
married, and having your setting out. School seems stupid. There were
two boys who wanted to come home with me, but mother said Ben must. Then
I wished--well, I wished he was in college. He wants to go. Father says
Mr. Leverett has infected him with the craze."

"If I was a boy, I'd like to go. Cousin Leverett is going to take me to
Harvard next summer when they have their grand closing time."

"I'd rather be a girl and have a nice beau."

Plainly Polly had been saturated with dissipation.

Spring was suggesting her advent. The days were longer. The snow was
disappearing.

"Oh, Cousin Leverett, look--there are some buds on the trees!" she
cried.

"Yes. You can see them at intervals through the winter. They are wise
little things, and swell and then shrink back in the cold."

"I'm so glad. I can soon go out. I get very tired some days. I like
summer best."

"Yes. I do hope we shall have an early spring."

She looked up with smiling gladness.

That afternoon she had fallen asleep in the big chair. How almost
transparent she was. The long lashes lay on the whiteness of her
cheek--yes, it was really white. And there was very little color in her
lips.

Abner Hayes came up from the warehouse with some papers the _Ulysses_
had just brought in.

"That the captain's poor little girl?"

"Yes; she's asleep. She hasn't been very well this winter, but the first
nice balmy day I shall take her out driving. I've been almost afraid to
have the air blow on her."

"Yes, she ought to live and enjoy all that big fortune. It's a thousand
pities the captain couldn't have come back and enjoyed it with her. But
we must all go when our time comes. You never hear a hard word said
about him, and sure's there's a heaven he is in it."

Chilian held up his finger. Then he signed a paper that had to go back,
and asked if the cargo of the _Ulysses_ was in good shape.

Elizabeth called him downstairs after that. There was a poor man wanting
some sort of a position and Chilian promised to look out for him. He had
been porter in a store, but the heavy lifting made him cough. He would
have to get something lighter.

When he returned Cynthia was standing by his table, white as a little
ghost. He almost dropped into the chair.

"Was I dreaming, or did that man say my father couldn't come back to
Salem, that he--that he was----"

She swayed almost as if she would fall. He drew her down on his knee and
her head sank on his shoulder. She was so still that he was startled.
How many times he had wondered how he would get her told. Perhaps it had
been wrong to wait.

"My little girl! My little Cynthia----"

"Wait," she breathed, and he held her closer. He had come to love her
very much, though he had taken her unwillingly.

"Is it true? But no one would say such a thing if it were not. I had
been asleep. I woke just as he said that. Perhaps I had been dreaming
about our being together. And it seemed at first as if my tongue was
stiff and I couldn't even make a sound. Did he go to heaven without me?"

Oh, what should he say to comfort her! She had so many feelings far
under the surface.

"My little dear," and his voice was infinitely fond, "I want to tell you
that he loved your mother tenderly. No one could have been better loved.
In the course of a few hours she was snatched away from him. You were so
little--five years ago. I doubt if there was ever a day in which he did
not think of her. When you are grown and come to love some one with the
strength of your whole heart, you will understand how great it is. And
when the summons came for him his first thought was that he should see
her, and with the next he must find a new home for his little girl, so
he gave you to me. It is very hard just now, but you must think how
happy they are together. Perhaps they both know you are here, where you
will be cared for and made happy, for we all love you. Every one has not
the same way of showing love, but Cousin Elizabeth has done everything
she could for you this winter. And we don't want to lose you. You won't
grudge them a few years together in that happy place?"

"Oh, are you quite sure there _is_ a heaven?"

Oh, Cynthia, you are not the first one who has asked to have it
certified.

"Yes, dear; very sure," in the tone of faith.

"He loved mother very much?"

"Yes."

There was a long silence. He felt the slow beating of her little heart.

"Then I ought to be content, since he gave me to you, when he knew he
was going away."

"It would have been very sad if you had been left alone there. Out of
his great love he planned it this way, thinking the tidings would not
come so hard after a while. And now you can always recall him as you saw
him last and just think, in a moment of time God called and he stepped
over the narrow space that seems such a mystery to us and met _her_. I
wish we didn't invest death with so much that is painful, for it is
God's way of calling us to a better land where there are no more
partings. Sometime you and I will go over to them."

"I shouldn't feel afraid with you," she commented simply.

When the tea bell rang she asked to be carried to her room and laid on
Rachel's little bed. He kissed her gently and turned away.

The next was his day in Boston. But late in the afternoon, after Miss
Eunice had been visiting her an hour or so, she went to the study and
sat by the window, where she could see him come. He glanced up and she
waved her hand daintily. All day he had been wondering how he should
find her.

"I haven't coughed but a very little to-day," she exclaimed. "Cousin
Elizabeth made some new syrup. And the doctor was in. He said I was a
little lazy, that I must be more energetic."

"I've been ordering a new carriage to-day. The old one was hardly worth
repairing. And when you are stronger I think I'll buy a gentle pony and
we can go out riding. You would not be afraid after a little?"

"Not with you."

Her confidence was very sweet.

"I'm going down to tea to-night. I was down at noon."

"Oh, you are improving. I hope there will come some warm weather and
balmy airs."

"It was beautiful last spring. You know I never saw a real spring
before."

She was bearing her loss and her sorrow beautifully. All day she had
been thinking of the joy of those two when they met on the confines of
that beautiful world. It made heaven seem so near, so real. Sometimes
the tears came to her eyes. She was Cousin Chilian's little girl, so why
should she feel lonely!

Once in a number of years spring comes early. It did this time, at the
close of the century. People shook their heads and talked about
"weather-breeders," and mentioned snow as late as May, when fruit trees
had been in bloom. But nature had turned over a bright, clear leaf, that
made the book of time fairly shine.

The carriage came and Cynthia was taken out. Miss Elizabeth wrapped her
up like a mummy, and would put a brick, swathed in coverings, in the
bottom for her feet. He had taken the ladies out occasionally, but of
late years the sisters had been so busy they had little time for
pleasure, they thought.

They crossed North Bridge and went up Danvers way. Oh, how lovely it was
with the trees in baby leaf, and some wild things blossoming. And even
then industry had planted itself. There on the farther bank of Waters
River was the iron mill, where Dr. Nathan Read invented his scheme for
cut nails. And he built a paddle-wheel steamboat that was a success
before Robert Fulton tried his. And they passed the Page house, where
General Gage had his office, and Madam Page had tea on the roof, because
they had promised not to use tea in the house.

That amused Cynthia and he also told her of the woman, when tea first
came to the country, who boiled the leaves and seasoned them, passing
them around to her guests, who didn't think they were anything much in
the vegetable line and too expensive ever to become general.

Birds sang about them, flocks of wild geese had started on their
northward journey. What a wonderful world it was! And her father had
been a boy here in Salem village, had lived in Cousin Chilian's house in
the father's time, and her mother had been married in the stately
parlor. Why, she could dream of their being real guests of the place.
How odd she should come to live here. The life in India would be the
dream presently.

She was very tired when Chilian lifted her out of the carriage and took
her upstairs. Rachel put her to bed for a while and gave her a cup of
hot tea--mint and catnip--which was a great restorer, or so considered,
in those days. She came down to supper and was quite bright.

Every day she improved a little. Eunice said she was getting 'climated.

Elizabeth wondered if she had any deep feeling. She had expected to see
her "take on" terribly. Chilian begged her not to disturb the child's
faith that both parents were in heaven.

"Letty Orne, that was, might have been one of the elect, but sea
captains are seldom considered safe in the fold, as children of grace. I
never heard that he had any evidence. And 'tisn't safe to count on
meeting them unless you've had some sign."

"We must leave a good many of these things to God. His ways are better
than our short-sighted wisdom."

Elizabeth was never quite sure of Chilian. So much study, and reading,
and college talk, and the new theories, and what they called
discoveries, were enough to unsettle one's faith, and she feared for
him. Younger children than Cynthia had gone through the throes of
conviction--she had herself, and she longed to see her in this state.

But the child was quite her olden self. What with the change of climate
and her illness she was many shades fairer, and her hair was losing its
queer sunburned color. Her thin frame began to fill out, her face grew
rounder, and her smile was sweetness itself.

"But she hasn't grown a mite since she came. Leverett people are all of
a fair size. I don't know a little runt among them," persisted
Elizabeth.

"I wish I could grow," she sighed in confidence to Chilian.

"Never mind. Then you will always be my little girl," he would answer
consolingly.




CHAPTER IX

LESSONS OF LIFE


Even Chilian wondered that the little girl took the death of her father
so calmly. Elizabeth called it unnatural and questioned whether the
child had any deep feeling.

"I don't believe she's shed a tear. And, Eunice, the child ought to go
in black."

The child was trying to get used to changed ideas. If her mother was
glad and happy, now that they were again united, why should she be
sorry? It seemed selfish to her as if she grudged them the joy. And
Cousin Chilian was trying every way to entertain her, to help her on to
perfect recovery. Sometimes, when she sat alone in the study, the soft
eyes would overflow and the tears course silently down her cheeks. She
never cried in the tempestuous way of some children. But she knew now
she had counted a good deal on their having a home together. Rachel
would keep the house and she and her father would take walks and have a
garden, where she could cut flowers and have them in the house. Cousin
Elizabeth said they made a litter. And now she should never go down to
the wharf and see him standing on the deck, and wave her hand to him,
as she used when he went on short journeys in India. They would have a
low carry-all and ride around, as she would tell him all she had learned
about Salem. And they would have people in to drink tea and have pretty
dishes on the table. Perhaps he would give her a party. But she didn't
know any children, except the Uphams. It might be better to go to school
so that she could get acquainted.

Chilian was a good deal startled about the black garments.

"She is so little and thin," he objected. "I never did like children in
black; it seems as if you weighted them down with woe. And he has been
dead so many months now."

"But one ought to pay decent respect to a custom sanctioned by all
civilized people. There will be a talk about it. Folks may think it our
fault."

"I do not believe half a dozen people would notice it. It's only a
custom after all. I never did like it. We will see how she feels about
it."

"Chilian, you make that child of as much importance as if she was a
woman grown. You will have your hands full by and by. She will think
every one must bow down to her and consult her whims and fancies."

"We will see;" nodding indifferently.

He didn't want her around in garments of woe. Very gently he mentioned
the subject.

She glanced up out of sweet, entreating eyes. She had been standing by
him, looking over a very choice book of engravings.

"Yes," she returned. "Rachel spoke of it. And you know there are some
people who wear white, and some who put on yellow. Black isn't a nice
color. Do you like it?"

He shook his head.

"It is the inside of me that aches now and then, when I think I shall
never see him come sailing back, that I must be a long while without him
until I go to their land. But he must be very happy with mother, and
that is what I think of when I feel how hard it is;" and the tears stole
softly down her cheeks. "I have Rachel and you, and he said you would
always love me and care for me. But I try not to feel sorry, and if I
had on a black frock I couldn't help but think of it all the time. Then
I should be sorry inside and outside both, and is it right to make
yourself unhappy when you believe people have gone to heaven?"

She said it so simply that he was deeply moved. She had been alone with
her sorrow all this time, when they had thought her indifferent.

"You need not wear black--I wish you would not. I want you to get real
well and happy. And you are a brave little girl to think of them and
refrain from grief."

She wiped away the tears lest they should fall on the book.

"At first it was quite dreadful to me. I couldn't say anything. Then I
remembered how we used to talk of mother, as if she was only in the next
room. And then I sit here and think, when the sky is such a splendid
blue and there come little white rifts in it, as if somewhere it opened,
I can almost see them. Can't people come back for a few moments?"

"Only in dreams, I imagine."

"I can _almost_ see them. And they are so glad to be together. And I
know father says, 'Cynthia will come by and by.' But twenty years, or
thirty years, is a long while to wait."

Perhaps she wouldn't need to wait so long, he thought, as he noted the
transparent face.

"And now I should be sorry to go away from you," she said, with grave
sweetness.

"I think your father meant you should stay a long while with me when he
gave you to me;" and he pressed her closer to his heart.

So she did not wear mourning, to Elizabeth's very real displeasure.
There was no further talk about the school, but she did try to sew a
little and began the sampler. Cousin Eunice was her guide here. She
brought out hers that was over fifty years old, and all the colors were
fading.

"I wonder if I shall live fifty years," she mused.

Driving about was her great entertainment. You could go to Marblehead,
which was a peninsula. There were the fishery huts and the men curing
and drying fish. Sometimes they took passage in one of the numerous
sailing vessels and went in and out the irregular shore, and saw Boston
from the bay. It seemed in those times as if it might get drowned out,
there was so much water around it.

"And if it should float off out to sea, some day," she half inquired,
laughingly.

He was glad to hear her soft, sweet laugh again.

She thought she liked Salem best, and even now people began to talk of
old Salem, there had been so many improvements since the time Governor
Bradford had written:

          "Almost ten years we lived here alone,--
          In other places there were few or none;
          For Salem was the next of any fame
          That began to augment New England's name."

And then it went by the old Indian name and was called Naumkeag. And she
found that it was older than Boston, and had been the seat of government
twice, and that Governor Burnett, finding Boston unmanageable, had
convened the General Court here for two years. That was in 1728, and now
it was 1800.

"But no one lives a hundred years," she said.

"Oh, yes; there are a number of persons who have lived that long. Now
and then a person lives in three centuries, is born the last year of
one, goes through a whole century, and dies in the next one."

"What a long, long while!" she sighed.

And there was the old Court House where the Stamp Act was denounced. She
wanted to know all about that, and he was fond of explaining things,
the sort of teacher habit, but there was nothing dogmatic about it. Here
were houses where the Leveretts had lived, third or fourth cousins who
had married with the Graingers, and the Lyndes, and the Saltonstalls,
and the Hales. It is so in the course of a hundred or two years, when
emigration does not come in to disturb the purity of the blood.

The little girl really began to improve. Her hair was taking on a
brighter tint and in the warm weather the uneven ends curled about her
forehead in dainty rings, her complexion was many shades fairer, her
cheeks rounded out, and her chin began to show the cleft in it. She was
more like her olden self, quite merry at times.

The summer went on as usual. Gardening, berry-picking, and she helped
with the gooseberries, the briery vines she did not like. There were
jars of jam and preserves, rose leaves to gather, and all the mornings
were crowded full. Often in the afternoon she went up in the garret to
see Miss Eunice spin--sometimes on the big wheel, at others with flax on
the small wheel. She liked the whirring sound, and it was a mystery to
her how the thread came out so fine and even.

Elizabeth had taken the white quilt out of its wrappings, it did not get
finished the summer before. A neighbor had let her copy a new pattern
for the border that had come from New York. And she heard there had
been imported white woven quilts with wonderful figures in them.

"Then one wouldn't have to quilt any more. Shan't you be glad, Cousin
Elizabeth?"

"Glad!" She gave a kind of snort and pushed the needle into her finger,
and had to stop lest a drop of blood might mar the whiteness. "Well, I'm
not as lazy as that comes to, and I don't see how they can put much
beauty in them. You can change blue and white and show a pattern, but
where it is all white! Why, you couldn't tell it from a tablecloth."

It was warm up in the garret, and what with drying herbs, and the sun
pouring on the shingles, there was a rather close, peculiar air. Cynthia
stood by the open window, where the sweet summer wind went by, laden
with the fragrance of newly cut grasses and the silk of the corn that
was just tasselling out. The hills rose up, tree-crowned; white clouds
floated by overhead, and out beyond was the great ocean that led to
other countries--to India she thought of so often.

Oh, how the birds sang! She was so sorry Cousin Eunice had to sit and
spin, when there was such a beautiful world all around, and Cousin
Elizabeth pricked her fingers quilting. She heard her sigh, but she did
not dare look around. She had that nice sense of delicacy, rather
unusual in a child. But then she wasn't an everyday child.

"Cynthia," called Rachel from the foot of the stairs, "don't you want to
go out for a walk? They've been unloading the _Mingo_, and they have a
store of new things at the Merrits'."

That was the great East India emporium.

"Oh, yes!" She skipped across the floor and ran downstairs lightly.

"That child's like a whirlwind," exclaimed Elizabeth crossly.

"But we ought to be glad she's so much better. I was really afraid in
the spring we wouldn't have her long."

"Oh, the Leverett stock is tough."

"But her mother died young."

"Of that horrid India fever. No, I didn't truly think she would die. If
she had, I wonder where all the money would go? Chilian is awful
close-mouthed about it. But it would have to go somewhere. 'Tisn't at
all likely he'd leave word for it to be thrown back in the sea."

"No; oh, no."

"There's some talk about missionaries going out to try to convert the
heathen. But Giles thinks it would cost more than it would amount to.
Giles has got way off; seems to me religion's dying out since they've
begun to preach easy ways of getting to heaven and letting the bars down
here and there. There's no struggle and sense of conviction nowadays;
you just take it up as a business. And that child talks about heaven as
if she'd had a glimpse of it and saw her father and mother there. Letty
Orne was a church member in her younger days, but I don't believe the
captain ever was. And they who don't repent will surely perish."

Eunice sighed. She could never get used to the thought that thousands of
souls were brought into the world to perish eternally.

Cynthia tied on her Leghorn hat. It did have some black ribbon on it,
and the strings were passed under her chin and tied at one side. That
and her silken gown gave her a quaint appearance, rather striking as
well.

They walked down the street and turned corners. There was quite a
procession of ladies bound for the same place. If they had been all
buyers, Mr. Merrit would have made quite a fortune. But he was glad to
have them come. They would describe the stock to their neighbors, and
perhaps decide on what they wanted for themselves.

"Ah, Miss Winn!" exclaimed a pleasant-faced woman. "And that is Captain
Leverett's little girl? Why, she looks as if she was quite well again.
We heard of her being so poorly. I suppose the shock of her father's
death was dreadful! Poor little thing! And she's to be quite an heiress,
I heard. What are they going to do with her? Won't she be sent to Boston
to school?"

"Oh, I think not. Mr. Leverett has been teaching her a little."

They had fairly to elbow their way in. Long counters were piled with
goods. Silks, laces, sheerest of muslins embroidered beautifully, lace
wraps, India shawls, jewelry, caps, collars, handkerchiefs, stockings,
slippers that were dainty enough for a Cinderella.

And all down one side were ranged tables, and jars, and vases, and
articles one could hardly find a name for. Such exquisite carving, such
odd figures painted and embroidered on silk, birds the like of which
were never seen on land or sea, dragons that flew, and crawled, and
climbed trees, and disported themselves on waves.

"Oh, it looks like home," cried Cynthia, for the moment forgetting
herself. And she kept sauntering round among the beautiful things, her
heart growing strangely light, and her pulses throbbing with a sort of
joy.

She was almost hidden by a great pile of tapestry. The Indians had found
some secrets of beauty as well as France, if they did make it with
infinite pains. And this was made with the little hand-looms and joined
together so neatly and the colors blended so harmoniously that it was
like a dream. Only the little girl did not like the dragons and strange
animals. She had never seen any real ones like them. They were in the
stories Nalla used to tell.

Then some one else spoke to Miss Winn. "Is your little charge here?" she
asked. "I'm quite anxious to see her. I've called twice on the
Leveretts, and really asked for her once when they said she was quite
ill. But I saw her out in the carriage with--isn't it her uncle? No?
And she's to be very well to do, I've heard. The idea of the Leverett
women undertaking to bring up a child! They're good as gold and some of
the best housekeepers in Salem, but I dare say they'll teach her to knit
stockings, and make bedquilts, and braid rag mats, and do fifty-year-old
things--make a regular little Puritan of her. I knew her mother quite
well before she was married. Doesn't seem as if we were near of an age
and went to school together. But some of the Ornes married in our line.
And I was married when I was seventeen, and now I'm a grandmother. How
the years do fly on! And she had to die out in that heathen land; he
too. Wasn't it odd about sending her here beforehand? I do want to see
her."

"She is somewhere about, interested in all these foreign things." Miss
Winn was not quite sure of the chattering woman. She had learned that
the Leverett ladies were exclusive, whether from inclination or lack of
time. They asked their minister and a few old family friends in to tea
on rare occasions, and then it was cooking and baking and cleaning up
the choice old silver and dusting and polishing, and the next day
clearing up. Everything out of the routine made so much extra work.
Among the few English-speaking people in India there had been a sort of
free and easy sociability.

Cynthia meanwhile had slipped around the end of the counter and came up
to them. She wanted to see the woman who had been to school with her
mother. Then her mother was a little girl, perhaps no older than she.
Did she like it? Cynthia wondered.

"This is Captain Leverett's little daughter," Rachel announced rather
stiffly.

"My--but you don't favor your mother at all. I'm Mrs. Turner and I knew
her off and on. We lived about thirty miles above here. Then her folks
died and she went to Boston, but she used to be at the Leveretts' a good
deal. I married and came here. I'm living up North River way and have a
house full of children--like steps--and one grandchild, and I'm just on
the eve of thirty-seven. I've one little girl about your age, but she's
ever so much bigger. I'd like you to be friends with her. The next older
is a girl, too. Why, you'd have real nice times if the old aunties were
willing. Do they keep her strict? And she's going to be a considerable
heiress, I heard. I wonder where her eyes came from? They're not
Leverett eyes, and her mother's were a clear blue, real china blue, but
then there's different blues in china," and she laughed. "Sad about the
captain, wasn't it? He should have lived to enjoy his fortune, and now
his little girl will have it all. I must come and scrape acquaintance
for the sake of my girls. You'd like them, I know, they're full of fun.
We're not strait-laced people--that's going out of date."

Then she passed on. They wandered about a little more among the vases
and jars and the paintings on silk. The air was heavy with sandalwood,
and attar of rose, and incense. The fragrance seemed never to die out of
those old things that became family heirlooms.

"Come," Rachel said, taking her by the hand. It was quite late in the
afternoon now, and the shadows of everything were growing longer. She
could not understand why it was at first, but now she knew. And the sun
would be round there in Asia presently. In her secret heart she still
believed the sun went round and the earth stood still, for in the
movement people _must_ slip off. But then what held it in the air?
Cousin Chilian had a globe, but you see there was a strong wire through
the middle, fastened to the frame at both ends. Perhaps the earth was
fastened somewhere! She liked to make it revolve on its axis, and in
imagination she crossed the oceans, and seas, and capes, and found her
father again.

The stage had just come in. They paused on the corner, waiting for
Cousin Chilian. Some one was with him--yes, it was Cousin Giles
Leverett.

"Well, little woman," he began, "so I find you out here meandering
round, and so much improved that I hardly know you. We were afraid in
the winter you were going to slip away and leave all this fortune behind
you, never having had a bit of good of it. But you look now as if you
had taken a new lease. And you are positively growing!"

Chilian smiled at the remark. He had begun to think so himself. And she
looked so pretty just now with the pink in her cheeks and the soft
tendrils of hair about her forehead, the eager, luminous eyes. He
reached out and took her hand.

"Have you been inspecting old Salem, and did you find any queer things?"
Cousin Giles asked.

"Oh, there was a great shipload of goods from India and it seemed almost
as if you were walking through the booths at home, only there were no
natives and no beggars or holy men----"

"Tut! tut! child; they are not holy men who are too lazy to move and
waiting for other people to fill their mouths. If they were here we'd
make them work or they'd have to starve. They're talking about
missionaries being sent out to convert them. I heard a rousing sermon on
Sunday, but it didn't loosen my purse-strings. Your greatest missionary
is work, good hard labor, clearing up and planting. Suppose those old
_Mayflower_ people had sat down and held out their hands for alms. Do
you suppose our Indians would have filled 'em with their corn, and fish,
and game? Not much. They'd tied 'em to a tree and set fire to 'em." When
Cousin Giles was excited he made elisions of speech rather unusual for a
Boston man. "They went to work and cut down trees, and built houses, and
raised farm and garden truck, and made shoes and clothes, and roads and
bridges, and built cities and towns, and shamed those countries
thousands of years old. And now we're trying to help them by bringing
over their goods and selling them."

"And creating extravagance, Elizabeth would say," returned Chilian, with
a sort of humorous smile.

"Oh, you might as well keep the money going as to hoard it up in an old
stocking, so long as it is honestly yours. We're getting to be quite a
notable country, Chilian Leverett."

They turned into Derby Street, and Cousin Giles paused to survey the
garden.

"You've lots of things to enjoy here," he said. "I don't know but it's a
sensible thing to take the good of what you have as you go along. And
little Miss here will have enough without your adding to the store. You
men of Salem ought to begin to do some big things--build a college."

"Oh, I think our young men would rather go to Harvard. We don't want to
rival you. We shall be the biggest New England seaport. We'll divide up
the glories."

Elizabeth was so taken by surprise that she was rather cross. She liked
things planned beforehand. Now the tablecloth must come off. This one
had been on since Sunday and it had two darns in it. And the old silver
must come out.

"I don't believe Cousin Giles would ever notice," Eunice said. "And I do
think the china prettier than that old silver."

"Well, it has the crown mark on it and the Leveretts owned it before
they came from England. Giles' folks had some of it, too, but the Lord
only knows what he's done with his. I dare say servants have made way
with it, or banged it out of shape. Anybody can have china. Come, do be
spry, Eunice."

Cynthia went upstairs and had her hair brushed and a clean apron put on,
though the other was not soiled.

"Rachel, what is an heiress?" she asked.

"Why--some one, a woman, who inherits a good deal of money."

"Does she have to wait until she is a woman?"

"Why, no. Yes, in a way, too. She can have the money spent upon her, but
she can't have it herself until she is twenty-one."

Cynthia wondered how it would seem to go and spend money, buy ever so
many things. But she really couldn't think of anything she wanted,
unless it was a house of her very own, and books, and pretty pictures,
not portraits of old-fashioned men and women. And a pony and a dainty
chaise. But then--she was such a little girl, and she wouldn't want to
leave Cousin Chilian.

Elizabeth made delicious cream shortcake for supper. Cousin Giles said
everything tasted better up here, perhaps it was the clear salt water.
There were so many fresh ponds and streams around Boston. But there were
big plans for drainage and for docking out. Then Elizabeth was such a
fine cook.

The two men sat out on the stoop in the summer moonlight and Cynthia
thought Cousin Giles really quarrelled trying to establish the
superiority of Boston. Then they talked about investments and Captain
Leverett, and Giles said, "Cynthia will be one of the richest women of
Salem. Chilian, you'll have to look sharp that some schemer doesn't
marry her for her money."

"You must come to bed, Cynthia," declared Rachel. Through the open
window they could hear Cousin Giles' voice plainly.

The men went the next morning to consider an investment Chilian had in
view. It had been thought best to divide the sums coming in between
Salem and Boston. Then they walked about and saw the improvements, the
new docks being built to accommodate the shipping, the great fleet of
boats, the busy ship-yard, the hurrying to and fro everywhere. It was
not merely finery, but spices and articles used in the arts. Gum copal
was brought from Zanzibar. Indigo came in, though they were trying to
raise that at the South.

And when Giles saw the new streets and fine houses, and Mr. Derby's,
that was to cost eighty thousand dollars, he did open his eyes in
surprise. Though he said rather grudgingly:

"It's a shame for one little girl to have all that money. There should
have been three or four children. Fifty years ago the Leveretts had such
big families they bid fair to overrun the earth, and now they've
dwindled down to next to nothing. Chilian, why don't you marry?"

"The same to yourself. Are you clinging to any old memory?"

"Well, not just that. I don't seem to have time. Now you are a fellow of
leisure. Get about it, man, and hunt up a wife."




CHAPTER X

A NEW DEPARTURE


Cynthia Leverett was making great improvement in every respect. She was
no longer the thin, wan little thing that had come from India. She had
outgrown her clothes, which was a good sign, Eunice said.

Elizabeth made a stand for good wearing ginghams and plain cloths for
winter.

"There's that gray cloth of mine that's too nice to hack around for
every day. I could have it dyed, I suppose, but I've two nice black
stuff dresses beside my silk, and that other one Chilian gave me that
must have cost a sight of money; it's thick enough to almost stand
alone. I can't bear those sleazy stuffs that come from India. But I've
wished more than once that I had the money it cost, out at interest. And
the cloth----"

"It isn't a very pretty color," ventured Eunice timidly.

"What does that matter for a child? It won't show dirt easily. And it is
settled that she is going to school, I'm thankful to say."

The dress in question was not a clear, pretty gray, but had an ugly
yellow tint.

"She certainly is rich enough to buy her own clothes, or have them
bought for her. I'd dip that dress over a good deal darker brown. You
know Chilian didn't like it for you, and he will not for her."

Eunice was amazed at her own protest. The child had always been prettily
attired. And more attention was being paid to children's clothes she
noticed in church on Sunday, and after she had indulged in such sinful
wanderings, she read the chapter in Isaiah where the prophet denounced
the "round tires like the moon, the bonnets and the head bands, the
mantles, and wimples, and crisping pins, and changeable suits of
apparel," and other vanities, and predicted dire punishments for them.

Mrs. Turner had called according to her proposal. She brought her little
daughter Arabella, commonly called Bella. Cousin Chilian was out in the
garden with Cynthia, and received her with his usual kindly cordiality,
inviting them to walk into the house. The parlor shutters were tightly
closed, and Mrs. Turner abhorred state parlors. Hers was always open,
for guests were no rarity.

"Why can't we sit out here a spell? It is so delightful to have this
garden in view. And your clematis is a perfect show. Then let the
children run around and get acquainted. How are the ladies?"

She seated herself on the bench at the side of the porch.

"I will call them," he said. "But--hadn't you better walk in?"

"Oh, we can't stay very long. I've been waiting for the ladies to return
my last call, but we were down in this vicinity, so I stopped. You see,
I don't always stand on ceremony. And we have been so interested in your
little girl. I saw her in Merrit's with Miss Winn."

He summoned the ladies, and then he returned to the guests. The children
were both down the path--Bella talking and gesticulating, and Cynthia
laughing.

Mrs. Turner was in nowise formal. She talked of Mr. Turner's
business--he was a shipbuilder--of the rapid strides Salem was making;
indeed one would hardly know it for old Salem of the witch days. And
people's ideas had broadened out so, softened from their rigidity,
"though some of the old folks are thinking the very trade we are so
proud of is going to ruin our character and morals, and fill us with
pride and vanity. But I say to Mr. Turner the people did their hard work
and bore their deprivations bravely all through the Revolution, and we
can't go back and make their lot easier by depriving ourselves of
comforts, or even pleasures."

There might be some casuistry in that, but there was truth as well.

Then he asked if she knew of any nice schools for girls. Where did hers
go?

"Oh, to Madam Torrey's. That's up Church Street. Maybe it would be too
far in bad weather, though our girls don't mind it. Alice is thirteen,
but she's been there since she was eight, and Bella has been going these
two years. The boys are at the Bertram School, and your neighbor Bentley
Upham goes there. He's a nice boy. But Madam Torrey is a fine woman. She
has an assistant, and a woman comes in to teach the French class.
Then--I don't suppose everybody will approve of this, but there is going
to be a dancing-class out of school hours, yet no one is compelled to
send their children to that. There's fine needlework, too, and fancy
knitting, indeed about all that it is necessary for a girl to know. And
the children are all from good families; that is quite an important
point."

"I think I must walk over and see her."

"Do. I am sure you will be pleased. The walk will be the only objection.
Isn't she delicate?"

"She wasn't well last winter. She took a cold. She was not used to our
bleak winters. And there was her father's death. She had counted so much
on his return."

"It was very sad. She looks well now."

Then the ladies made their appearance. Elizabeth apologized for Chilian
not asking her into the parlor. "It looked inhospitable."

"It was my fault. The stoop was so tempting. A shady porch in the
afternoon is a luxury. We take our sewing out there; that is, Alice and
I, and sometimes the guests. How lovely your vines are! And your garden
is a regular show place, quite worth coming to see if there were no
other charm. And, Miss Leverett, I hear you have been making the most
beautiful white quilt there is in Salem."

"Oh, no. But as nice as any. And it was a sight of work. I don't know as
I'd do it again. I've no chick or child to leave it to."

"May I come over some day and see it? Not that I shall do anything of
the kind. With four big boys to mend for and the two girls, I have my
hands full."

Then they talked about putting up fruit and making jellies, and Mrs.
Turner said she must go over to the Uphams. She heard that Polly was
getting to be such a nice, smart girl, and had worked the bottom of her
white frock and a round cape to match. Then she called Bella.

"Oh, can't I go over with them?" pleaded Cynthia.

Cousin Chilian nodded. Elizabeth rose stiffly and went in. Eunice pulled
out her knitting. It was so lovely here. There were the warmth and
perfume of summer and the rich fragrance of ripening fruits and grass
mown for feed, not snipped with a lawn-mower, such things had not been
heard of even in the rapidly improving Salem.

"There are some countries where people live out of doors nearly all the
time," began Eunice reflectively. "Well, they do a good deal in India.
But I think this is in Europe. And this is so lovely, so restful. But
I'm afraid you have affronted Elizabeth by not insisting Mrs. Turner
should walk into the parlor. Though really--we had not returned her last
call. I do wish Elizabeth could find some time to get out. I don't see
why there should be so much work."

"Couldn't you have some one to help?"

"Well, it isn't just the cooking and kitchenwork. And no one could suit
her there. She's up in that old garret toiling, and moiling, and packing
away enough things to furnish an inn. We shall never want them. And
there's your mother's, and some of your grandmother's, blankets."

"The New England thrift is rather too thrifty sometimes," he commented
dryly.

Cynthia staid after Mrs. Turner made her adieus. Indeed, as it was
nearing supper-time, he walked over for her. She and Betty were in the
wide-seated swing and Ben was swinging them so high that Betty, used as
she was to it, gave now and then little squeals. Chilian held up his
hand and Ben let the "cat die," which meant the swing stopping of
itself.

"Oh, Mr. Leverett, can't Cynthy stay to tea? I'll run and ask mother."

"Not to-day. She had better come home now."

"Oh, dear!" cried Bentley disappointedly.

"Yes, I had better go. And I've had such a lovely time. Cousin Chilian,
can't I come over again?"

How pretty she looked with her shining eyes, her rosy cheeks, and her
entreating lips! What would she coax out of men as she grew older!

"Oh, yes; any time they want you."

"Well, we'd like her every day!" cried Ben eagerly. "And isn't it
splendid that she's grown so well and strong, and can run and play, and
have good out-of-doors times? Though I used to like it in the winter up
in your room, and Mr. Price said he never knew a boy to improve so in
Latin."

Bentley made a graceful bow to Mr. Leverett.

"Oh," said Cynthia, skipping along in exuberant joy, "children are nice,
aren't they? You can't have much fun alone by yourself, and the days are
so long when you go in to Boston."

"I wonder if you would like to try school again?"

"Yes, I think I would;" after a pause. "You see," with a gravity that
sat oddly upon her, "I'm not so afraid as I was, and I have more sense.
And I know things more evenly than I did. I can write now quite well,
and I know most of the tables, though division does bother me. And I can
spell all but the very difficult words. I don't think any one would
laugh at me now."

"No, they wouldn't," he answered decisively.

"I shouldn't like little boys, but I wouldn't mind them as big as
Bentley. And, oh, I wish we had a swing. And they have a real sailors'
hammock, such as they have on shipboard. It's delightful under the
trees."

"I think we can manage that."

"Well, if your head isn't tousled!" cried Elizabeth. "It looks like a
brush heap. Get it fixed, for supper is all ready. Why didn't you stay?"
the last ironically.

"Cousin Chilian thought I had better not. They did want me to."

"Are you sure they _wanted_ you to?"

"Why, yes," she answered in ignorance of the sarcasm.

She walked up and down the garden path with Cousin Chilian and asked
about the school, was glad when she found Bella and her sister Alice
went there. Now and then she gave two or three skips and pulled on the
hand she held so tightly. He had never seen her in quite such glee, and
how charming she was!

"Chilian, bring that child in out of the dew. Next thing she'll be in
for a winter's cold," said the severe voice.

The interview with Madam Torrey was very satisfactory. Chilian asked
Miss Winn to go out and buy what was needed and get it made. They went
over to Mrs. Turner's one day and took the school in on their way.

"When it rains Silas can take you and come for you. I think the walk
will not tire you out."

"Oh, no; I don't get tired out now."

It was Miss Winn's place to look after the child, of course, but
Elizabeth felt in some way defrauded. She wished Cynthia had been poor
and dependent upon them. Then she would stand a chance to be brought up
in a useful manner.

Chilian took her to school the first morning. Miss Winn was to come for
her. She had been rather shy at first. But Bella Turner told the girls
about her, how she had been born in Salem, and gone to Calcutta when
only a few months old, come and gone again in her father's ship, and he
was Captain Leverett, and then returned to America. He was to come
afterward, but he had died. And Mr. Chilian Leverett, who was something
in Harvard College, was her guardian. And she was to have ever so much
money when she was a young lady.

Any other child might have been spoiled by the attentions lavished upon
her. The girls thought her curly hair so pretty, and her hands were so
small, with their dainty, tapering fingers. Then she found one of the
girls, Lois Brinsmaid, lived in Central Avenue, so there was no further
question of troubling any one. Cousin Chilian had given her a good
foundation for study and she was eager for knowledge of all sorts,
except that of the needle.

Then autumn began to merge into winter and there were storms and bleak
winds, and some days she staid at home. She caught light colds, but
Chilian and Miss Winn were very watchful.

She went to the Turners one afternoon and staid to tea, and the big boys
hovered about her like bees. She was not forward or aggressive, but
there was a sort of charming sweetness about her. When she raised her
lovely eyes they seemed to appeal to every heart, though they never went
very far with Cousin Elizabeth.

One day she came home and found the house in a great state of
excitement. Elizabeth had started to go down into the cellar with both
hands full. She had been a little dizzy for several days, and meant to
take a dose of herb tea, boneset being her great stand-by, when she
could find time. Whether it was the vertigo, or she slipped, she lay
there unconscious, and they sent for Doctor Prescott.

Silas and the doctor carried her upstairs, and the latter brought her
out of the faint. But when she started to stand up, she toppled over and
fainted again.

"There's something quite serious. Let us carry her up to her room, and
you women undress her. Her legs are sound, so the trouble is higher up."

Then he found her hip was broken, a bad thing at any time of life, but
at her age doubly so. And he sent for Doctor Lapham to help him set it.
It was very bad. They were still there when Chilian came home.

"I'm afraid she's laid up for a year or so;" and the doctor shook his
head ominously.

"Do your very best for her," besought Chilian.

He said to Eunice, "Now you must have some one. You can't carry on the
house alone."

"If it is the same to you, Chilian, I'd rather have a nurse. There's
Mother Taft, who is good and strong, and used to nursing. She's willing
to help about a little, too."

"Just as you think best. I want every care taken of her."

For a month it was a very serious matter. They thought the spine was
somewhat injured as well. And Elizabeth knew they could never get on
without her.

"I expect I shall find the house in such a state when I do get about, it
will take me all summer to right it. You never were as thorough as I
could wish, Eunice."

Miss Winn begged that she might be of service. She had so little to do,
or to think about, that time hung heavy on her hands, now that Cynthia
was in school. For then school hours were from nine to five. And the
child was getting so handy caring for herself. She curled her hair and
put on her clothes, brought her shoes down every evening for Silas to
black, and sometimes wiped the tea dishes while Miss Winn washed them.
Somehow there didn't seem so much work to do. Eunice didn't always have
two kinds of cake for supper, nor a great shelf full of pies for Silas
to take home. There was plenty of everything and no one complained.

They found Mother Taft invaluable. She was about the average height, and
had long arms, and strength according. Then she had a most excellent
way with her. When Elizabeth groaned that they never could get on
without her, and she must be up and about before everything went to
"wrack and ruin," Mother Taft said:

"The kitchen looks like a new pin. There's no signs of ruin that I can
see. Meals are good, cake fine, house clean. When you get downstairs
you'll think you haven't been out of the harness more'n a week."

"A likely story," Elizabeth moaned.

Cynthia went through March very successfully, but with the first warm
spell in April she caught a cold and coughed, and Chilian was almost
wild about her, his nerves having been worn somewhat by Elizabeth's
mishap. But after ten days or so she came around all right and was eager
for school again.

She was sitting in her old place by the window late one afternoon and he
had been reading some poems to her--a volume lately come from England.

"Cousin Chilian," she said, "will you tell me what true relation we
are?"

"Why, what has put that in your head?"

"I want to know." She said it persuasively.

"Well, it isn't very near after all. My father and yours were cousins.
My father was the son of the oldest brother, your father the son of the
youngest, that stretched them quite far apart. When I wasn't much more
than a baby Anthony came to live with us, and was like an elder brother
to me. Father was very fond of him. But he would go to sea and he made
a fine sailor and captain. Then he was married from here, and you were
born here."

"The girls sometimes say, 'your uncle.' I wonder if you would like to
have me call you uncle?"

Something in him protested. He could not tell what it was, unless an odd
feeling that it made him seem older. He wished he were ten years
younger, and he could give no reason for that either.

"I think I like the 'cousin' best;" after some deliberation.

"And it is so lovely to be dear to some one, very dear. I like Rachel,
she's been almost a mother to me, and I like Cousin Eunice for her sweet
ways. But I've no one of my very own, and so--I'm very glad to be dear
to you. It is like a ship being anchored to something safe and strong."

She came and put her arms about his neck and kissed him. He drew her
down on his knee. She was her mother's child, and her mother had been
dear to him, his first love, his only love so far.

Oh, how would the garden get made and the house cleaned, the blankets
and the winter clothing aired and put away, those in use washed? Eunice
and Miss Winn went up in the garret one day and swept and dusted, not
giving a whole week to it.

"Now," said Mother Taft, "I'm going to take a holiday off. I'm tired of
puttering round in the sick room, and she's so much better now that she
doesn't keep one on the jump. And I'm going to wash them there blankets
and you can pack them away, so there'll be one thing less to worry
about."

"But Silas' wife would come and do it. And a holiday! Why don't you go
off somewhere----"

"I want to do it."

And do it she did. Some way the house did get cleaned. "After a
fashion," Elizabeth said. And the garden was made. Chilian and Eunice
trimmed up roses. Cynthia and Miss Winn planted seeds. There were always
some things that wintered over--sweet Williams, lilies of various sorts,
pinks, laurels, some spiræas, snowball and syringas, hosts of lilacs
that made a fragrant hedge. Cynthia thought it had never been so lovely
before. She wore a nosegay at her throat, and in her belt just a few;
she had the fine taste that never overloaded. She and Cousin Chilian
used to walk up and down the fragrant paths after supper and no one
fretted at them about the dew. Sometimes Rachel or Eunice would bring
out a dainty scarf. And how many things they found to talk about. She
loved to dwell on the times with her father, and it seemed as if she
remembered a great deal more about her mother than she did at first, but
she never imagined it was Cousin Chilian's memory that helped out hers.

She had enjoyed the school very much. There were no high up "isms" or
"ologies" for girls in those days. She learned about her own country,
for already there were some histories written, and the causes that led
to the war. Some of the girls had grandmothers who had lived through
those exciting years, and made the relation of incidents much more
interesting than any dry written account that was mostly dates and
names. What heroes they had been! And the old _Mayflower_ story and John
Alden, and others who were to inspire a poet's pen.

Then there was the dread story of the witchcraft that had led Salem
astray. Cousin Chilian would never have it mentioned, and had taken away
several books he did not want her to see. But the girls had gone to some
of the old places, where witches had been taken from their homes and
cast into jail, the Court House where they had been tried, and Gallows
Hill, that most people shunned even now.

One rainy evening, after her lessons had been studied, Cynthia went
downstairs. Rachel had been fomenting her face for the toothache and was
lying down. Cousin Chilian had gone to a town-meeting, and the house
seemed so still that she almost believed she might see the ghost or
witch of the stories she had heard. No one was in the sitting-room, or
the kitchen proper, but she heard voices in what was called the summer
kitchen, a roughly constructed place with a stone chimney and a great
swinging crane. Here they did much of the autumn work, for Elizabeth was
quite a stickler for having a common place to save something nicer.

Mother Taft always smoked a pipe of tobacco in the evening. "It soothed
her," she said, after her tussle of fixing her patient for the night,
"and made her sleep better."

"And it's my opinion if Miss 'Lisbeth could just have a good smoke at
night 'twould do her more good than the doctor's powders."

"Why, Cynthy!" Cousin Eunice exclaimed.

"I was lonesome. Rachel's gone to sleep, Cousin Eunice--were there such
things as witches over a hundred years ago?"

Eunice glanced at Mother Taft. Witchcraft was a tabooed subject, yet it
lingered in more than one imaginative mind, though few would confess a
belief in it.

"Well, people may talk as they like, but there's many queer things in
the world. Now there's that falling sickness, as they call it. Jabez
Green has two children that roll on the floor, and froth at the mouth,
and their eyes bulge most out of their heads. They're lacking, we all
know. But when they come out of the fit they tell queer things that they
saw, and I do suppose it was that way then. They do act as if they were
bewitched."

We know this misfortune now as epilepsy, but medical science in the
earlier century did not understand that, nor incipient insanity.

"It was very strange," said Eunice rather awesomely. "And Mr. Parris
was a minister and a good man, yet it broke out in his family."

"But he had them slaves, and in their own land black people do awful
things to each other. But it was strange; again, after his wife was
accused, Governor Phipps ordered there should be no more punished and
all set free, and then the thing stopped."

"And it wasn't real witchcraft?" said Cynthia.

"Well, I wouldn't undertake to say. There were witches in Bible times
and they kept themselves mighty close, for they were not to be allowed
to live. And Saul had a hard time getting anything out of the witch of
Endor, you know, Miss Eunice."

Eunice nodded. They were trenching on forbidden ground.

"My grandmother believed in them and she was a good God-fearing woman,
too. You see what made it worse for Salem was their sending so many here
for trial from the places round. Grandfather lived way up above
Topsfield, had a farm there and 'twas woods all around. No one troubled
them then, but afterward--well, they'd cleared the woods and built a
road and new houses were put up around, for some people were glad enough
to get out of Salem. There was a woman named Martha Goodno, who had been
in prison, and people were shy of her. Grandmother had two cows, and
folks turned them out in the woods then. One of them went in Martha's
garden, but she spied her out and drove her off before much damage was
done. The fence had been broken down and she laid it to the cow, but
people said it had been down for days. Well, something got the matter
with the cow. She gave good rich milk and mother saved it for butter.
But when she churned there came queer streaks in it that looked like
blood. She doctored the cow, although it seemed well enough. One day a
neighbor was in and the same thing happened. 'Throw some in the fire,'
said the neighbor, 'and if you hear of any one being burned you'll know
who is the witch.' So grandmother threw two dippers full in the fire and
she said it made an awful smell. The rest she dumped out of doors, she
wouldn't feed it to the pigs. About an hour afterward another neighbor
came in. Grandmother made a salve that was splendid for burns and cuts.
'Mis' Denfield,' she says, 'won't you come over to Martha Goodno's and
bring your pot of salve. She's burned herself dreadfully drawin' the
coals out of the oven, set her dress on fire just at the waist.' So
mother went over and found it was a pretty bad, sure enough burn, and
she was groaning just fit to die. Mother spread a piece of linen and
laid it on and left her some salve. 'What did I tell you?' says mother's
neighbor, and they nodded their heads. But the queer thing was that
after that the cow was all right and she never had any more trouble.

"After she was well she took a spite against another neighbor, who used
to spin flax and sell the thread. Then her flax took to cutting up
queer, and would break off, and turn yellow, and trouble her dreadfully.
Mother was there one afternoon when it bothered so. 'Just throw a
handful in the fire,' says mother. 'Fire's purifying;' and she did. They
sent to mother again for salve, for Martha had scalded her right hand.
Then the folks talked it over and a letter was written and tucked under
her door, warning her to move, and the next-door man bought the place.
I've heard grandmother tell this over--she lived to be ninety, and she
was a good Christian woman, and she never added nor took away one iota.
There, I oughtn't have told all this before the child; she's white as a
ghost."

"You must go to bed this minute," exclaimed Eunice. "I'll go up with
you."




CHAPTER XI

THE VOICE OF A ROSE


There were some marvellous ghost stories in those days, and haunted
houses as well. The society of Psychical Research would have found many
queer things if it had existed at that time. The sailors spun strange
yarns over the power we call telepathy now. Many of the families had a
retired captain or disabled first mate, or supercargo, who had seen
mysterious appearances and heard warning voices. And it recalled to the
little girl some of the stories she had heard in India that she pieced
out of vague fragments. Maybe there were curious influences no one could
explain.

Elizabeth improved a little. She had been moved from cot to bed, but now
they packed her in a big chair and pushed her over to the window where
she could see the vegetable garden and the chicken yard. They had not
had very good luck at the hatching this season. The hens had missed
Elizabeth's motherly care. She had trained them to an amusing habit of
obedience, and the little chickens were her delight. Was she never to be
out among them again?

One day Cynthia came up with two roses in a glass, most exquisite ones
at that.

"Cousin Elizabeth," she began, "do you remember the little rosebush you
put in my garden last summer? We thought it would die. It came out
beautifully in the spring and these are the first roses that bloomed. I
thought you ought to have them. Are you never going to get well enough
to walk around the garden? Cousin Eunice has kept it so nice."

Elizabeth Leverett's heart was touched and she swallowed over a lump in
her throat. She had taken up the rose from a place where it had been
smothered with those of larger growth and given it to the child who had
begged for "a garden of her very own." She had not supposed it would
live. And that Cynthia should bring her the firstfruits!

"I'm obliged to you," she returned huskily. "They are very beautiful."
And she wondered the child had not given them to Chilian.

"I wish you liked a few flowers every day," the little girl said
wistfully.

"Well--I might;" reluctantly.

"They are so lovely. The world is so beautiful. It's very hard to be ill
in summer, in winter one wouldn't mind it so much. But I am glad you can
sit up."

Was it tears that Elizabeth winked away?

She had many serious thoughts through these months of helplessness. She
had always measured everything by the strict line of duty, of
usefulness. There was a virtue in enduring hardness as a good soldier,
and the harder it was the more virtue it held in it. Her room was plain,
almost to bareness. There had been a faded patchwork top quilt at first,
until Mother Taft insisted upon having something nicer. But it had to be
folded up carefully at sundown, when the likelihood of calls was over.
And she did put one of the new rugs on the floor.

"That's beginning to go," Mrs. Taft said. "Some one will catch their
foot in it and have a bad fall."

"It could be mended, I suppose."

"Yes. There's a new one needed in the kitchen. I'll sew it up for that.
Land sakes! you've got enough in this house to last ten lifetimes!"

Friends came in to sit with her and brought their work. Sometimes she
sewed a little, but drawing out her needle hurt her back after a while.
She read her Bible and Baxter's "Saints' Rest" And she wondered a little
what the other world would be like. She had never thought of heaven with
joy--there was the judgment first. And now that she could begin to sit
up it did prefigure recovery.

Most schools had kept open all the year round, but now the higher ones
were giving a month's vacation. Altogether it had been a happy year to
Cynthia. She had really been adored at school. Her frocks were admired,
she let the girls curl her hair, usually she wore it tied in a bunch
behind--not unlike the queue. Then she had some rings that she coaxed
Rachel to let her wear, it was such a pleasure to lend them to the
girls. She was learning what was considered necessary for a girl in
those days; a good deal more with Cousin Chilian. She kept her love for
the Latin and often read to him. She began to draw and paint flowers,
she joined the dancing-class, which was a delight to her; but Chilian
suggested she should not mention it to Elizabeth. She pirouetted up and
down the path like a fairy, and he loved to watch her.

There had been parties among the girls, but he would rather not have her
go, it was a bad thing for children to be up so late. She went to take
tea now and then. The Turners were very fond of her and the Uphams
wanted her once a week. She wondered if she might ever ask any one to
tea.

Then they planned what they would do in this wonderful vacation. Go off
for day's rides, take sails up and down, there were so many places. She
was brimming over with joy.

Chilian was called up in the night by Mother Taft.

"She's had a stroke. And she seemed so smart yesterday. She even laughed
over some school stories Cynthia told. That child's brought her flowers
every morning, and she's softened so much to her. I really think she's
been getting religion, as one may say, and being prepared."

Chilian heard the stertorous breathing. The eyes were half open and
rolled up, her face was drawn. He took the hand. It was cold and heavy.

"I'll go for the doctor. I think the end has come."

Dr. Prescott said the same thing, adding with a slow turn of the head,
"She will not last long."

What should he do with Cynthia? He remembered how careful her father had
been to shield her. She must not see Elizabeth, she must not confront
death in this awesome fashion.

When they came to breakfast he said:

"Cynthia, wouldn't you like to go in to Boston with me this morning?"

"Oh, it would be splendid!" She clapped her hands in delight.

"Well, Rachel must get you ready. We will take the stage. It goes early
now."

Of course, she was full of excitement. It had been planned as one of the
month's outings, but to take it as the first! Cousin Chilian was always
thinking up such nice things.

"Oh," she cried, tying the big Leghorn hat down, making a great bow
under her chin, "I must get my flowers for Cousin Elizabeth."

When she came in she would have flown upstairs, but Rachel stopped her.

"Miss Elizabeth is asleep. She had a bad spell in the night and the
doctor doesn't want her disturbed. I'll take them."

"Oh!" She looked disappointed. "Tell her good-bye and that I was sorry
not to come in and say it. And give her the flowers. I hope she will be
better to-night."

What a great thing it was to go off in the stage! It was a fine morning
with an easterly breeze. To be sure, the roads were dusty, but
travellers were not so dainty in those days. Cynthia had a dust cloak of
some thin material that shielded her white frock. There were three men
and two women. They sat on the middle seat, two of the men on front with
the driver, the other back with the ladies. Presently the driver blew a
long toot on his horn and they came to a little town with a tavern, as
they were called then, at its very entrance.

Two of the passengers left, one came in. The horses had a drink and on
they went over hill and dale, through great farms, where there were not
more than two or three houses in sight. The stage stopped for a man who
gave a loud halloo, and he climbed in. Then the horn gave another loud
signal.

So it went on. Some places were very pretty, great fields of corn waving
in the sunshine, potatoes, stubble where grain had been cut, stretches
of woodland, high, rather rough hills, then towns again. The sun went
under a cloud, which made it pleasanter. The passengers changed now and
then. One woman told her next neighbor "she was goin' in to Boston to
shop, because things were cheaper now. She always went after the rush
was over. There were cambrics, she heard, for one and ninepence, and
cotton cloth home-made was so much cheaper than the imported, but you
had to bleach it. And little traps that you couldn't get at a country
store."

Cynthia was tired and sleepy when they reached their journey's end,
which was Marlborough Street, where Cousin Giles had an office.

"Well! well! well!" he ejaculated in surprise. "Why, Miss Cynthia
Leverett, I'm glad to see you. Have you come to town to shop?"

Chilian made a little sign. "She has a whole month's vacation and we are
going to fill it up with journeys, taking Boston first."

"That's right. We shall have lots to show her. You'll hardly want to go
back to Salem. It was a long warm ride, wasn't it? Chilian, take off her
hat. Don't you want a drink?"

"I am thirsty," she admitted.

He fixed a glass of lemonade, and lemons were dear at that
period--scarce, too. While she was sipping it, being refreshed in every
pulse, the two men went down to the end of the room for a talk.

"She's dreadfully disfigured," Chilian said in a low tone. "And
Elizabeth wasn't a bad-looking woman. The doctor thinks she can't live
but a few days, her body is growing cold rapidly. I'd like to have the
child out of it all. Death is a great shock and very mysterious to a
child."

"Oh, I'll be glad to keep her, if she will stay content. I wish you
could have brought that woman with you. Poor Elizabeth! How Eunice will
miss her. Chilian, you've been like a son to those women. Women ought to
marry and have children of their own, but children are not always kind.
Yes. After you're rested we'll go home. I'm going to change my office,
get nearer to the business centre, only this is so pleasant with a nice
outlook."

"You ought to retire."

"Oh, what would I do? Like that Roman fellow, buy a farm? I don't know a
bit about farming and don't want to. There's so much going on here."

Presently they returned to the little girl, who was quite refreshed, and
then they went out, as it would be dinner-time presently. Cousin Giles
lived in Cambridge Street in quite an imposing row, though it had no
such spacious grounds as at Salem.

An immaculate black man opened the door and took the men's hats. "Ask
Mrs. Stevens to come down," Cousin Giles said.

Mrs. Stevens seemed a great lady. Eudora Castleton's mother was like
this, always looking as if she was dressed for a party. She had a pretty
silk gown, with some ruffles about the bottom, short enough to show her
clocked silk stockings. The waist was short also, the square neck filled
in with lace, and great balloon sleeves--so large at the top they came
almost up to her ears.

"This is the little girl who came from India, that I told you about, and
who is going to be a great lady some day. When she gets older we'll have
to have her down here to Boston, and give balls and parties for her, and
pick out a fine lover for her; hey, Cynthia?"

Cynthia turned scarlet.

"I think you must be warm and tired with the long stage ride; wouldn't
you like to come upstairs with me?"

Cynthia rose as Cousin Chilian looked approval, and followed up the
stairway, where her feet sank in the carpet. There were several rooms,
with the air blowing through delightfully, and there was fragrance
everywhere from vases of flowers.

Mrs. Stevens took off her hat and inspected her. She was going to be a
big heiress and a pretty girl in the bargain, piquant with a slightly
foreign look, though perhaps it was more in her manner.

"Susan," she called to a girl sewing in the next room, "come and wash
this little visitor's hands and face. She has come all the way from
Salem this morning. I wish we had a fresh frock for you, but we have no
little girls."

The voice was so soft and charming that Cynthia looked up with a kind of
admiring smile.

Susan took off her frock, bathed her face and hands with some perfumed
water, brushed out her hair, and said, "What lovely hair you have, and
so much of it. A queen might envy you!"

The idea of a queen wanting anything she had! Oh, how nice and refreshed
she felt.

Susan shook out the frock and put it on again, pulled out the sleeves,
smoothed the wrinkled skirt, and took her in the next room.

"It rests one so much. Are you hungry? We shall have dinner in half an
hour."

"Oh, no," Cynthia said. "And--and I am very much obliged to Susan."

"Come and sit here. Tell me how the aunties are--the one with the broken
limb."

"I think she isn't so well. Yesterday she was so much improved. The
doctor was there this morning."

"Poor lady! She has been ill a long while. And you are quite at home in
Salem, I suppose? You had a long journey. Did you like India?"

"Father was there;" with a sweet, attractive simplicity. "And some of it
was very beautiful. Oh, I almost froze the first winter here, but last
winter I didn't mind. And the sleigh-riding was splendid."

"Are there many little girls to be friends with?"

"Oh, I go to a nice school. And we have so many funny plays and dancing
once a week. I didn't tease about it, though I wanted to go, and Cousin
Chilian said I might. It's queer, but in India they come and dance for
you, and you pay them. But it is lovely to do it for yourself;" and she
made some graceful motions with her hands, while her beautiful eyes were
alight with emotion, as if she heard the music.

"Did you ever want to go back?"

"At first. But when I heard that father had gone away, he had meant to
come to Salem, but----" she made a pause, "mother was there in India.
Only the bodies, you know, the other part that thinks and feels is in
heaven. He wanted mother so much. He used to talk about her. And now I
am going to live in Salem with Cousin Chilian all my life long."

How simply sweet she was, with no self-consciousness.

Then they were summoned to dinner. The elegant black servant waited on
them, and that suggested India again. They went out on a back porch and
sat in the shade. Cousin Giles found an opportunity to explain the
matter to Mrs. Stevens, and after that the men went out for a while.

Quite in the afternoon there were calls from stylishly-dressed ladies,
and cake and cool drinks were brought in. Then Cousin Chilian told her
that he would like her to stay all night and he would come in to-morrow.

She didn't want to a bit. "Why, I would be very quiet and not disturb
Cousin Elizabeth," she said, with beseeching eyes.

"Will you not do it to please me?"

She choked down a great lump. "Oh, yes," she answered in a low tone,
without looking up. But it seemed very queer to her to be left this way.

There was company in the evening--quite a party playing cards. She had
a pretty story book to read until Susan came to put her to bed. And what
a delightful little bed it was, like her little pallet at home, so much
nicer than the big bed at Salem.

She would not show that she was homesick, for so many nice things were
being done for her. A note came from Chilian--Cousin Elizabeth was very
ill, and he hoped she would be content. Some clothes were sent for her,
some of her very best ones, and she was glad to have them.

There were so many things to see in Boston, really much more than at
Salem. They were putting up some fine public buildings. And there was
Bunker Hill and Copp's Hill, and, down near the bay, Fort Hill. There
seemed little rivers running all about and submerged lands.

There were many other entertainments and her days were full. Mrs.
Stevens sent out some cards and seven or eight young girls came in and
chatted quite like the grown-up ladies, asking her about Salem, and
being not a little surprised that she had lived in India. They had a
pretty sort of half tea, cakes and delicacies after the thin bread and
butter, and a most delightful cool drink that seemed to have all flavors
in it. One of the girls played on the spinet afterward. So she had her
first party at Cousin Giles', instead of Salem.

Notes came from Cousin Chilian, and at last the welcome news that he was
coming down for her.

She had come to like Cousin Giles very much. He was so different from
Chilian--breezy and rather teasing--and, oh, what would Cousin Elizabeth
have said to his fashion of getting things about, putting papers or
books on chairs, mislaying his glasses and his gloves, and she would
think the fine furniture, and the servants, and the little feasts
awfully extravagant.

Poor Elizabeth! She had never come back to consciousness. She had shrunk
intensely from the last moment when she would have to face death and the
judgment, though she had been striving all her life to prepare for it.
But God had mercifully spared her that, the two worlds had touched and
merged with each other and left her to God.

There had been a quiet funeral, though it was well attended, but the
coffin was closed and a pall thrown over it, for the poor face had never
recovered its natural look.

All this was softened to Cynthia, as she sat with Cousin Chilian's arm
about her. She had the sweet remembrance of that last day, and the smile
that somehow had made the wrinkled face pretty. It had been thoughtful
and tender in Cousin Chilian to spare her the rest.

They went over to Cambridge and he took her through the place that was
to be so much grander before she was done with life. And here was the
house where he had lived through the week, going home to spend Sundays,
for his father was alive then. And he told her stories about old Boston,
some quaintly funny, but she was rather proud that Salem had been the
first capital of the State.

"I've had such a nice time," she said with her adieu. "Every day has
been full of pleasure. I thank you both very much."

She was to come again, and again, they rejoined cordially.

"What a nice child!" Cousin Giles said. "She doesn't seem to consider
what an heiress she is. And she's enough like Chilian to be his own
child. He always had that dainty way with him, like a woman, and
everything must be fine and nice, yet he never was ostentatious. She'll
make a charming young woman. I wish I could persuade Chilian to come to
Boston."

Chilian had driven in with the carriage. There had been a shower in the
night and the travelling was delightful. He had missed his little girl
so much, yet he knew it had been better to save her the poignancy of the
sad occurrence. So her father had thought in his trusting appeal.




CHAPTER XII

CHANGES IN THE OLD HOUSE


There was not as much change in household affairs as Cynthia supposed
there would be. Elizabeth had been laid by so long that her place at the
table had been filled by Eunice. Indeed, the former had an unfortunate
habit of running out in the kitchen to see to something, then returning,
pouring a cup of tea, passing some article of food, then disappearing
again. It had grown on her, the belief that she must be everywhere or
something would go wrong. It did annoy Chilian. And no one hustled up
the dishes when you had eaten the last crumb of cake. He liked to linger
over the table.

Eunice was very glad to see her. Rachel took her wrap and her parcel
upstairs, for supper had been waiting. Eunice poured the tea, Rachel
passed the eatables, and they were both eager to hear how it had fared
with the little girl.

"It's been just splendid! Mrs. Stevens is--well, she is grand, and, oh,
you ought to see the beautiful gowns she wears; but she doesn't hold you
way off. You can come up close and lean on her shoulder or her lap. They
were both so good. And, look! Cousin Giles would buy me these two
rings;" and she held up her hand laughingly. "And an elegant necklace. I
told him there were so many things here that were my mother's, but he
wouldn't mind. And slippers! There's white, and a kind of gray, and a
bronze, and a red pair. The little girls wear them when they come from
school and go out to companies. Oh, Cousin Chilian, doesn't any one play
on the spinet? I'd like to learn."

"It's very old. It was mother's. I think we must have a new one. And you
can learn."

"Oh, I shall be so glad."

Mrs. Taft was out in the kitchen. "Now you all go your ways," she began.
"'Taint nothing to clear off the supper table."

They sat out on the front porch. But through the talk Cynthia kept
thinking of poor Cousin Elizabeth and feeling sorry she had not enjoyed
more of the pleasures of life. Was there so much real virtue in making
life hard and cold? But there were some girls in school who were very
much afraid of dancing and reading story-books.

Truth to tell, as Chilian listened, he came to experience a queer
feeling--he would have scouted the idea of jealousy about Cousin Giles,
but that he should have devoted himself so much to her and taken her
about, wanted to buy trinkets for her and all that! There was still a
week of vacation left. They would go somewhere to-morrow.

He had asked Mrs. Taft to stay with them.

"Well, I can't exactly promise. You see, I like to 'wrastle' with things
and fight off the worst. Though I hadn't much hope of 'Lisbeth when the
doctor said her spine was hurt. That's a kind of queer hidden thing that
even doctors can't see into. And the poor creature suffered a good deal.
My, but she was spunky and was bound not to die, and I fought for her
all I could. But the last few weeks there was a change. She liked Cynthy
to come in with the posies and say something bright. And now it's all
done and over, and she was a good upright woman in the old-fashioned
way. So I'll stay a spell till Miss Eunice gets used to the change, and
when I see another good fight somewhere, you mustn't have hard feelings
if I go."

They went out the next morning and found a boat going up to Plum Island.
It was like going to sea to go around Rockport Point. Captain Green
declared "he wan't much on passengers, but he had a nice cabin and an
awning on the for'ard deck, and there was a woman and some children
whose husband living up there had bespoke passage."

It was a fine day with the right sort of wind. Oh, how splendid it was
as they went out oceanward. She had been on the water such a very little
since her long voyage.

Mrs. Halcom had three children and a baby. She was a plain, commonplace
body, who had been living up to North Salem, but her folks were
Newburyport people and she should be glad to get in sight and sound of
them once again. Chilian had brought a book along, Ben Johnson's Plays,
and now and then he met with such a charming line or two he must read it
to her. There were some new poets coming to the fore as well, but he
knew most of the older ones. Oh, he must get back his youth for her
sake. Cousin Giles was ever so much older.

She was interested in the ship as well and talked to Captain Green. He
had so many funny nautical terms, provincialisms, that she had to
inquire what some of the words meant. For most of the early people of
New England had not dropped into the careless modes of speech that were
to come later on and be adopted as a sort of patois. They read their
Bibles a good deal and the older divines, and if their speech was a
little stilted it had a certain correctness. Then Chilian Leverett was
rather fastidious in this respect.

The wind filled the sails and they skimmed along merrily. Now the sea
was green and so clear you could see the fish disporting themselves.
Then the sun tinted it with gold and threw up diamond, amethyst, and
emeralds, taunting one with treasures.

There are new names along the coast, though a few of the old ones
remain. They passed Gloucester, Thatcher's Island, rounded Rockport,
where in the inside harbor they had to unload part of their cargo. Then
on to Plum Island, where the rest were set ashore and the woman and her
children. Some few things were taken on board, but they were to stop at
Gloucester, going down for the return cargo.

They walked about a little and bought some ripe, luscious dewberries and
fruit.

"How queer it would be to live on an island and have to take your boat
when you went anywhere," and Cynthia laughed gayly.

"People do, farther up. There are a great many islands on the coast of
Maine, and fishermen are living on them."

"And in Boston Harbor Cousin Giles took us out. It's funny that they
don't float off. Do they go 'way down to the bottom of the sea?"

"I think they must. Sometimes one does disappear."

"Suppose you were living on it. And you saw the water coming up all
around you and you couldn't get away----"

Her eyes filled with a kind of terror.

"Oh, you would have some boats."

"But if it happened in the night?"

"We won't go and live on an island," he said with a smile.

It was rougher going back, but not bad enough to cause any alarm. The
wind had died down, but the swells were coming in. They stopped at
Gloucester and took on some boxes and great planks, and several pieces
of furniture.

"There's enough old truck in Salem now," declared Captain Green
ungraciously. "'F I had my way I'd turn it out on the Common and put a
match to it. Now there's the Hibbins--came over in 1680 and brought
their housen goods. There wan't any way of makin' 'em then but just
outen rough logs. An' now the old granma'am's died and 'twas her
mother's, I b'lieve, and Mis' Hibbins she's just gone crazy over it. And
they're buildin' a fine new house. Strange how Salem's buildin' up!
Those East Ingy traders do make lots of money. But before I'd have that
old truck in my nice new house!" And the captain gave a snort of
disdain.

He did not dream that before another hundred years had passed there
would be comparative fortunes made in the old truck.

"We'll be a little late gettin' in, but there'll be a moon. Lucky wind
ain't dead agin us."

How good the supper tasted, for Cynthia was very hungry. And then they
went on and on, hugging the shore, the captain said, until it was a kind
of shadowy waving blur, but on the other side most beautiful. It made
her think of coming from India, but she was glad to see the vague
outline of the shore.

The captain was much surprised that she had been such a traveller. He
had been to New York and all around Long Island, and up as far as Nova
Scotia. The Bay of Fundy was wonderful, with its strange dangerous
tides.

"We will go there another summer," Chilian said, holding her hand, and
she returned the soft pressure.

"I was 'most afraid something had happened." Eunice had gone down the
street to meet them. "But it's clear as a bell and no wind to speak of,
and the captains of the coasting vessels know every inch of the way."

"Only just lovely things happened. It's been splendid. But I'm hungry
again. Can't I have a second supper?"

How different she looked from the little girl who had come to him for
care and friendship. And he had been rather unwilling to accept her. She
was growing tall, and--yes, really pretty.

They had one more excursion to Winter Island. Why, it seemed as if they
were building ships enough for the whole world. And there were the
fisheries, and the curious musical singing, not really words, but sort
of detached sounds that floated off in a weird kind of way.

After that school again. She was glad to see the girls, and Madam Torrey
gave her a warm welcome, saying, "Why, Miss Cynthia, how tall you have
grown!"

"I'm very glad," she said smilingly. "All the Leveretts are tall, but I
don't ever want to be very large."

"And she had really been to Boston! Was it so much handsomer than Salem?
They had a real theatre, and parties, and balls. Sadie Adams' big
sister was going to spend the whole winter there."

Chilian Leverett decided to alter his house a little. The two rooms at
the back had always seemed crowded up, though Elizabeth preferred a
separate one so long as they connected. But he had the memory of the
poor drawn face, as he had seen it the morning of her seizure. Wouldn't
Eunice recall it as well?

"I think I will make some alterations," he announced to her. "I'll push
that upstairs room out over the summer kitchen and make it a good deal
larger. While they are doing it, Eunice, you had better go over the
other side and let Mrs. Taft take your room."

She assented, though she thought the house and the rooms were large
enough for the few people in it. Cynthia was interested in her studies,
and the girls, and the new books coming in. For now Sir Walter Scott was
having a great hearing, and there were some new poets.

It was not expected that people would be at all gay when there had been
a death in the family, so Cynthia felt compelled to decline her few
invitations. The new room was finished and made much brighter with the
two added windows. The walls were painted a soft gray, with a warm tint.
There were yards and yards of new rag carpet up in the garret, sewed in
bagging to keep out moths. Of course, it might as well be used. The old
bedstead was taken out and though the one substituted was quite as old,
it was very much prettier, with its carved posts and the tester frame
from which depended white curtains. Some of the other furniture was
changed and it made a very pretty room, so Eunice came back to it very
much pleased, though not quite sure so much comeliness was best for the
soul.

At Christmas Chilian took the little girl down to Boston on a special
invitation. There were two visitors a little older than herself, one
whose father was a representative from the State, the other from New
York.

Washington was not much thought of in those days. Other cities had
yielded their claims unwillingly, and there had been much talk of its
being set in a morass. Mrs. President Adams had described her
infelicities very graphically. The rooms were not finished, and she took
one of the parlors for an adjunct to the laundry to dry the wash in. New
York considered itself the great head for fashion and gayety, Boston for
education and refinement, and she too, had quite an extensive port
trade.

But Giles Leverett thought the little girl from Salem was quite as
pretty and well bred as Boston girls, and really she never seemed at
loss now, and was seldom overtaken with a fit of shyness. They had a
gay, happy time, with a regular dancing party, which filled Cynthia with
the utmost delight.

And though the winter seemed cold and bleak spring came again, as it
always does. Mrs. Taft had gone away to another bad case. Eunice and
Miss Winn kept the house. There had been quite an entertaining episode
with Miss Winn. A very prosperous man, who lived up on the North side,
and had a fine house and five children, asked her to be his wife,
thinking she would make such an excellent mother for girls. It was
supposed at that time that no woman could refuse a good offer of
marriage.

"Consider it well," said Mr. Leverett. "I don't know how we could give
you up, and, of course, you could not take Cynthia. Her father made a
generous provision for you, and I think he chose wisely for his child.
But----"

"I don't know that I want to begin over again," and she gave a peculiar
smile. "Five seems quite an undertaking when you have had only one. And
you have taken so much the charge of her."

"But you see, now she will need a woman's guidance more than ever. She
has outgrown childhood. I see the change in her every day. Eunice could
not supervise her clothes and her pleasures, times have changed so much.
I want her to be very happy and have a life like other girls----"

She thought she could give up the prospect good as it was, won by that
persuasive voice. And she had come to really love Miss Eunice, who was
blossoming in a new phase now that there was nothing to restrain her
natural sweetness.

"I promised her father to do the best I could for her. I love her very
much. I enjoy the home here. I do not think I could be any happier. And
I am so used to owning myself that I do not feel disposed to give up my
liberty. If I had no prospect, I might consider it. And Cynthia will
need some one as she grows older to see that she makes the right sort of
acquaintances and guide her a little."

"Then since all is agreeable we can count on your staying. You cannot
imagine my own thankfulness;" and he pressed her hand cordially.

"Isn't it funny!" cried Cynthia. "Why, Margaret Plummer goes to Madam
Torrey's, but she is very--well, I don't know just how to describe it,
only she said once that they would all make the house too hot to hold a
step-mother. And, oh, dear Rachel, I couldn't bear to have anybody ugly
to you. And then you know we couldn't give you up. Cousin Chilian said
so, and Miss Eunice cried."

Miss Winn winked some tears out of her eyes, though she tried to smile.
It was very comforting to a woman without kith or kin to feel so welcome
in a household.

Cynthia was sitting on the step of the porch one May night when the moon
was making shifting shadows through the trees and silvering the paths.
Chilian was studying the face, and wondering a little what was flitting
through the brain that now and then gave it such intentness.

"What are you thinking about?" he asked.

"Oh, Cousin Chilian!" She flushed a lovely, rosy glow. "Building an air
castle."

"Is it very airy? So far that it would be a journey for another person
to reach it?"

"Oh, part of it is near by. The other is what could be, maybe;"
wistfully.

"Can't I hear about it?"

"Cousin Chilian, why are the parlors always shut up, and why don't you
have people coming and going, and saying bright things, and talking
about the improvements and--and Napoleon and the wars in Europe, and the
new streets and houses, and, oh, ever so many things?"

He looked at the tightly closed shutters. In his father's time there
were visitors, discussions, playing at whist and loo, and little
suppers. She wouldn't care for that, of course. Yet he remembered that
she had been interested in the talks at Boston.

"Why, yes; the rooms could be opened. Only we have grown so at home in
the sitting-room, and you and I in the study."

"At the Dearborns' they keep the house all open and lighted up, as they
do in Boston. And they ask in young people and have plays, and charades,
and funny conundrums----"

Oh, she was young and should have this kind of life. How should he set
about it? He must ask Miss Winn. But he ventured rather timidly, for a
man.

"Would you like--well, some girls in to tea? They ask you so often. And
there is no reason why we should all be hermits."

She sprang up and clasped her arms about his neck.

"Oh, I just should. At first when Cousin Elizabeth went away, and the
lessons were difficult, and it was winter, but now everything seems so
joyous----"

"Why, yes; we must talk to Miss Winn about it, Cynthia," and his voice
dropped to a tender inflection. "I want you to feel this is your home
and you must have all the joy and pleasures of youth. You need never be
afraid. I've been a rather dull old fellow----"

"Oh, you're not old. You're not as old as Cousin Giles, and ever so much
handsomer. The girls at school think," she flushed and paused, "that you
were so good to get me the pony and the pretty wagon." She was going to
say something much more flattering, but delicacy stopped her.

"My dear," he said gravely, "I was glad to make you the gift, but I want
you to know that there is a considerable sum of money of your own, and
your father wished you to enjoy it. Whatever you want and is proper for
you to have, I shall be glad to get, and to do. For I have no little
girl but you."

"Would it be wicked and selfish if I said I was glad?"

The arms tightened a little. How soft they were! And her hair brushed
his cheek. It always seemed to have a delicate subtle perfume.

"No, dear. You and I are curiously alone in the world. I haven't a first
cousin, neither have you."

"And a whole houseful of folks is so nice," she said wistfully.

He had been very well content with his books and his college friends.
But women were different, at least--those who shut out everybody
narrowed their lives fearfully.

"We will try and have some."

"And you must like it. If you do not, the greatest pleasure will be
taken out of it for me."

"I shall like it;" encouragingly.

"How good you are to me. Father said I must love you and obey you, for
you would know what would be best for me."

Then they sat in silence, the contentment of affection.

He spoke to Miss Winn the next day. Afterward they went into the parlor
and opened the shutters. It was stately, grand, and gloomy.

Before Anthony Leverett had thought of sending his little girl to his
care he had forwarded to Chilian a gift "for old remembrance' sake," he
said, of a very handsome Oriental rug. Floors of the "best rooms" had
been polished until you could see your shadow in them. Chilian did not
like the noise or the continual trouble. So he laid down the rug and
bought one for the other room. But the heavy curtains, with their silken
linings, staid up year after year. He noticed those at Giles' house were
much lighter and in soft colors. And his furniture was not so massive.

"I wish we could change things a little. That old sofa might go up in
the new room. It was grand enough in my father's time, with its borders
of brass-headed tacks, and its flat, hard seat. Two of these chairs
might come up in my room."

"I wish we could find a place for the lovely sort of cabinet that
Cynthia's father sent over. I keep it covered from dust and scratches.
She will be glad to have it when she has a house of her own."

"One of the rooms ought to be hers--well, both," he added reflectively.

"The rugs are elegant. Yes, lighter curtains would change it a good
deal. How very handsome the mantels are with all their carving."

They would have adorned a modern house. They went nearly up to the
ceiling with small shelves and nooks, on which were vases and ornaments
such as bring fortunes now.

"And--about the party?"

"Oh, that will be only a girls' tea--her schoolmates where she has been.
Next year will be time enough for the party;" with a little laugh.

So the two spacious rooms were quite remodelled and modernized, and the
gloomy appearance was a thing of the past. Why shouldn't he spend his
money on her? There was no one else.

He had not lost sight of Anthony Drayton. The father had been exigent.
Anthony, being the eldest, must take the farm when he was done with it.
The lad had worked his time out. Cousin Chilian had offered him enough
to take him to a preparatory school where he would be fitted for
college. He had come in to Boston and Chilian had been attracted to the
manly young fellow.

Cynthia was more than delighted with the privilege of the tea party.

"Some of the girls have brothers, but I don't know them very well. I
like Bentley, but he is away at school. And I'd rather have just girls."

Her admiration of the parlor knew no bounds, and it gratified him.

She had been taking lessons on the spinet, but the painting was a great
rival. And this was old, thin, and creaky.

"I have found a much better one in Boston, and the dealer wants this
because it was made in London in 1680. How strenuous some people are
over old things. It has no special interest that I know of, and is
comparatively useless."

The new ones were really the beginning of pianofortes and this one was
very sweet in tone.

Chilian had been very greatly interested in the changes. He began to
cultivate his neighbors a little more. Indeed improvements were taking
place in the town. New streets were laid out, old ones straightened,
fine new houses built. There seemed a sudden outburst of commercial
grandeur. Furnishings of the richest sort were eagerly caught up by the
shoppers, who did not think it necessary to go to Boston and buy goods
that had come in port here. Many of the old wooden houses were replaced
with brick, and the beautiful doorways, windows, roofs, and porches
still attract craftsmen and architects from different sections of the
country, while illustrators find rich material in old Colonial doorways.

Miss Winn consulted Mrs. Upham as to what was proper for a girls' tea.

"Miss Cynthia is old enough now to begin with friends in a simple
manner. The family have lived so quietly that I have not gained much
experience in such matters, and Miss Eunice doesn't feel equal to
managing it. Of course, Miss Cynthia is quite an heiress and will go in
with the best people."

"As the Leveretts always have. There's been many a cap set for Chilian
Leverett and it's been a wonder to every one that he hasn't married. But
there's time enough yet."

She came over and admired the parlors without stint.

"You see," she said confidentially, "Miss Elizabeth was no hand for
company. Some of the older people did the same, shut up the best rooms
lest they should get faded, or something scratched, or worn. And I
suppose he kept giving in; then there was his going in to college, and
that's a sort of man's life. I'm glad he has had something to stir him
up. He has been to several town-meetings. They are talking up
improvements. It's a fine thing to have so many vessels flying Salem
flags in different ports; nigh on to two hundred registered, husband
said. But I told him there ought to be some home interest as well. We
must not let Boston get so far ahead of us, nor forget the young people
are to be the next generation."

"And young people want some pleasure. I do not see how they stood so
much of the gloomy side twenty years ago. I was that surprised when I
first came here."

"Well, there had been a good many things, and all that witchcraft
business. Puritan ways grew sterner and sterner. I can't say that people
were really the better for it, in my way of thinking, and the Saviour
talked a good deal about loving and helping people. He didn't stop to
make them subscribe to all sorts of hard things before he worked a
miracle. But we were going to talk about the tea."

"Yes; about what time now? I want Cynthia to have it just right and
proper;" laughing.

"They come--we'll say about four. They will want to run around and see
things, and I'd have supper about five and they'll sit over it, and
talk, and laugh. Suppose I send my 'Mimy over to pass things and wait.
You would not want Miss Eunice to do it, and you will have other things
on your hands."

"Oh, thank you. You are very kind about it."

"Well, I've had a girl to grow up and be married, and Polly's to leave
school this summer, and next winter she will be setting up for a young
lady. Little cookies and spicenuts are nice and two kinds of cake. You
never give them real tea, you know, though it's called a tea party. And
some cold chicken, or sliced ham. I'd spread the plates of bread, it's
so much less trouble. They'll be sure to enjoy everything. A lot of
girls always do have a good time."




CHAPTER XIII

A TASTE OF PLEASURE


Cynthia was full of joy, running down to the gate to meet and greet
guests. They came in groups of twos and threes, having called for each
other. There were fifteen in all--the girls she knew best, who were
nearest her own age, and at most of the houses she had been made a
welcome guest. Indeed, more than one mother was glad to have her
daughter good friends with Miss Cynthia Leverett, who was to be a rich
young woman, and whose trustee in Boston lived in fine style.

Yet it was not exactly that money was so much thought of either, though
it was always esteemed an excellent thing. Somehow it was rather
relegated to the men. A father had an idea that his daughters would
marry well, so business opportunities, and often the homestead, went to
the sons. Here was an undivided fortune. And now it was hardly likely
Chilian Leverett would marry, so she might come in for that.

The house had always been considered rather gloomy, as even on state
occasions not much light was allowed in the parlors. Some of the girls
had been gently advised to notice if there had been changes made.

Cynthia led them upstairs to take off their things. They were rather
particular about complexions in those days. Some of the summer hats were
really ornate sunbonnets, others were the great poke shape with a big
bow on top and wide strings that were allowed to float on a hot day, so
as not to get crushed by the warmth under the chin. They had long muslin
sleeves to pull over their arms, indeed some of them were finished with
mittens, so that the hands might not get tanned.

The girls wore rather scant straight skirts, tucked up to the waist, or
with needlework at the bottom, or two or three tiny ruffles. The
stockings were not always white, oftener they matched the color of the
slippers that were laced across the instep. The necks were cut square,
often finished with a lace berthe. Some old families have handed these
down and kept them laid away in rose leaves and lavender, and they are
so sweet that when they are shaken out they perfume the room.

Cynthia wore a white gauzy frock made over blue silk that was soft as a
pansy leaf. It had blue satin stripes and she was very glad she had the
pretty blue slippers to match. Then almost every girl had a coral
necklace, or was allowed to wear grandmother's gold beads. Some had
their hair tied up high on their heads with a great bow, and maybe the
family silver or gold comb put in artistically. Chilian liked the
little girl's to hang loose, and now it was down to her waist.

It was said the Holland wives of centuries ago took their visitors
through their wardrobes and displayed their silk and velvet gowns. And
when England passed some sumptuary laws that no one below titled rank
should wear silk, the good wives of traders lined theirs with silk and
hung them up in grand array to gratify their visitors or themselves.

"You have so many lovely things," said a girl enviously. "I haven't but
one silk frock, and that was Mary's until she outgrew it. And mother's
so choice of it; she thinks it ought to last and go to Ruth."

"Why, you see, so many things came from India," apologized Cynthia,
almost ashamed of having so much. "And there's a boxful upstairs, but I
think I like the white muslins best, they look so pretty when they are
clean, and you don't have to be so careful."

"Do you ever get scolded when accidents happen?"

"Well, not much. Cousin Eunice is so sweet. Cousin Elizabeth was more
particular."

"And Miss Winn?"

"Oh, my dear Rachel loves me too much," the child said laughingly.

There were so many odd and pretty things that they staid up until all
the girls had come--not one of them declined. Then they went down to the
parlors.

"Cousin Chilian said this back room was to be mine. That lovely desk
and the cabinet were my own mother's. And the table is teakwood. The
chair father had carved for me, and that big portrait is father. This
case has miniatures of them both, but it is too big ever to wear."

"What a pity!"

It was a beautifully engraved gold case, set with jewels.

"Well, you are a lucky girl! And you can have all these yourself. You
just don't have to share them with anybody. Is the room truly yours?"

"Why, it is to put my things in, but anybody can come in it, and we can
go in the other room. Most of those articles were Cousin Chilian's
father's and mother's, and the great clock in the hall came over in
1640. It's funny;" and she laughed. "Old furniture and quilts and things
never get cross and queer as folks sometimes do."

"Well, they're not really alive."

"And they last so much longer than folks."

They had not inspected all the things when Miss Winn invited them out to
supper. She took the head of the table, and began to talk so that they
should not feel embarrassed. The lovely old china was on the table, and
two vases of flowers that looked as if they were set with gems. 'Mimy
passed the plates of bread and butter and cold meats and cottage cheese,
and after a little they all began to talk as if it was recess at
school.

Mr. Chilian Leverett passed through the sitting-room and thought it was
really an enchanting sight, and that Cynthia was the prettiest girl of
them all.

People had not thought up ice cream in those days, but they made lovely
custards, baked in cups with handles, and a tiny spoon to eat them with.
They were the last of the tea.

Then they went into the front parlor, which was the larger and played
fox and geese, and blind-man's buff in a ring. Oh, Elizabeth, it was
enough to disturb your rest to have those merry feet twinkle over the
beautiful rug, when you scarcely dared walk tiptoe for fear of crushing
the soft pile. But they had a grand, good time.

Then Mr. Leverett brought in Cousin Eunice, who had a bit of white at
her neck and wrists, and a lavender bow on her cap. She had protested
against the bow, but Miss Winn had carried her point.

Mr. Leverett set them to doing some amusing things he had resurrected
from his own boyhood. Catches on words, such as "Malaga grapes are very
good grapes, but the grapes of Oporto are better." And then, "A hen, a
hen, but not a rooster. Can you say _that_?" They were greatly puzzled
and looked at Cynthia, who was silently smiling, saying it over in every
manner, until at last one girl almost shrieked out, "_That_," and there
was a chorus of laughter.

At nine o'clock they were bidden to come home. Some of them were sent
for and those who lived near together went in a group. Ben Upham came
for his sisters.

"I don't see why they couldn't have had boys," said Ben to Polly. "Ever
so many of us would have been glad to come."

"Well, we didn't have any real boys' plays. But the supper was elegant.
And 'Mimy waited so nicely. Cynthia's going to have the back parlor for
hers, and Mr. Leverett has bought a new spinet. And she has the most
beautiful things----"

"Oh, yes, I've seen those;" rather impatiently.

"And Mr. Leverett's just splendid!"

"I always told you so;" somewhat grumpily. "But I'd rather be up in the
study with him and Cynthy than to go to half a dozen parties."

"Oh, we weren't in the study at all."

"No, that isn't for girls." So he had scored one, after all.

It was the general verdict when the tea party was talked over that
Cynthia Leverett was in a fair way of being spoiled. A man didn't know
how to bring up a girl, and, of course, Miss Winn let her have her own
way. Miss Eunice had given in to her sister so long that she gave in to
every one else.

Friends went to call and found the children had not exaggerated. Now and
then a neighbor was asked in to supper, and found Cynthia a nice, modest
girl, with no airs of superiority.

They had some journeys about. They went up to the bay of Fundy and
cruised around, chatting with fishermen and French settlers in their odd
costumes, looked at their funny little huts, and were amazed at the
children rolling round in the sand and the sun. Cousin Chilian talked to
them, but their language was a sort of patois difficult to understand.

After that Cynthia was much interested in the French and English war.
And the whole country was watching the Corsican who had made himself
master of half of Europe.

"It is a wonderful world," Cynthia said when they were safe in the study
again. "And I wonder if it is narrow and selfish to be glad that you are
just you?"

He was amused at the idea. But he couldn't recall that he had ever been
anxious to change with any one.

"And that _you_ are just _you_. I couldn't like any one else as well,
not even Cousin Giles, and I do like him very much."

Chilian felt a rise of color stealing up his cheek. The preference was
sweet, for Cousin Giles was extremely indulgent to her, and he was not a
child enthusiast either.

In those days no one supposed parents and friends were put in the world
purposely for children's pleasure. They didn't even consider they came
for _their_ pleasure. It was right to have them, they were to be the
future men and women, workers, legislators, and homemakers. They didn't
always have easy times, nor their own way, and they were not thought to
be wiser than their parents, even in the choice of professions for life.
But there were many fine brave fellows among the boys, and the girls
went on, making pretty good wives and mothers. If life did not bring
them just what they wished, they accepted it and did the best they
could.

Anthony Drayton came to make Cousin Chilian a visit and pass an
examination for Harvard. With a little help he had worked his way
through the academy. He was one of the brave, resolute boys, and, though
it grieved him to go against his father's wishes, he had decided for
himself.

"I really could not bury myself on a farm," he confessed. "I want a
wider life, I want to mix with men and take an interest in the country.
Not that I despise farming, and if one could branch out and do many new
things, but to keep on year after year in the old rut, corn and
potatoes, wheat and rye--just as grandfather did. What is the use of a
man living if he can't strike out some new ways? Maybe I'd been willing
to go to the new countries, but father was just as opposed to that."

He was a fresh, fair lad, with eyes of the Leverett blue, a strong, fine
face, not delicate as Cousin Chilian's. His hair was not very dark, but
his brows well defined, and with the eyelashes much darker than the
hair. His voice had such a cheerful uplift.

"You have quite decided then?" Chilian wondered if he could ever have
gone against his father's wishes, but in that case father and son had
similar tastes.

"Oh, yes; I've nothing farther to look for, and I'm willing to leave my
share to the other children. I know I can make my way, and I'm ready to
work and wait."

His voice had such a nice wholesome ring that it inspired you with faith
in him.

Cousin Eunice took a great fancy to him. They talked over the visit of
years ago. It seemed to her as if it had just been the beginning of
things.

One sister was grown up and "keeping company," the other a nice handy
girl. The next brother would be a great help--he cared nothing for
books. Both of the Brent cousins were married, one living on the farm
with his mother, the other having struck out for himself. And Miss Eliza
Leverett was weakly. Like many women of that period, when all hope of
marrying and having a home of her own was past, she sank down into a
gentle nonentity and dreamed of Cousin Chilian. Not that she had
expected to captivate him, but life with some one like that would set
one on the highest pinnacle.

He thought Cousin Cynthia--they were always cousins, to the fourth
generation--was the sweetest, daintiest, and most winsome thing he had
ever seen--and so she was, for his acquaintance with girls had been
limited. They looked over the old treasures in the house and thought it
wonderful any one should ever go to India and return without being
wrecked. They walked about the lovely garden, and he was amazed at her
familiarity with flowers and plants he had never seen.

Then she took him over to the Uphams, for an old friend came in to play
checkers with Cousin Chilian. Polly was bright and merry, but somehow
Ben seemed rather captious. Anthony listened with surprise at the bright
sayings they flung at one another.

The next day he and Cousin Chilian went over topics for examination. His
reading had not been extensive but thorough. In mathematics he was
excellent. But he found some time to chat with Cynthia, and they both
walked down to the warehouse with Cousin Chilian.

What a sight it was! He had read of such things, but to see the hundreds
of busy men, the great fleet of vessels, the docks piled with all kinds
of wares, the boxes and bales lying round in endless confusion. And the
great ocean, lost over beyond in the far-off sky.

When the two had gone up to Boston, Cynthia felt very lonely. She had
been sipping the sweets of unspoken admiration. She saw it in the eyes,
in the deference, as if he was almost afraid of her, in the sudden flush
when she turned her eyes to him. It was a new kind of worship.

She went over to the Uphams. Polly had been having her sampler framed.
The acorn border was very pretty in its greens and browns. Then a stiff
little tree grew up both sides, about like those that came in the Noah's
Ark later on. And between these two trees was worked in cross-stitch:

          "Mary Upham is my name,
              America is my nation;
           Salem is my dwelling place,
              And Christ is my salvation."

"Isn't the frame nice?" she asked. "I made father two shirts and he gave
me the frame and the glass. Peter Daly made it. And the frame is oiled
and polished until the grain shows--well, almost like watered silk.
Gitty Sprague has a beautiful pelisse of gray watered silk. And now I
have one thing for my house. I'm beginning to lay by."

"Your house!" Cynthia ejaculated in surprise.

"Why, yes--when I'm married. You have such lots of things, you'll never
have to save up."

Cynthia was wondering what she could give away. Not anything that was
her father's or her mother's.

"I'll paint you a picture. You do so much better needlework than I that
I should be ashamed to offer you any."

"And the girls will give me some, I know. I'd fifty times rather have
the picture. What a nice young fellow that cousin is! I'm glad his name
isn't Leverett. There's such a host of them. But I don't like Anthony so
well."

"That was father's name. It's quite a family name. It always sounds good
to me."

"And is he going to Harvard?"

"Yes; even if he can't get in right away."

"That's nice, too. It's quite the style for young men to go to college.
Some of them put on a sight of airs, though. He doesn't look like that
kind."

"He isn't," she returned warmly. "He is going to work his way through."

"Oh! Hasn't he any father?"

"Yes; but his father will not do anything for him. I think it is real
grand of him."

Polly nodded, but she lost interest in the young man.

Bentley walked home with Cynthia. It was afternoon, so he did not really
need to.

"I suppose that cousin isn't going to live with you?" he asked
presently.

"Oh, no; he will have to live in Boston."

"And come up here for Sundays?"

"Why, I don't know. That would be nice. I think I am growing fond of
company."

"Well, I can come over;" half jocosely.

"Oh, I meant other people;" innocently.

"Then you don't care for my coming?"

"Yes, I do. Oh, do you remember that winter I was half sick and how you
used to come over and read Latin? And I used to say it to myself after
you."

That delighted him. He didn't feel so cross about the young fellow, but
he half hoped he wouldn't pass, and have to go back to New Hampshire for
another year.

They sat on the stoop and chatted until the old stage stopped and
Chilian alighted.

"Oh!" the young girl cried, "where did you leave Anthony?"

"With Cousin Giles. The examinations will begin to-morrow."

It was near supper-time and Ben rose to go. Sometimes they asked him to
stay to supper, but to-night they did not.

Then an event happened that took Cynthia's entire interest for a while.
This was the return of Captain Corwin. He came up the walk one
day--quite a grizzled old fellow it seemed, with the sailor's rolling
gait--and looked at her so sharply that she had a mind to run away.

"Oh, Captain Anthony's little girl," he cried. "You have forgotten me.
And it ain't been so long either."

She thought a moment and turned from red to white. Then she stretched
out both hands and cried, her eyes and voice full of tears:

"Oh, you couldn't bring him back!"

"No, little Missy. He'd shipped for the last time before I'd reached
there and gone to a better haven. He was the best friend I ever had. But
he knew it long afore, and that was why he wanted you safe with
friends."

"I know now." She brushed the tears from her eyes.

"And I hope you've been happy."

"I waited and waited at first. Sometimes I wished I was a bird. Oh,
wouldn't we have a lovely time if we could fly? And one time in the
winter I was quite ill--it was so cold and I did get so tired of
waiting. Then Cousin Chilian told me he had gone to mother and I knew
how glad she would be to see him. I had some nice times. Cousin Chilian
loved me very much. So did Cousin Eunice. I think Cousin Elizabeth would
if she had lived longer, but she went away, too. Oh, I've done so many
things--studied books, and taken journeys, and made friends, and painted
pictures, flowers, and such. And I've tried to paint the sea, but I
can't make it move and seem like a real sea."

"Oh, Missy, how smart you must be!"

"There are so many things I don't know," she laughed. "And now tell me
about yourself and why you did not come back."

"We had a pretty fair journey all along first. But as we were nearing
Torres Strait an awful storm took us, and we were driven ashore almost a
wreck and lost two of our men. After a while we got patched up and set
sail again, but I was afraid we would never reach harbor. Howsomever we
did, in a pretty bad condition. Poor _Flying Star_ seemed on its last
legs and 'twasn't sea legs either. Then I went up to Hong Kong and
cruised around, buying stuff and selling it elsewhere. The _Flying Star_
was patched up again, but she wasn't thought safe for a long journey.
But there was plenty of work near at hand. Of course, I knew all about
your father, and that the word must have reached you, but I hated
mortally to come back and face you. But after a while the hankerin' for
old Salem grew upon me. And there was the _Aurora_ wantin' a captain,
for the man who brought her out died of a fever. So says I, 'I'm your
man, and I've been over often enough to know the ropes, the islands, and
p'ints of danger and safe sailing.' So here I be once more. But jiminy
Peter! I should hardly 'a' knowed little old Salem. Why, she looks as if
she was going to outsail all creation!"

"Oh, we're getting very grand. New streets, and splendid new houses, and
stores, and churches. Why, Boston isn't very much finer."

"Don't b'lieve Boston harbor can show tonnage with her! And where's
first mate?"

"I don't know, but he will be in soon. Oh, there's Rachel. Rachel, come
here to an old friend."

The captain shook hands heartily. "Why, you don't seem to have changed a
mite, only to grow younger and plump as a partridge."

It had all to be talked over again and in the midst of it supper was
ready, and there was Miss Eunice's surprise. Cynthia could hardly eat,
the long journey and the dangers seemed such a strange thing now. Had
she really come from India, or was it all a dream?

Yes, old Salem was almost fading out of the minds of even middle-aged
people. There were curious stories told about witches and ghosts, but
the real witchcraft was dying out of mind and the old houses that had
been associated with it were looked upon as curiosities. Public spirit
was being roused. In 1804 the East India Marine Society left the Stearns
house and moved to the new Pickman Building in Essex Street. People
began to send in curiosities that had been stored away in garrets:
models of early vessels, articles from Calcutta, from the islands about
the Central and South Pacific, cloths, and cloaks, and shawls, and
implements.

The captain was quite sure Winter Island had grown larger--perhaps it
had, by docking out. And he declared the streets looked like London,
with the gayly gowned women, the stores, the carriages, for a number of
handsome late ones were to be seen. There were a few fine young men on
the promenade and they were attired in the height of fashion, as the
society men of New York and Philadelphia. They were still paying
attention to business and devoting the evenings to pleasure. Descendants
of the strict old Puritans met to play cards and have dances and gay
times with the young ladies. In the afternoon a cup of tea would be
offered to callers, or a piece of choice cake and a glass of
wine--often home-made. There were few excesses.

Many were still wearing the old Continental attire, yet you saw an old
Puritan gentleman, with his long coat, his high-crowned hat, black silk
stockings, and low shoes with great steel buckles.

Anthony was very much interested in the captain, whose best friend had
been Anthony Leverett. He was proud of the name, and Cynthia's story was
like a romance to him. He was taken up quite cordially by Cousin Giles,
and very cordially by Mrs. Stevens, who had a liking for young men when
they were well-mannered. He had managed to enter Harvard, with some
studies to make up. Chilian Leverett insisted he should do no teaching
this year, and offered him enough to see him through, but he would only
accept it as a loan.

Bentley Upham was a year ahead and had a good standing, but he felt a
little jealous of the young country fellow--"bumpkin" he would have
liked to call him, but he was not that. A young man received at Mr.
Giles Leverett's, and who sometimes escorted Mrs. Stevens to an
entertainment, was not to be ignored.

The captain staid in port nearly two months and Cynthia experienced her
old fondness for him, if he was a little uncouth and rough. They went
down to see the _Aurora_ off and she recalled the day she had said
good-bye to the _Flying Star_, that was to bring back her father.

As for her she was very busy learning to play and to paint. It was a
young lady's accomplishment, but she really did very well. There were
girls' teas, and now and then a small dance that began at seven and
ended at nine, but boys were invited generally. Miss Polly Upham was
quite in the swim, as we should say now. Mothers expected their
daughters to marry, and how could they if they did not see young men?
But there was a certain propriety observed, and very little playing fast
and loose with the most sacred period of life, with the greatest
God-given blessing--Love.




CHAPTER XIV

IN GAY OLD SALEM


The next winter Cynthia was fairly launched on society. There was no
regular coming out in almost bridal array, with a grand tea and a
houseful of flowers. When a girl left school she expected to be invited
out and to give little companies at home. Almost the first thing, she
was asked to be one of the six bridesmaids at Laura Manning's wedding.

The Mannings had one of the splendid new houses on Chestnut Street, with
spacious grounds before the houses grew so close together. Avis Manning
was still in school, Cynthia was between the two in age. Mr. Manning was
connected with the East India trade and an old friend of the Leverett
family. It had begun by Cynthia being invited to a girls' tea, and Mrs.
Manning had taken a great fancy to her. Laura was not very tall, and
they did not want any one to dwarf the bride.

Every one was to be in white, the bride in a soft, thick silk, and she
was to have a court train. The maids were to be in mull or gauze, as a
very pretty thin material was called. The Empress Josephine had brought
in new styles that certainly were very becoming to young people. The
short waist and square neck, the sleeve puffs that had shrunk so much
they no longer reached the ears, the short curls around the edge of the
forehead arranged so the white parting showed, the dainty feet in
elegant slippers and choice silk stockings that could not help showing,
for the skirts were short. Pretty feet and slim ankles seemed to be a
mark of good family.

"Will I do?" Cynthia stood before Cousin Chilian with a half-saucy
smile. Around her throat she wore a beautiful Oriental necklace, with
pendants of different fine stones that sparkled with every turn of the
head. There were match pendants in her ears, and just back of the rows
of curls was a jewelled comb.

She was a pretty girl without being a striking beauty. But her eyes
would have redeemed almost any face, and now they were all aglow with a
wonderful light.

He looked his admiration.

"Because if _you_ don't like me----"

There was a charming half-coquettish way about her, but she never made a
bid for compliments.

"What then?" laughing.

"I'd stay home and spoil the wedding party. I know they couldn't fill my
place on a short notice."

He thought they couldn't fill it at all, but he said almost merrily,
"You need not stay at home."

Cousin Eunice said she looked pretty enough for the bride. Miss Winn had
attended to her toilette, and now she wrapped a soft silken cloak about
her and Cousin Chilian put her in the carriage. He was all in his best,
ruffled shirt-front, light brocaded silk waist-coat, and there were lace
ruffles about his hands.

One feels inclined to wonder at the extravagance of those days, when one
sees some of the heirlooms that have come down to us. But their handsome
gowns went through several seasons, and then were made over for the
daughters. And they did not have their jewels reset every few months.

Such a roomful of pretty girls! Youth and health and picturesque
dressing make almost any one pretty. Miss Laura looked fine, but she
paused to say, "Oh, Cynthia, what an elegant necklace!"

"Father had it made for mother," she replied simply.

They patted and pulled a little, powdered, too.

Miss Willard, the great mantua-maker of that day, who superintended the
dressing of brides, saw that everything was right. The young men came
from their dressing-room, and they began to form the procession. Both
halls were illuminated with no end of candles, and guests were standing
about. Mr. Lynde Saltonstall took his bride-to-be, and they let the
white train sweep down the broad stairway, then Avis Manning and Ed
Saltonstall followed. They were not much on knick-names in those days,
but he had been called Ed to distinguish him from some cousins.

Cynthia and a cousin came next, and there were several other relatives.
It was a beautiful sight. The bride walked up to the white satin cushion
on which the couple would kneel during the prayer, the maids and
attendants made a semicircle around her, and then the nearest relatives.
The old white-haired minister had married her mother.

Then there was kissing and congratulation and Mrs. Saltonstall had her
new name, though Avis said she liked Manning a hundred times better.

"Then you wouldn't accept my name?" said Ed, but he looked laughingly at
Cynthia.

"Indeed I wouldn't! I don't want any one's name at present. I'm going to
be the only daughter of the house a while," she returned saucily.

"I wonder if I ought to go on and ask all the maids?" There was such a
funny anxiety in his face that it added to the merriment.

"You needn't ask this one," said Ward Adams, and Cousin Lois Reade
blushed scarlet, though they all knew she was engaged.

"But I'm going to dance with every maid. And just at twelve I'm going to
hunt for a glass slipper."

His look at Cynthia said he needn't hunt very far, and she blushed,
which made her more enchanting than before.

They all laughed and talked, the older men teasing the bride a little
and giving her advice as to how she should break in her new husband.
Young people's weddings were expected to be gay and every one added his
or her mite. The fine new house was duly admired. On one side it was all
one long room, beautifully decorated. On the other a library, for books
were beginning to come in fashion, even if you were not a clergyman or a
student. Then a kind of family sitting-room, with a large dining-room at
the back. Some of the fine old houses were taken for public purposes
later on.

They went out to refreshments and the bride cut the cake with a silver
knife. Large suppers were no longer considered the style, but there was
a bountiful supply of delicacies. They drank health and long life to the
bride and groom, and good wishes of all kinds.

The black waiter, in white gloves and white apron, stood in the hall to
deliver boxes of wedding cake as the older people took their departure.
And then the fiddlers began to tune up. There were two minuets to take
in all the party. Cynthia and Mr. Jordan were in the head one, with the
bride. He was a little stiff and excused himself, as he wasn't much
given to dancing. It didn't matter so much in the minuet.

Then they paired off any way. Mr. Ed Saltonstall caught Cynthia's hand.

"I'm just dying to dance with you, and this is the basket quadrille.
Jordan dances like a pump handle, but he's a good fellow. Now let us
have something worth while. I know you dance beautifully."

"How do you know?" piquantly.

"I'd like to be nautical and impertinent, but I'm afraid you'd report
me to Mr. Leverett. Oh, it's in you, in every motion. Aren't you glad
you didn't live in those old Puritan days when you would have been put
in the stocks if you had skipped across the room? Come."

That _was_ dancing. Not a halt nor an ungraceful turn, but every curve
and motion was as perfect as if they had danced together all their
lives. She gave two or three happy sighs. Her cheeks were like the heart
of a blush rose; she never turned very red when she ran or skipped, and
never looked blowsy.

Another person watched and thought her the prettiest thing in the room,
and was very glad she belonged to him.

"I'm sorry I have to dance with some one else and it's Lois Reade. Adams
would like to kick me, I know, and she would be twice as happy with him.
That is the price you pay for assisting your brother into matrimony.
Next time there shall not be but one bridesmaid, and I'll dance with her
all the evening."

"Next time? Will he be married twice?" she asked demurely.

"Oh, you witch! You are the most delicious dancer--it almost seems as if
you were sipping some very fine wine----"

"And it went to your head," she laughed.

"Head and heels both. I'm extravagantly fond of it with a partner like
you. You'll go to the assemblies this winter?"

"Oh, I don't know."

"Is Mr. Leverett very--he's your guardian, and somehow I stand just a
little in awe of him. He is so polished, and knows so much, and is he
going to be very exclusive?"

"Why----" She didn't quite understand, but she looked out of such lovely
eyes that all his pulses throbbed.

"Take your places."

She was standing there alone when Mr. Adams asked her. That was only
fair play. Mr. Saltonstall was in the same set and he gave her hand a
squeeze when he took her, crumpled it all up in his, and she flushed
daintily.

He could not dance with her again until the very last. That was a
"circle" in which you balanced and turned your partner and went to the
next couple, but some way you returned to your own. There were various
pretty figures in it. Once or twice she was a little confused, but he
seemed always on the watch for her.

The music stopped and the fiddlers were locking their cases. The dancers
went out to the supper-room again.

"I'd rather dance than eat. I believe I could dance without music. Would
you like to try?" he asked.

"Oh, no!" with a frightened look that made him laugh.

Mr. Leverett came, and Mr. Saltonstall was all polite deference. He
wished he could be invited to call, but how was it to be managed?

Then Cynthia went upstairs to put on her cloak. The bride kissed her,
and said she was glad to have had her, and when they gave their
house-warming she must be sure to come.

"I've had such a lovely time. Thank you ever so much."

"I'm the obliged one," was the reply.

If she had not been in the carriage she must have danced all the way
home. There was music in her head and a "spirit in her feet." She hardly
heard what Cousin Chilian was saying, only after they entered the house
and she slipped out of her wrap, with his good-night, he said, "You are
a very pretty girl, Cynthia." Of course, he should have had more sense
than to foster a girl's vanity.

The next morning she asked him about the assemblies.

"They are very nice dancing parties. Only the best people go and no sort
of freedom or misbehavior is tolerated. I think I'll take out a
membership."

"Oh, do, please do," she entreated.

The elegant wedding was talked of for days. Girls called on Miss
Leverett--it seemed funny to be called that. She was asked to join a
sewing society that made articles of clothing for the widows and
children of drowned sailors, and there were many of them on the New
England coast. Her tender heart was moved by the pathetic tales she
heard.

"Dear Cousin Eunice," she said one day, "I went with one of the
committee to see a poor sick woman who is in awful destitution. There
are three small children, and when she is well she goes out washing.
They send her driftwood and old stuff from the ship-yards, and one of
the companies pays her rent. But you should see the things! Such ragged
quilts that hardly hold together, and one little boy was without
stockings. There are so many things up in the garret that you will never
use----"

"Likely, dear, but they are Chilian's."

"He said I might ask you, that he was willing. Can't we go up and find
some? What is the use of their being piled up year after year, and
people in need? Ah, if you could see the poor place!"

Miss Eunice went unwillingly. The thrift of New England did often
shrivel into penuriousness. She and Elizabeth were in the habit of
putting away so many partly worn articles for the time of need.

"Those old blankets and quilts----"

"Elizabeth thought they would do to cover over."

"But there are so many better ones. And some on the closet shelves that
have never been used. Why, there is enough to last a hundred years."

"Oh, no;" with an alarmed expression.

"And even I shall not last a hundred years. No one does."

"Oh, yes. I knew a woman who lived to be one hundred and four."

"Did she come to want?"

"She had a good son to take care of her."

"And you have Cousin Chilian. I read somewhere in the Bible--I wish I
could remember the chapters and verses, 'While we have time let us do
good unto _all_ men.' I suppose that means those who haven't been frugal
and careful, as well as the others."

"We can't tell just what every sentence means."

"But we can help them. And here is a poor woman who doesn't go to
taverns;" smiling tenderly and with persuasive eyes.

They picked out enough for a wagon-load. Some of Cousin Chilian's
clothes that would do to cut over, old woollen blankets, and a variety
of articles.

"Let us put them all in this chest."

"We might need the chest."

"Oh, no, we won't. They will be so much easier to carry that way. Silas
could drive down there. And, oh, you can't imagine how much good they
will do."

Cynthia went down to see afterward, and the poor woman's gratitude
brought tears to her eyes.

"They will be a perfect God-send this winter," she said. "I've been
frettin' as to what we should do. I've never begged yet. Well, the Lord
is good."

Then there came another source of interest. Polly Upham was "keeping
company." A nice, steady young man in the ship-chandlery business, with
a little money saved up, whose folks lived at Portsmouth. He came
regularly on Wednesday night and Sundays to tea. They went to church in
the evening, and that certified it to the young people. Betty had left
school and was trying her hand at housekeeping. Louis, the little
fellow, was a big boy.

Alice Turner was engaged also, and certainly very much in love if she
considered the young man a paragon. Cynthia compared them all with
Cousin Chilian, and it wasn't a bit fair.

She met Mr. Saltonstall at a small party, where they played games and
had forfeits.

It was odd, she thought, how the girls chose him in everything. She
didn't choose him once. He spoke of it afterward.

"Why, I thought some of the others ought to have a chance," she
explained with winning sweetness. "But if it had been dancing!" and she
laughed, and that reconciled him.

Then Mrs. Lynde Saltonstall gave her house-warming. It was a simple
dwelling and not very large, but it was pretty as a picture. And young
people didn't expect to rival their fathers and mothers in the start.

They had dancing, and that was enough. They were all young people, and
two of the fiddlers were there. They had a gay time and a nice supper.

"I think Ed is smitten with Cynthia Leverett," Laura remarked to her
husband. "He seemed to feel annoyed that they had sent Miss Winn in the
carriage for her. She's a lovely dancer."

"It wouldn't be a bad thing for Ed. She has lots of money that just
turns itself over on interest. And her trustee has been buying up some
choice Boston property for her. She's pretty and has charming manners
and comes of a good family."

Then Mrs. Stevens asked her to come in to Boston for a few days. She was
going to have a little dancing party.

"My dear, you'll dance yourself to death," said Cousin Eunice.

"Oh, no. It isn't as hard as cleaning house or washing, as some of the
poor women do. And it is tiresome to practise on the spinet, hour after
hour--counting time and all that. If I was a girl of twenty years ago
I'm afraid I should be chasing up and down some old garret, spinning on
the big wheel."

Cousin Eunice laughed, too. Cynthia always made commonplaces seem
amusing, she accented them so with her bright face.

They were very glad to have her in Boston. Chilian took her in on
Saturday and staid with her until Monday morning. On Sunday Anthony
Drayton was invited in to dinner. He had improved very much. The country
air had been effaced. And he was a gentleman by instinct, and acquired
cultivation readily.

"And a fine fellow!" said Cousin Giles, rubbing his hands. "He's decided
to go in for law presently, and it will be a most excellent thing. I
don't know but I'll have to adopt him, as you did Cynthia."

Anthony hovered about the young girl. She had been cultivating her voice
the last year. It was a sweet parlor voice, adapted to the old-time
songs. Mrs. Stevens had a book of them and she sang most cheerfully.

"Oh, I wish you were going to stay over another Sunday," he exclaimed
wistfully. "But I shall come in on Tuesday evening. I don't dance, but
Mrs. Stevens is so kind to me, I've met several of the first men in the
city here."

"Oh, I am glad you are coming."

It was a very sincere joy and she could not keep it out of her face, did
not try to. And it was such a sweet face that she raised to his. He had
a sudden unreasonable wish that he was five years older and settled in
business, but then--she was very young.

Mrs. Stevens said to her on Monday, after she had read a note over and
glanced up at her rather furtively, "There's a friend of yours coming
Tuesday night--a friend from Salem that I hope you will be glad to see."

"From Salem----"

"Mr. Saltonstall. He was in here a fortnight or so ago. His mother and I
used to be great friends. I happened to ask him if he knew the
Leveretts, and he told me about his brother's marriage, that you were
one of the bridesmaids."

"Oh, yes. Laura Manning was one of the older girls at Madam Torrey's.
They had just gone in their new house and the wedding was splendid. And
I liked Mr. Edward Saltonstall so much. He is a most beautiful dancer.
I'm so glad he is coming. You see I don't know many of the new dances,
and I shouldn't so much mind making a break with him."

She looked up in her sweet, brave innocence as she uttered it.

"You are not in love with him, little lady, and he is very much smitten
with you," Mrs. Stevens ruminated. "But you shall have the chance."

"I've always liked Ed," she continued. "He's a nice, frank, honest
fellow, pretty gay at times, but not at all in the dissipated line, just
full of fun and frolic. So I asked him down, and here he says he will
come," waving her note. "I look out for men who dance. I do like to see
young folks have a good time. The older people can play cards."

It seemed rather odd that at eight o'clock not a soul had come. At home
they would be beginning the fun by this time. Then a sudden influx of
girls, some she had met before--two or three young men--and then young
Saltonstall, who had been counting the moments the last half hour.

"I am so glad to see you. It was such a surprise."

He could see it in her face, hear it in her voice. He really was afraid
of saying something foolish--something that would be no harm if they
were alone.

"I've known Mrs. Stevens a long while. And Mr. Giles Leverett. It's
queer--well, not quite that either--that I've known you such a little
while. I always thought of you as a child, though I've seen you drive
your pony carriage."

"Mrs. Stevens is delightful."

Then there was another relay, quite a number of young gentlemen. The
black fiddlers in the hall began to tune up.

There were two very handsome girls and beautifully gowned. All of them
looked pretty in dancing attire. Then a quadrille was called. There were
just eight couples.

Of course, Mr. Saltonstall took her. The rug was up and the floor had
been polished. The dancing was elegant, harmonious.

"The next is the Spanish dance. You will like that. The windings about
are like the song words to the music."

"But--I don't know it;" and she shrank back.

"Oh, you'll get into it. You are the kind that could pick up any step.
You make me think of a swallow as it darts round. If it made a mistake
no one would know it."

"Oh, I'd rather not;" entreatingly.

"Don't spoil the set."

She rose up and let him lead her out. She had a way of yielding so
quickly, when it was right and best, very flattering to a man in love
and easily misread.

If dancing had been art instead of nature, something by rote instead of
a segment of inner harmony, she could not have succeeded so well. He
warded off the few blunders, and at the third change she had another
well-bred partner. But she was glad to get back to him. The joy shone in
her dangerous eyes.

There were some new dances coming in. One of the girls from New York and
her escort waltzed up and down the room in a slow-gliding manner that
was the poetry of motion. She was fascinated, enchanted, and she knew
she could do it herself.

"We'll try it sometime," Saltonstall said.

Mr. Leverett came in, bringing Anthony Drayton with him. He knew he was
late, but he didn't dance, and he had earned five dollars copying that
evening. But he must see Cynthia.

"Oh, I thought you would not come!"

Then she had been giving a thought to him out of her happy time!

"I was detained. Are they all well, or didn't Cousin Chilian come down?"

"Oh, no."

They were being marshalled out to supper.

"You'll have to content yourself with me," said Mrs. Stevens to Anthony,
and he accepted smilingly. But she placed Cynthia next, so he could have
a little talk with her. He was getting on so well, and she was glad for
him.

Some one wanted Miss Tracy to waltz again. Then they had a galop, and
the party broke up. Anthony said good-night, and that he was coming up
on Saturday. Then Saltonstall drew her into a little nook in the hall
that made a connection with another room when it was open. Mrs. Stevens
had smiled over its uses.

"Cynthia, my darling, I must tell you this," and his voice seemed to
throb with emotion. "I want the right to come and visit you as lovers
have, for I love you, love you! I am coming to see Mr. Leverett and ask
his permission. I do nothing but dream of you day and night. You are the
sweetest, dearest----"

"Oh, don't! don't!" She struggled in the clasp. "Oh, I can't--I----" and
he felt her slight body tremble, so he loosed it.

"Forgive me. I wanted you to know so no one can take you from me. I want
to see you often. Oh, love, good-night, good-night!"

He pressed a rapturous kiss upon her hand and was gone. She slipped
through to the dining-room and took a glass of water.

"You look tired to death, little country girl," said Uncle Giles, and he
kissed her on the forehead.




CHAPTER XV

LOVERS AND LOVERS


"Take me home with you, Cousin Chilian," she pleaded, when he came in
the next day.

"But I thought"--he studied her in surprise.

"I want to go home," she interrupted, and her under lip had a quiver in
it that would have disarmed almost any one, persuaded as well.

"Why, yes. Didn't you enjoy the party?" He felt suddenly at loss, he was
not used to translating moods with all his knowledge.

"Oh, it was delightful! And some such pretty girls. There were new
dances. And Mrs. Stevens _is_ charming. Anthony came over a little
while."

In spite of inducements held out, she would go. Cousin Giles was almost
cross about it.

"I'm so glad to get back," she said to Rachel. "One feels so safe here."

"Was there any danger?" laughed the elder.

Cynthia's face was scarlet. It wasn't danger exactly, but she felt
better under Cousin Chilian's wing. And she was her bright gay self all
the evening.

But how to get her story told? For if Mr. Saltonstall came and asked for
her company, as they termed it then, and not being warned, he should
consent----

They sat by the study fire. It had turned out cold and cloudy, with
indications of snow. He had a lamp near him on the small table, and read
and thought, as his glance wandered dreamily over the leaping flashing
blue and yellow flames. If it stormed for one or two days, she could not
have come home.

She rose presently and came and stood by him, laid her hand lightly on
his shoulder. She was a young lady now, and it was hardly proper to draw
her down on his knee.

"Cousin Chilian;" hesitatingly.

"Well, dear?" in an inquiring tone.

"There is something I ought to tell you, and I want to ask you--to--to
do--oh, I hardly know how to say it. Mr. Saltonstall came down; he and
Mrs. Stevens are old friends----"

Ah, he knew now. This young man had dared to invade the virginal
sweetness of her soul, to trouble the quiet stream of girlhood. He was
roused, strangely angry, for all his placid temperament.

"I couldn't help it--just before he went away--and I couldn't have
dreamed of such a thing----"

Then she hid her head down on his shoulder and cried.

"Dear--my dear little girl--oh, yes, it would have to happen sometime.
And--he loves you."

"Oh, that isn't the worst;" illogically, between her sobs. "He is coming
to ask you if he may--and I don't want him to come that way. I just want
it as it was before. Polly Upham can't think or talk of anything but her
intended, and it gets tiresome. He doesn't seem so very wonderful to me.
And wouldn't it weary you to hear me praising some one all the time?"

"I think it would," he answered honestly, yet with some confusion of
mind.

"So I don't want it;" with more courage in her voice. "I want good times
with them all. And I don't see how you can come to love any one all in a
moment."

Was he hearing aright? Didn't she really want the young man for a lover?
He was unreasonably, fatuously glad, and the pulses, that were chilled a
moment ago, seemed to race hot through his body.

"It was not quite marriage?" a little huskily.

"He wanted to ask if he might have the right to come, and he said he
loved me, and, oh, I am afraid----"

She was trembling. He could feel it where she leaned against him. He
took sudden courage.

"And you do not want him to come in that way? It would most likely lead
to an engagement. And then I should have to listen to his praises
continually. Yes, it would be rather hard on me;" and he laughed with a
humorous sound.

It heartened her a good deal. She was smiling now herself, but there
were tears on her cheek.

"And you won't mind telling him; that is not _very_ much, that----"

"I think you are too young to decide such a grave matter, Cynthia," he
began seriously. "And you ought to have a glad, sweet youth. There is no
reason why you should rush into marriage. You have a pleasant home with
those that love you----"

"And I don't want to go away. I feel as if I would like to live here
always. You are so good and indulgent, and Cousin Eunice is so nice, now
that she doesn't seem afraid of any one. Were we all afraid of Cousin
Elizabeth? And we have such nice talks. She tells me about the old times
and what queer thoughts people had, and how hard they were. And about
girls whose lovers went away to sea and never came back, and how they
watched and waited, and sometimes we cry over them. And the house is so
cheerful, and I can have all the flowers I want, and friends coming in,
and, oh, I shall never want to go away, because I shall never love any
one as well as you."

That was very sweet, but it was a girl's innocence, and her face did not
change color in the admission.

"Well, I will explain the matter to Mr. Saltonstall. I am glad you told
me, otherwise I should hardly have known your wishes on the subject. And
now we will go on having good times together, and count out lovers."

"Yes, yes." She gave his hand a squeeze and was her own happy self, not
feeling half as sorry for the man who would come to be denied as he did.

It snowed furiously the next morning, and sullenly the day after. Then
it was cold, and she said half a dozen times a day she was so glad she
came home.

She did not see Mr. Saltonstall when he called, and she really did miss
him at two little companies. Then she wondered if she oughtn't give one,
she had gone to so many.

"Why, yes," Cousin Chilian answered. She might have turned the house
upside down so long as she was going to stay in it.

Then she wondered if she ought to invite _him_. Mrs. Lynde and she were
very good friends, and she should ask Avis, of course. They spoke--they
were not ill friends.

Chilian considered. "Yes, I think I would," he made answer.

They had a merry time and danced on the beautiful rugs, and had a fine
supper. And Mr. Saltonstall was glad to be friends. She _was_ young and
presently she might think of lovers. He would try and keep his chance
good.

_Anthony came now_ and then and spent a Sunday with them. He loved to
hear Cousin Chilian read Greek verses, but the pretty love odes seemed
to mean Cynthia, and he used to watch her. Then Ben Upham was a visitor
as well, and used to play checkers with her, as that was considered
quite a good exercise for one's brains.

Polly would be married in the spring, Alice Turner in June. The Turners
were always besieging her for a two or three days' visit, and the Turner
young men hovered round her. She never seemed to do anything, she never
demanded attention, but when she glanced up at them, or smiled, they
followed her as the children did the Pied Piper. She might have led them
into dangerous places, but she was very simple of heart. Yet the danger
was alluring to them.

Polly came to her for a good deal of counsel. When there were two
patterns of sleeves, which should she take?

"Why, I'd have the India silk made with this and the English gingham
with that--you see it will iron so much easier. Miss Grayson does up the
puffs on a shirring cord, then you can let them out in the washing."

"That's a fine idea. You do have such splendid ideas, Cynthy."

"They are mostly Rachel Winn's," laughed the young girl.

They had a capable woman in the kitchen now. Cynthia should have been
mastering the high art of housekeeping, people thought, instead of
running about so much and driving round in the pony carriage with Miss
Winn, or a girl companion. Of course, there was plenty of money, but one
never quite knew what would happen.

John Loring was building his house as people who could did in those
days. They would not be able to finish it all inside, and there was a
nook left for an addition when they needed it. Polly was to have some of
grandmother's furniture, and John's mother would provide a little.
Corner cupboards were quite a substitute in those days for china
closets, and window-seats answered for chairs. But there was bedding and
napery, and no one thought of levying on friends. Relatives looked over
their stock and bestowed a few articles. Cynthia thought of the stores
in the old house and wished she might donate them. She did pick out some
laces from her store, and two pretty scarfs, one of which Polly declared
would be just the thing to trim her wedding hat, which was of fine
Leghorn. So she would only have to buy the feather.

They haunted the stores and occasionally picked up a real bargain. Even
at that period shoppers did not throw their money broadcast.

"Cynthia Leverett is the sweetest girl I know," Polly said daily, and
Bentley was of the same opinion.

They were to stand at the wedding.

"And I want you to wear that beautiful frock that you had when Laura
Manning was married. I shall only have two bridesmaids, you and Betty,
but I want you to look your sweetest."

And surely she did. They had a very nice wedding party and the next day
Polly went to her own house and had various small tea-drinkings, and she
arranged them for Saturday so Bentley could come up. They were
wonderfully good friends, but Cynthia felt as if she had outgrown him.
In her estimation he was just a big friendly boy that one could talk to
familiarly. Anthony was more backward in the laughter and small-talk.

Then there was the college degree. There was no such great fuss made
over commencement then, no grand regattas, no inter-collegiate
athletics, for it was a rather serious thing to begin a young man's life
and look forward to marriage.

He went straight to Mr. Chilian. It was the proper thing to be fortified
with the elders' consent. Of course, he would not marry in some time
yet, but if he could be her "company" and speak presently--they had been
such friends.

Chilian studied the honest young fellow, whose face was in a glow of
hope. So young to dream of love and plan for the future!

"You are both too young;" and his voice had a bit of sharpness in it.
"Cynthia is not thinking of such things."

"But one _can_ think of them. They begin somehow and go into your very
life. I believe I've loved her a long while."

"I think neither of you really know what love is. No, I cannot consent
to it. I want her to go on having a good free time without any anxiety.
I have some right to her, being her guardian."

"But--I will wait--I didn't mean to ask her immediately."

"We are going on a journey presently. I cannot have her disturbed with
this. No, your attention must be devoted to business for the next two
years."

He drew a long breath. "But you don't mean I must break
off--everything?" and there was an unsteadiness in his voice.

"Oh, no. Not if you can keep to the old friendliness."

Then Chilian Leverett dropped into his easy-chair and thought. The child
had grown very dear to him, she was a gift from her father. A
tumultuous, uncomprehended pain wrenched his very soul. To live without
her--to miss her everywhere! To have lonely days, longer lonely evenings
when the dreariness of winter set in. And yet she had a right to the
sweet, rich draught of love. But she did not need it amid all the
pleasures of youth. Let her have two or three years, even if it was
blissful thoughtlessness. But he must put her on her guard. A young
fellow soon changed his mind. The old couplet sang itself in his brain:

          "If she be not fair for me,
           What care I how fair she be?"

Did he get over his early love and forget? We all say, "But ours was
different."

How to find the right moment? Ben did not come over. She was very busy
with this friend and that, youth finds so _many_ interests. But one
evening, when they were sitting on the porch in the moonlight, the young
fellow walked slowly along, glanced at them, halted.

She flew down to the gate.

"Oh, Ben, what has happened?" she cried, the most bewitching anxiety in
her face. "Why, you have not been in--for weeks."

"Not quite two weeks." Had it seemed so long to her? To him it had been
months.

"Oh, come in. Cousin Chilian will be glad to see you."

The radiant cordiality in her face unnerved him.

"And you?" Yes, he must know.

"Do you have to ask that question?"

The sweet, dangerous eyes said too much, but the smile was that of
amusement.

So they walked up the path together. Mr. Leverett greeted him in a
friendly manner.

"I thought I ought to come in and say good-bye. I'm going off on some
business for father, and may not be back for several weeks."

"That sounds as if you needed an apology for coming at all," she
commented with half-resentful gayety.

He flushed and made no immediate reply.

"And we are going to take a journey as well. Up somewhere in Maine. Mr.
Giles Leverett insists we shall, for our health, but I think it is our
delightful company. He has to go to look after a large estate where some
people think of founding a town. Isn't it funny?" and she gave her
bewitching laugh that was like the notes of silver bells, soft, yet
clear. "They must go off and build up new places. And some people are
going West, as if there wasn't room here. Have you noticed that we are
overcrowded?"

"Well, sometimes along the docks it looks that way."

"I like a good many people. Often Merrits' is crowded, and it's funny to
catch bits of sentences. And at Plummer's as well. Did you ever read
right across the paper, one line in each column, and notice the odd and
twisted-up sense it made? That's about the way it sounds."

How bright and charming she was! Ben could not keep his eyes from her
radiant face. Was she really a coquette, Chilian wondered. Yet she was
so simple with it all, so seemingly careless of the effect. That was the
danger of it.

He lingered like one entranced. Poor young lad! Chilian began to feel
sorry for him.

She walked down to the gate with him, and hoped they would have a nice
time when autumn came, if he meant to stay in Salem.

A young man not in love would have called her a bright, merry, chatty
girl. He went away with the consciousness that she liked him very much.
Chilian asked her if she did.

She glanced up wonderingly.

"Why--he is nice, and being Polly's brother makes it--well, more
familiar. Then we can talk about Anthony. I believe he didn't like him
much at first, but he does now."

Oh, how could he put her on her guard! She was not dreaming of love.
Saltonstall's fancy had died out--no doubt this would, too. Lad's love.
Was it worth ruffling up the sunny artlessness? But he would watch the
young men closer now that he knew the danger line.

He said simply to himself that he could not give her up to any one else
so soon. There would be a long life of joy and satisfaction to her, and
he knew she would not grudge him these few years. Then, too, he was
quite certain she had not even had an imaginary fancy for these two
men--Ben was nothing but a boy.

Anthony Drayton was to join them. Miss Winn was to be Cynthia's
companion. Mrs. Stevens had refused to trust her precious self to any
wilds, and bear and wolf hunts, though Mr. Giles declared they were not
going to take guns along. He was not an enthusiastic hunter. As for
Chilian, such sport did not attract him.

The journey was partly by stage, partly on horseback, and one or two
days they left the ladies at the tavern where they stopped. Cynthia was
charmed and amused at the uncouthness of the people and their dialect in
some places, and positive good breeding in others. Anthony unearthed a
college chum who was tally man at a sawmill. The new town was really
making progress. A small chapel had been started, a schoolhouse built.
And twenty years later it was a pretty town; in fifty years an
enterprising city.

"Anthony's going to be a first-class fellow. I should like to have such
a son. Chilian, you and I should have married and have sons and
daughters growing up. But at my time of life I should want them grown
up. And smart, as well. I always feel sorry for the fathers of dull
lads, when they have plenty of means to educate them. Yes, I should want
mine to have a good supply of brains."

Chilian Leverett enjoyed the change very much and the breath of spruce
and pine was invigorating. But there was a little nervous feeling about
Cynthia. Cousin Giles was somewhat of a lady's man, and he was on the
continual lookout that Cynthia should not tire herself unduly, that she
be assisted over the rough places, that she should have the best of
everything. He was almost jealous at times.

But Cynthia moved about gayly, serenely, full of merry little quips,
seizing the small ridiculous events with such a sense of amusement that
she inspirited them all. And he could not notice that she paid any more
attention to Anthony than either of her seniors. There was such a
genuine frankness in all she said and did, a charm of manner that was
just herself, and had none of the arts of society, but came from a heart
that overflowed with spontaneous warmth, but was not directed to any
particular person.

Cousin Giles declared he was sorry to get back to Boston. He could not
remember when he had enjoyed such a good time. Then in a business way it
had been a success, which added to his satisfaction.

They really had to stay in Boston one night. They would fain have kept
Cynthia for a week, but she said she was tired of just changing from one
frock to another, and longed for more variety.

"And I'm so glad to get back home again," she cried delightedly. "I've
had a splendid time, and I like Anthony ever so much. Cousin Giles was
so nice and fatherly. He ought to adopt Anthony and give him his name,
and that would always make me think of father. But after all, home is
best. Oh, suppose I was a waif, just being handed from one to another!"

She looked frightened with the imaginary lot. She expressed emotions so
easily.

"You couldn't have been;" hoarsely.

"Cousin Chilian, if you had not been in the world, or if you hadn't been
willing to take me--I don't think father knew much about Cousin
Giles--why, I must have gone to strangers."

There were tears in her eyes, and a sweet melancholy in her voice.

She had so much to tell Cousin Eunice that it seemed really as if she
had taken the journey with them. She put on Jane's faded gingham
sunbonnet and gave her voice a queer nasal twang, and talked as some of
the women did up there in the wilderness, who thought a city "must be an
awfully crowdy place an' she jes' didn't see how people managed to live
in it. An' as fer the sea, give her dry land every time."

Then she talked the French-English patois of the emigrants from Canada,
and told of their funny attire, and their log huts, sometimes with only
one big room, with a stone chimney in the centre, and sawed logs for
seats.

"They did that in Salem nigh on to two hundred years ago," said Cousin
Eunice.

"How much people do learn by living," remarked the little girl sagely.

Then the olden round began. Being asked out to tea and inviting in
return, sewing bees, quilting parties when some girl was making an
outfit. And though the elders shook their heads at such a waste of time,
they went out to walk in the afternoon and stopped in the shops that
were making a show on Essex Street and Federal Street. There was Miss
Rust's pretty millinery parlor--it had a sofa in the front room and a
table with an embroidered cover that Cynthia had sent her. They talked
of new styles and colors, and were aghast at the thought that royalty
sometimes had as many as twenty hats and bonnets. She made pretty old
lady caps as well, and she did love to hear the young girls chatter. And
Molly Saunders was still baking gingerbread, that had delighted them as
school children, and no one made such good spruce and sassafras beer.

One evening at a dance she had a great surprise. Some one said, "Miss
Cynthia Leverett, Mr. Marsh."

A rather tall, ruddy, good-looking fellow, with laughing eyes and an
unmistakable sailor air, held her dainty hand and studied her face.

"Oh, you don't know me!" in the jolliest of tones. "And I should know
you if you had been cast ashore on a rocky island and I were looking at
you through a spyglass. You haven't changed in the main, only to grow
prettier. You were a poor pale little thing then."

"Oh, I can't think!" She flushed and smiled. Something in the hearty
voice won her.

"At Dame Wilby's school. And the bad boy who sat behind you--Tommy
Marsh."

"Oh! oh! And that day I sat on the floor!" She laughed gayly. She did
not mind it a bit now.

"Wasn't it funny? And the way you just sat still with the school in an
uproar. You standing up there and 'sassing' back the old dame! Such a
mite of a thing, too. My! but you were a plucky one!" in admiration.
"And you never came to school after that. I ought to get down on my
knees and beg your pardon for the sly pinches I gave you, and the times
I tweaked your curly hair. I've half a mind to do it."

"Oh, no!" and she made a funny gesture of alarm, and both laughed.

"And I've been over there to India, where you came from, and found some
people who knew your father. I've been to sea seven years, three on this
last cruise, and when the _Vixen_ is repaired and refitted I'm going out
again as first mate. One of these days I shall be a captain."

How proud and strong he looked. Why, one couldn't help liking him.

"I wonder if I might dance with you?"

"Oh, do you dance? I thought sailors--and there are no girls----" and
she blushed at her incoherence.

"I think we do a little. Where did you get the Sailor's Hornpipe from?
We're sorry about not having girls, but we make it answer. And when you
get in the doldrums, or becalmed, it stirs up your blood. Oh, they are
taking their places."

Ben was in the same quadrille. Every time he touched her hand he gave it
a pressure that made her cheeks rosier. Altogether it was a delightful
evening.

Cousin Chilian came for her. He had found she preferred it.

"Oh, Cousin Chilian, I've had such a funny adventure. Perhaps you can
recall the little boy I really hated that week I went to the dame's
school. Well, he is a nice big fellow now, and we had a talk, and he
has been to Calcutta and seen people who knew father. I want him to come
so we can have a good long talk, and won't you ask him? You'll like him,
I know. I'll find him and bring him to you, and you can ask him to come
while I'm putting on my things."

She hunted him up and he was very pleased to meet Mr. Leverett. She gave
them quite a while, for she was chatting with the girls about some
weddings on the tapis.

She gave Mr. Marsh her hand and a smile that would have set almost any
masculine heart beating. It must have been born with her, though it was
pitifully appealing in the childhood days. Now the true, sweet nature
shone through it, lending it a fascinating radiance.

Mr. Leverett said he should be glad to have him call while he was in
port, and the young man thanked him and said he should give himself the
pleasure.

"And when he does come," said the little lady in her half-coaxing,
half-imperious way, "can't we have him up in the study? You see, it does
very well for half a dozen of us to be down in the parlor, but it gets
kind of stiff and not cheerful with just one. And you'll like to talk to
him."

He assented readily. Ben always came up in the study, though now he
would rather have been alone with Cynthia. There were some things he
meant to say, if he ever had a chance, in spite of youth and
guardianship.

Mr. Marsh did not lose much time considering. The very next week he
called.

They found him a nice, agreeable, well-informed young man, a true sailor
lad, and like many a Yankee boy, he kept adding to his stock of
knowledge where-ever he went. He had drawn some useful charts of
seaports and islands he knew about, their products and climates, and
really his descriptions were as good as a geography.

"There's no doubt Salem has the lead in the foreign trade, but we're
going to be pushed hard the next few years. Other cities have found out
the profit in it. But we've some of the best captains, and that's what I
mean to be myself."

At Calcutta they still held a warm remembrance of Captain Anthony
Leverett. And Marsh thought it quite a wonderful thing that the little
girl had gone back and forth and braved all the perils. He told them of
a pirate ship they had once battled with and the rich stores they had
taken from her. The prisoners had been left on an island.

"But--how would they get to their homes?" she asked.

"Oh, that wasn't our lookout. They'd have done the same thing to us if
they could, maybe worse. Occasionally vessels are wrecked, and sometimes
it is months before a ship goes that way and sees their signal."

Yes, she was glad nothing of the kind had happened to her. And Chilian,
watching the little shiver, gave thanks also.

Thomas Marsh enjoyed these evenings wonderfully. He was always glancing
at Cynthia to see if what he said met with her approval. It seemed so
strangely sweet to be thrilled at the tones of her voice and the touch
of her hand. And when she looked up and smiled, the blood surged to his
brain. He was quite a favorite with the girls, but no other one had that
power over him.

Of course, they met here and there at the different companies--he never
went unless she was sure to be there, and if he asked she answered
frankly. Cousin Chilian took her down to see the _Vixen_, which was
nearly ready for her new cruise. He was very proud of her, so was
Captain Langfelt, and they had some tea in the cabin. But some sudden
knowledge came to Chilian Leverett, and he was sincerely glad the young
man was going away.

The evening Thomas Marsh came in to say good-bye, she was alone.

"You'll find Miss Cynthia up in the study," said Jane, and thither he
went two steps at a time. She had on a soft gown, and he thought she
looked like some lovely flower as she rose to greet him.

"I believe we are to sail to-morrow. Stores and cargo are all in, and
now the captain is in haste to be off. Come down about eleven in the
morning and wish me God-speed, a safe journey, and a happy return."

"Yes. We were talking of it to-day. Oh, I hope you will have all, though
a great many things happen in three years." Neither of them, indeed no
one, could have predicted what was to happen in those eventful three
years.

They discussed the pleasant times, the girls and boys who had grown up
and married during the whole seven years of his absence. Oh, how sweet
and pretty she was! He envied the boys like Bentley Upham and two or
three others who had business at home--but no, he never could have been
anything but a sailor.

Then he rose to go. He stood holding her hand and the red and white kept
flitting over her face, her eyes were so soft and dark. They would haunt
him many a night on the deck.

"It's best that I am going so soon," he began in a rather tremulous
voice. "Do you remember what your uncle was reading the other day about
the man who wanted to be lashed to the mast when they passed the Syrens?
It would be that way with me if I staid much longer. I--I wouldn't be
able to help loving you, and I doubt whether it would be a good thing
for either of us. I've tried all along to keep it to a plain, honest
like, but I know now it is more than that. I shall take away with me the
remembrance of the sweetest girl in all the world, and I have no right
to spoil her life. But sometimes maybe you'll think of a far-away lad,
who sends you his love and the best wishes for your happiness with the
man you will love best of all."

Then he pressed her hand to his lips and went slowly down the stairs.
She heard the door shut. And, foolish girl, she sat down and cried, and
there Cousin Chilian found her, and had to listen and absolve.

"No," he said, "it would not do for you to have a sailor lad. Your
tender heart would break with the anxiety. He's a nice, upright fellow,
and he will never shirk a duty. But you----" What should he say to her?

"I want to stay here. Oh, I wonder if you will like me when I get as old
as Cousin Eunice, and the world will change and improve and I shall be
queer and old-fashioned?"

He held her in his arms, but he was shocked to find what was in his own
heart.




CHAPTER XVI

PERILOUS PATHS


Avis Manning's "Company" was one of the events of the season. She was a
full-fledged young lady, and knowing she could have her choice of the
young men of Salem, was rather difficult to capture. She and her
brother-in-law were very good friends, but not lovers. And Laura, who
knew where his fancy lay, counselled him to go slowly, though she was
quite sure he would win in the end.

"You see, she is like a child to Mr. Chilian Leverett, and he is loath
to part with her. But all girls do marry sooner or later, and he isn't
selfish enough to want her to stay single. If he was not so much older
he might marry her--they are not own cousins, you know."

"He marry her! Why, he's getting to be quite an old man," and there was
a touch of disdain in his tone. "But there's half a dozen others----"

"It's queer, but she isn't a flirt. She's one of the sweetest of
girls--she was, at school. And with her fortune she might hold herself
high. They say the Boston trustee has doubled some of it that he
invested."

"I wish she hadn't a cent!" the young man flung out angrily.

"Well, money is not to be despised. She'll get a little tired by and by,
and long for a home and children of her own, as we all do. And if you
haven't found any one else----"

"I never shall find any one like her;" gloomily.

"Oh, there are a great many nice girls in the world."

Avis knew all the best people in Salem, it was not so large, after all.
And they came to the beautiful house and made merry, played "guessing
words"--what we call charades, quite a new thing then--and it made no
end of merriment. Of course, Cynthia was in them, was arch and piquant,
and delighted the audience. Then they had supper and more dancing. One
of the Turner boys, Archibald, hovered about Cynthia like a shadow.
There was Ben Upham, but Edward Saltonstall warded them off to her
satisfaction. But Bella Turner was shortly to be married, and Archie
would have her for that evening surely.

She and Mr. Saltonstall were very good friends. He was a little older
than the others, and grown wary by experience. But it was queer that
half a dozen girls were pulling straws for him and here was one who did
not care, would not raise a finger, but, oh, how sweet her smiles were.

"If you are a bridesmaid the third time, you will never be a bride,"
said some of the wiseacres.

Cynthia tossed her proud, dainty head and laughed over it to Cousin
Chilian. He looked a little grave.

"Would you mind if I were an old maid? I wouldn't really be _old_ in a
long while, you know. And you will always want some one. If anything
should happen to Cousin Eunice, how lonely you would be."

"Yes, if you went away."

"I don't care for any of them very much. I like Mr. Saltonstall the
best. He isn't quite so young, so--so sort of impetuous. And the boys
get jealous."

Then it was likely to be Mr. Saltonstall, after all! Was he going to be
narrow and mean enough to keep her out of what was best in a woman's
life? But he looked down the dreary years without her. He could not
attach himself to the world of business as Cousin Giles did. Some of
these young fellows might come into a sort of sonship with him--there
was Anthony Drayton.

Why was it his soul protested against them? He did not understand the
deep underlying dissent that made a cruel discordance in his desire for
her happiness.

Mr. Saltonstall walked home from church with her and Miss Winn. And he
came in one evening to ask some advice. He had cudgelled his brain for
days to find just the right subject. That ended, they had a talk about
chess--that was becoming quite an interest in some circles. There were
several moves that puzzled him.

"Come in some evening and talk them over," said Mr. Leverett.

Edward Saltonstall wondered at the favor of the gods and accepted. Not
as if he was in any vulgar hurry, but he dropped in, politely social,
and asked if he should disturb them. Chilian had been reading Southey's
"Thalaba."

"Oh, no. We often read in the evening," said Cynthia.

She was netting a bead bag, an industry all the rage then among the
women. They really were prettier than the samplers. But she rose and
brought the box of chessmen, while he rolled the table from its corner.

"Will I disturb you if I stay?" she asked.

"Not unless it interferes with Mr. Saltonstall's attention," said
Chilian, then bit his lip.

"Oh, I do not think it will;" smilingly.

"You are very good to bother with a tyro. I'd like to be able to play a
good game. Father is so fond of it, and Lynde seldom comes in
nowadays--family cares;" laughingly.

They led off very well. Saltonstall was wise enough to try his best,
though out of one eye he watched the dainty fingers threading in and out
among the colored beads, and could not help thinking he would rather be
holding them and pressing kisses on the soft white hand. Then he made a
wrong play.

"We may as well turn back," said Mr. Leverett, "since the question at
stake is not winning, but improving."

"You are very good," returned the young man meekly.

This time they went on a little further, but the result was the same. So
with the third game.

"Of course, I could let you win," Mr. Leverett began, "but that wouldn't
conduce to the real science of the game which a good player desires. But
you do very well for a young man. I should keep on, if I were you."

"And annoy you with my shortcomings?"

"Oh, it will not be annoyance, truly. Come in when you feel like it."

"Thank you." Then he said good-night in a friendly, gentlemanly manner,
and Cynthia rose and bowed.

After that she gathered up her work and said good-night. Chilian sat and
thought. Edward Saltonstall was a nice, steady young fellow; that is, he
neither gamed, nor drank, nor went roystering round in the taverns
jollying with the sailors, as some of the sons of really good families
did. He would not have all his fortune to make, and his father's
business was well established. The sons would take it. The two daughters
were well married. What more could he ask for Cynthia? She was not so
young now and would know her own mind.

Yet it gave his heart a sharp, mysterious wrench, a longing for what he
was putting away, the essence of the solemn ideals of love that run
through the intricate meshes of the human soul. He knew that he loved
her, that he wanted her for his very own, and his conscience told him it
was not right. Of all her admirers he liked this one the best. Under
other circumstances he would have considered him an admirable young man.

Saltonstall dropped in now and then, not too often. He did not mean to
startle any one with his purpose, but to let it grow gradually. Still,
at the last assembly of the season, his attentions were somewhat
pronounced. It was partly her doings, she was sheltering herself from
other rather warm indications.

A few days later she went over to Polly Loring's with her work. Polly's
bag had somehow gone wrong. Cynthia had to cut the thread and ravel out
a round. The baby was to be admired as well as the chair seat Polly had
begun in worsted work, which was the new accomplishment. And they talked
over various matters: who had new gowns, new lovers, and new babies. But
every time she came almost to the subject so near her heart, Cynthia
made an elusive detour. Then she ventured out straight with her
question.

"Cynthia, are you going to take Ed Saltonstall?"

Cynthia's face was scarlet.

"He hasn't asked me, he hasn't even asked Cousin Chilian," but her voice
was not quite steady.

"How do you know? It was talked of at the assembly--the two men were a
good deal together. And if you don't mean anything, Cynthia, you'll get
yourself gossiped about, and you'll spoil some lives," declared Polly
spiritedly. This thing had been seething in her mind, and she was going
to have it out at the risk of breaking friendship.

"I don't want to spoil any one's life. And I've never really kept
company with any one."

The keeping company was the great test. When the young man came steady
one night in the week, to Sunday tea, and went to church with the girl
alone, the matter was as good as declared.

"But--well, I don't know how you've done it, but they hang about you and
it does upset them. First it's one, then it's another. You ought to
know. You ought to settle upon one and let the others alone."

Polly had acquired a good deal of married wisdom, and she really did
love Cynthia. Ben loved her, too.

"But suppose I didn't want any of them?" and Cynthia tried to laugh, but
it was a poor shadowy attempt.

"Oh, nonsense! You don't mean to be an old maid. No girl does. But it is
time you stopped playing fast and loose with hearts. Now there's Ben.
You know he's loved you this long while. And we all like you so. Last
fall he quite gave up and went to see Jenny Willing. She'll make a good
wife and she's a nice girl, though she hasn't your fortune. Mother's
been trying to make him believe that you are looking higher."

"Oh, Polly--I never scarcely think of my fortune," Cynthia interrupted,
her face full of distressful color.

"Well, I'm not saying that you do. Ben's getting along first-rate. He
has a college degree and father isn't poor. I know several girls who
would jump at a chance for him. Of course, we would _all_ rather have
you. Then at Avis Manning's party you gave him the sweetest of your
smiles, and lured him back."

Oh, she recalled it with a kind of shame. It was to keep off Archie
Turner and Mr. Saltonstall. And then for a while he had grown
troublesome. If they could be merely friends!

"The thing is just here, Cynthia. I know I'm speaking plainly and you
may get angry. If you don't want Ben, let him alone. A young man begins
to think of a home and a wife of his own, and when he likes a girl very
much--yes, I will say it, she can make or mar. She can take him away
from some other nice girl. And people now are beginning to say you are a
flirt. I think Jenny will make Ben a nice wife, and if you don't want
him----"

"Oh, Polly, I don't want any of them. You can't think how delightful
life is with Cousin Chilian. I couldn't be as happy anywhere else, or
with any other person. I can't make myself fall in love as all of you
girls have, and think this one or that one perfect. Something must be
wrong with me. And I'm very sorry. I'm not a bit jealous when they take
to other girls. Why, I'd be glad to be Jenny's bridesmaid if she wanted
me to."

Cynthia paused and mopped the tears from her cheeks. Polly was a little
subdued. Cynthia was taking this so meekly. But she said rather
spitefully, "You had better marry Mr. Leverett."

Ah, Polly, it was a dangerous seed to fling at a young girl. And it
dropped on a bit of out of the way fruitful soil.

Cynthia rose quietly. She was very pale. She began to roll up her work.

"Now I think you can go on with it," she said. "If you get in trouble
again, let me know."

Then the two friends looked at each other until the tears came into
their eyes.

"I'm very sorry," murmured Cynthia in a broken voice.

"But you see----"

"Yes. I understand. I hope Ben will be very happy."

Afterward Polly sat down and cried. She knew Ben loved Cynthia so. They
had counted on having her in the family. But she felt quite certain now
that Ed Saltonstall would get her. And he was a flirt, going with every
pretty girl, every new girl for a little while.

Cynthia went home in a very sober mood. Why had they all cared so much
about her? They had nice attractive qualities, but why could they not
look at her just as she looked at them! She did not know very much about
men and that with them pursuit often merged into the strong desire for
possession, which she did not understand. But she did not want to be
blamed. She would have none of them. Cousin Chilian was more to her. If
he seldom danced and was never very gay, there were so many other
requirements to life; there was something in his nature to which hers
responded readily.

Then suddenly she seemed to have lost the clue. She experienced a season
of bewilderment. Was Cousin Chilian meaning she should take Mr.
Saltonstall for a lover? He surely gave him opportunities he had given
no other. Sometimes he excused himself and went out. There were some
difficulties with the mother country that men were discussing. She
really felt a little awkward at being left alone with Mr. Saltonstall.
Not only that, but it awoke a strange terror in her soul that he should
come so near; it was as if her whole being rose in arms.

Occasionally Chilian spoke of her marriage--he had always said she was
too young, in a protesting manner. So on one occasion she gained
courage.

"Do you mean--that is--you would like to--have me married, Cousin
Chilian?"

Married! It was as if she had given him a stab. And yet was not that
just the thing he had been thinking of?

"Why, you see, Cynthia," he made his voice purposely cold, "I am much
older than you. I may die some day. Cousin Eunice will no doubt go
before me, and you would not like to go on alone. Then Giles is older
even than I. One has to think of these things. Yes, it would be nice to
know you were happily settled."

"And why couldn't a woman live alone as well as a man? I could have Miss
Winn, and a housekeeper, and a man----"

"It's a lonely life for a woman."

"But why not for a man?"

"Oh, well, that is different. Only a few men do. And they grow queer and
opinionated."

A fortnight ago she would have protested and said, "You are not old, you
are not opinionated," in her eager, girlish manner. Now she was hurt,
and she could not tell why; so she kept silent.

And she began to note a change in him. The delightful harmony in which
they had lived fell below the major key into minors, that touched and
pierced her. He did not come so often to listen to her music, to ask her
for a song, to watch while she painted some pretty flower, to go around
with her training roses, or cutting them for the house. She put a few of
them everywhere; she did not like great bunches, only such things as
grew in clusters, lilacs and syringas and long sprays of clematis. She
missed the little walks around, and the dear talks they used to have.

She felt somewhat deceitful in planning adroitly. She made Miss Winn go
to church with her, and when they came home with Mr. Saltonstall they
sat on the porch together. A girl thinking of a lover would have asked
him in. Then she went down to Boston, and Anthony came over as often as
he could. Surely there was no danger with him.

All this time Chilian Leverett was having a hard fight with himself. He
was really ashamed of having been conquered by what he called a boy's
romantic passion. He could excuse himself for the early lapse; he was a
boy then. His honor and what he called good sense were mightily at war
with this desire that well-nigh overmastered him. True, men older than
he had married young wives. But this child had been entrusted to him in
a sacred fashion by her dying father; he must place before her the best
and richest of life, even if it condemned him to after-years of joyless
solitude.

For it was not as a father he loved her, though he had played a little
at fatherhood in the beginning. She was so companionable, they had so
many similar tastes. He was so fond of reading to an appreciative
listener, and even as he sat in the darkness, when she did not know he
was alone in the study, he could see her lovely eyes raised in their
tender light. He thought this her unusual wisdom and discernment, never
dreaming it had been mostly his training and her receptiveness. And to
think of the house without her! Why, going out of it in her wedding gown
would be almost as if she had been laid in her shroud and shut away. Of
course, he could not have her here and see her love another.

Giles Leverett's dream was much happier. In his mind he saved her for
his favorite. When Anthony was through--and he was putting in law, with
the classics--he would take him in his office, where he would find much
business made to his hand. The house was big enough for them all, and he
had grown curiously interested in young people. Anthony was very fond of
his sweet, fascinating cousin--they all were. He did not know whether
there was any one in Salem quite good enough for her. Saltonstall was a
rather trifling fellow, whose fancies were evanescent.

But Mr. Ed Saltonstall had a good friend in Mrs. Stevens, and she
counselled him not to be too ardent in his pursuit. She said pleasant
little things about him without any effusiveness. She considered his
friendship with her very charming--young men were not generally devoted
to middle-aged women. Once she shrewdly wondered why he had not made
some errand down.

Altogether it was a pleasant visit, though Cynthia kept revolving her
duty, if such there was in the case. A blind, mysterious asking for
something haunted her, something it would be sad to miss out of her
life.

Then she came home alone in the stage. There was a property dispute
going on, where Mr. Leverett was an important witness for a friend. When
the stage stopped, Rachel and Jane both ran out and gave her a joyful
welcome.

"Oh, dear!" exclaimed Cousin Eunice, "we are so glad to get you back.
You are the light _of_ the house, isn't she?" glancing at the other.
"Even Chilian has been mopey, though I think he isn't well. He is
getting thin, too, and goodness knows he had no flesh to lose. Oh, my
dear, I hope you will never go away again while I live;" and she gave a
long sigh as the girl left the room.

She came down presently in a cheerful light frock and began to tell
Cousin Eunice and Jane what she had seen and heard. She was in the full
tide of this, eager, bright, and flushing when Chilian entered. He
greeted her rather languidly. Yes, he had grown thinner, and Cousin
Giles was putting on too much flesh and growing jollier. Chilian did not
look well and an ache went all over Cynthia's body, every nerve being
sympathetic. He was not silent, however; he asked questions, but she
thought he was hardly paying attention to the answers. He remained down
in the sitting-room and read his _Gazette_, now and then making some
comment, or answering some query of Cousin Eunice. It was not nine yet
when he rose and said, "He was very tired; if they would excuse him, he
would go to bed."

They all went presently. She was glad to be alone in the room, glad
there was no moon, and she turned her face over on the pillow and cried
softly. After all, life was a riddle--two ways and not knowing which to
take, both having a curiously lonely ending. Could she not bear it
better alone? If he should go away as her father had done, if she should
stay here in the old house, and then Cousin Eunice would fold her hands
in that silent clasp, Rachel would slip into old womanhood, Jane would
marry, she was keeping company now. There would be other Janes and
she----

On the other hand would be love, marriage, children maybe, a pleasant
home. Living along side by side, as other people did.

She did not try to shut out either vision. Which should she take? Was
life just for one's self?

She was not morbid. It was only in religion that people took out their
very souls and examined them for lurking sins; the days' duties were
what must be accomplished, whether or no. She knew she was not very
religious, the deep things seemed beyond her grasp. And there was a
certain joyousness in her love for sunshine, flowers, people, and all
the attractive things of life. She was deeply grateful, she raised her
heart in thankfulness to God for every good gift. And now she took up
the daily duties cheerfully. It was not their fault the shadow had
fallen over them.

Some days afterward she was rambling around aimlessly, when she met a
girl friend, and they chatted about various matters.

"Oh," exclaimed the friend, "there'll be another wedding in the autumn,
and Betty Upham is keeping steady company. I used to have an idea that
you and Ben would make a match----"

"It's Jenny Willing," she interrupted. "And I am heartily glad."

"You were all such friends;" looking puzzled.

"And I hope we will go on being friends. I have always liked Jenny."

"She was awfully afraid you'd cut her out. You know he did fancy you
first. I think she would have been very unhappy if she had missed him. I
don't see what there is about you, Cynthia;" studying her intently. "You
are pretty, but there are some handsome girls in Salem. And they run
after Ed Saltonstall as if there was no other man in town. And my advice
to you is to seize on him, for I think your chance best. He's an awful
flirt, though. I think good-looking men always are."

Cynthia flushed. Why should these things be profaned by foolish gossip.

Polly came over one afternoon. She had accomplished the bag and was
proud enough of it. And she announced Bentley's engagement.

"They will be married in the early fall; they are not going to build,
but have part of that double house of Nelsons'. She'll make a fine,
economical wife, and that is what men need who are trying to get along.
Assemblies and all that are not the thing for prudent married people."

"And one gets tired of them." She had a feeling just then that she
should never want to dance any more.

Cynthia was glad to have him settled, glad Jenny Willing had the man she
loved.

And the last time he had come back to her she had held up her finger to
him thoughtlessly, to shield herself from some other pointed attentions.
It had been a mean thing to do. But she had only meant it for that
evening, and he had gone on importunately. She was ashamed of it now.
Yes, she had better marry; then no one would be pleading for favors,
mistaking a simple smile for deeper meaning. Was her smile different
from that of other girls?

She watched Cousin Chilian narrowly. Was the old dear freedom between
them gone? He seemed rather abstracted. He did not call her into the
study, he went out oftener of an evening. Mr. Saltonstall would pass by,
then turn and walk up the path and sit down on the step. This would
occur several times a week. He asked her to ride with him, but she
shrank from that. She went over one evening on special invitation, when
Chilian was to play chess with the father. Mrs. Saltonstall took her in
quite as if she was one of the family, and really was very sweet to her.
And the old gentleman was fatherly.

That seemed to settle it for her, rather the fact that sank deeper in
her mind every day that Cousin Chilian wished her to marry and that this
young man was his preference. She allowed him to come a little nearer,
to hold her hand, to take nameless small freedoms, and he was always
delicate.

Would he be satisfied without all she could not help withholding? Would
it be right to give him a half love? But then how could she help loving
Cousin Chilian, who had been so tender to her in childhood? She would be
gladly content to stay without any nearer tie between them; of course,
that other could not be thought of.

One night Mr. Saltonstall asked her in a manly fashion. And suddenly a
great white light shot up in her heart, and loving one man she knew she
had no right to deceive another, to live a deception all her life long,
to cheat him--yes, it was that. Better a hundred times to live out her
flawed life alone.

"Oh, I cannot," she murmured. "I--I"--she choked down the strangling
sob.

"My little darling, give me the opportunity to teach you what love
really is. You do not know."




CHAPTER XVII

THE FLOWERING OF THE SOUL


Cynthia had said coldly that she did not wish to marry at present,
perhaps never. "I have been trying to love you to--to please some one
else, and it is a compliment for you to ask me. But any woman ought to
be sure before she makes a life-long promise. I must be honest--with
you, with myself."

Something in the solemn tone awed him. He had not been looking at the
serious side of love. She was pretty, bright, and winsome, with a good
deal of Puritan simplicity, a great power of enjoyment and difficult to
win. He liked to do the winning himself. He liked to find some new
qualities in girls, and Cynthia, with all her daintiness, had many sides
that surprised one. She had been brought up by a man--that made the
difference.

"We will wait a little," he said. "Talk to your cousin about it. I think
it will all come right. You are the first woman I ever desired to marry,
and I have been fond of girls, too."

That would have flattered some women. She said good-night in a strained,
breathless tone, and vanished through the door. He sat and thought.
There was no other lover, he was quite sure.

She went to bed at once. She did not cry, she was somehow stunned at
this revelation about herself, for she had resolved to accept him and
this sudden protest told her that it was quite impossible. If Cousin
Chilian was disappointed, if he was tired of her, there was a warm
welcome in Boston.

She did not sleep much. Rachel noted her heavy eyes, and the expression
as if she might be secretly upbraiding fate. What if Mr. Saltonstall had
been trifling?

Chilian went up to his study. He felt languid, he nearly always did now.
He took a book and sat by the open window. Two tall trees hid the
prospect, except a space of blooming garden. To-day a small outlook
pleased him, for his life was to be made narrower. She would come and
tell him--shut the golden gate forever. He could not, would not, enter
their paradise. Let him keep quite on the outside.

She came in a soft, white gown that clung to her virginal figure. The
swelling-out period had passed, even sleeves had collapsed to a small
puff, and for house wear the arms and neck were left bare.

The book was a Greek play. The letters danced before her eyes as she
stood there. He looked off the book, but not up at her.

"Cousin Chilian, I want to tell you"--her voice had the peculiar
softness that one uses to try to cover the hurt one cannot help
giving--"Mr. Saltonstall was here last evening. He has asked me to marry
him."

It seemed to her the silence lasted moments. Then he said in an
incurious tone, "Well?"

"I--will you be angry or disappointed when I confess that I cannot, that
I do not love him."

"Oh, Cynthia, child; what do you know about love?" he said impatiently.

"Enough to know that it would be wrong to take a man's love and give him
nothing in return." Now her voice was steady, convincing.

He had a sudden thought. Like a vision the stalwart form of the young
sailor rose before him. He had carried admiration, yes, love in his
eyes. What if he had carried more than that away?

"Cynthia, is there some one else, some one you _could_ love----"

"There is some one else." Her tone was very low, but brave. That
admission would settle the matter.

"Are you to wait three years for him?"

"For whom?" in surprise.

Then he glanced up. Her face, that had been lily-white, was flushed from
brow to neck. What was there in the beautiful, entreating eyes?

"Cynthia?" All his firmness gave way.

His arm stole softly around her, drew her a trifle down. "Tell me! Tell
me!" he cried, yet he had no idea he was asking her to lay her heart
bare. There was still the boy Anthony.

"Cousin Chilian, if a woman loved very much, would it be a shame to her
if, unasked, she----"

Her head sank down on his shoulder. He felt the warm, throbbing breath
on his cheek. He drew her closer. Did the slim, palpitating body betray
its secret?

"Oh, Cynthia, child, the most precious thing in all the world to me,
tell me that I will not have to give you to another, that I may keep you
to myself. For I cannot comprehend how so great a joy could come to me.
And whether I would have the right to take your sweet young life, that
should be replete with the joys of youth, with the gladness that is its
proper birthright."

"If I gave it to you? If I could never have given it to any other?"

He drew her down closer, and the gentle yielding, the sort of rapturous
sigh, answered him better than any words. He pressed kisses on the
unresisting lips, kisses that then were sacred to affianced lovers and
husbands.

Was it an hour or half a lifetime? He inclined her to his knee as he had
when she was a little girl, but at length he came back to his senses.

"Cynthia," he began with tender gravity, "there are many points to
consider. Do you know that I am more than double your age----"

"Don't tell that to me. Isn't love as sweet?"

Could he deny it in the face of that ravishing smile, those appealing
eyes.

"Still--the world will think about it. And you are a rich young woman,
you could take your pick of lovers----"

"But they are all so troublesome," she interrupted. "And one gets
affronted with the other. And if I picked very much I might be called a
flirt, perhaps I have been. I didn't want them, only to dance and be
merry with, and there are so many pretty girls in the world--enough for
all of them."

He smiled a little and it gave her a heartache to see how thin he had
grown, and there were new creases in his forehead that had been so fair
and smooth.

"And if some day you should repent?"

"I'm not going to repent. Why should one when one gets the thing one
wanted?"

There was a touch of the old brightness in her tone. Had she really
wanted him?

"I've been very naughty with all these lovers, haven't I? But no one
came near enough to really ask me that question until last night, though
Mr. Marsh thought he would if he were going to stay. And Cousin Chilian,
I had made up my mind truly, I thought, for I liked Mr. Saltonstall very
much, and it seemed to me you wanted me to----" Her voice died away in
pathos.

"I did. Oh, you must know the worst of me. When I found you were
growing into my very heart, and I began to feel jealous of the young
men, I took myself in hand as a most reprehensible old fellow. But I
found you had entwined yourself in every fibre of my heart, and it was
hard indeed to uproot you."

"And you really tried?" Her tone was upbraiding.

"I tried like an honest, upright man. I shall never be ashamed of the
effort. I would not mar or spoil your life. You see you might have loved
some of these brave young lads. You might have been very happy with
them."

"Oh, you can't have but one husband;" in laughing gayety.

He flushed at her mischief.

"I wonder when you began to love me? And what has made you so cold and
distant, as if you were taking your affection away?"

"I was--I was--Heaven forgive me! I was learning to live without you; to
go back to a life more solitary than it was before you came. And,
Cynthia, you were not altogether a welcome guest. I did not know what to
do with a little girl. I was set in my ways. I did not like to be
disturbed. I could have sent a boy off to school. And Elizabeth thought
it a trouble, too. You must read your father's letter and see the trust
he reposed in me. But you were such a strange, shy little thing, and so
delicate in all your ways. You never touched an article without
permission, you handled books so gently, you never made dog's-ears, or
crumpled a page. And that winter you were ill--and the faith you had in
his return. How many times my heart ached for you. After that I could
not have given you up, and I fell into a sort of belief that it would go
on this always. When the lovers began to come, I found I must awake from
my delusion. And then I knew that an oldish fellow could love a sweet
girl in her first bloom, but that it would be a selfish, unpardonable
thing."

"Not if she loved him!" She raised her face in all its sweet bravery of
color.

"But it was his duty to let her see what pleasure there was in the world
for youth; it was the promise to her dead father, who had confided his
treasure to him. And even now he hesitates, lest you shall not have the
best of everything."

"I shall have the best;" with winning confidence.

"I loved your mother. I was a young lad, and she some five years older.
I suppose I was like a young brother to her, because your father, her
lover, had been here so much. And somehow, you slipped into the place
where there never had been any other."

"It must have been kept for me," she said gravely. "And now I give you
warning that I shall never go out of it. No place could ever be so dear
as this house with all its memories. I am glad you knew and loved my
mother."

It came noon before they were talked out, or before they had settled
only one point, about which she would have her way. She wrote a pretty
note to Mr. Saltonstall, reiterating some things she had said the
evening before, and acknowledging that when she had tried to accept him,
she had found her heart was another's, "and you are worthy of a woman's
best love," she added, which did comfort him.

Still it puzzled him a good deal, but he finally settled upon Anthony
and thought it a rather foolish choice. No doubt but that Giles Leverett
was back of it all.

They told Cousin Eunice and Miss Winn. The former cried for sheer joy.
She seemed older than her years, but she was well and bid fair to live
years yet.

"Then you will never go away. I could not live without you, and as for
Chilian----"

"It would only be half a life," returned the lover, and he kissed Cousin
Eunice.

Miss Winn hardly knew whether to be pleased or not. She liked Mr.
Saltonstall very much for his gayety, good humor, and fine presence, and
then he had the divine gift of youth to match hers. Would she not tire
of Chilian Leverett's grave life?




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PASSING OF OLD SALEM


After all, they were foolish lovers. She did not hoard up any sweetness.
If he could not look forward to so many years, she must give him a
double portion. That was her only regret about him, and she never
confessed that.

He was surprised at himself. If she had loved another, the wound of
loneliness must have bled inwardly until it sapped his life. Oh, how
daintily sweet she was! Every day he found some new trait.

"You see," she explained to Miss Winn, "we shall all keep together.
Father trusted you to the uttermost, and you have been nobly loyal. I
couldn't do without you. And no one could look so well after Cousin
Eunice, who will keep growing older."

That was true enough. She was very well content in her home, and at her
time of life did not care to try a new one. Cynthia was almost like a
child to her.

Meanwhile matters had not gone prosperously with old Salem, England had
claimed her right of search, against which the country strongly
protested. The British government issued orders, and the French Emperor
decrees, forbidding ships of neutrals to enter the ports, or engage in
trade with their respective enemies. This crippled the trade of Salem.
Then there had been the embargo, which for a while closed the ports. But
the town went on improving. Fortunes had been made and now were being
spent. But much of the shipping lay idle. Yet the social life went on,
there was marrying and giving in marriage.

Of course, there was some gossip about the Saltonstall fiasco. No one,
at least very few, supposed a sensible girl would give up such an
opportunity to settle herself. Miss Cynthia would no doubt use her best
efforts to get him back. She seemed superbly indifferent to the gossip.

At first Chilian insisted upon an engagement of some length, so that she
might be sure of the wisdom of the step. But she only laughed in her
charming fashion, and declared she would not give up the old house, much
more its owner.

But they had a quiet wedding, with only the choicest friends, and then
they went to Boston to escape the wonderings. Cousin Giles was really
displeased.

"It's an unfair thing for an old fellow like you to do. And you had
money enough of your own; her fortune should have gone to help some nice
young fellow along. Why, really Cynthia has hardly outgrown childhood.
You might have been her father!"

"Hardly!" returned Chilian dryly.

On their return the house was opened and really crowded with guests.
Cynthia was in her most splendid attire. Happiness had certainly
improved Chilian Leverett, he had gained some flesh and looked younger.
The most beautiful belongings had been brought out to decorate the
rooms.

"For I am not going to have them stored away for possible
grandchildren," she declared gayly.

And the guests had a charming welcome. The younger girls were truly glad
she had made her election, and no one could deny that she was very much
in love with her husband. Neither had need to marry for money, since
both had fortunes. And they wished her health and happiness with all
their hearts.

Jane had said to her, "Mis' Leverett, there's an old adage:

          "'Change the name and not the letter,
           You marry for worse and not for better.'"

Cynthia laughed. "I'm not going to let signs or omens trouble me. And I
haven't even changed my name, so the letter cannot count. And it is one
of the good old Salem names. It was my dear father's."

One incident touched Cynthia deeply. Eunice took her up in the garret
one day and exhumed from a chest the beautiful white quilt of
Elizabeth's handiwork. Pinned to one corner was a card, "For my little
Cynthia."

"Only a few days before she had her stroke she made me write this and
go up and pin it on the quilt. Maybe she'd had a warning, people do
sometimes. I supposed she'd leave it to Chilian. Oh, my dear, she'd be
so glad to have you go on in the old house if she could know."

Eunice wiped the tears from her eyes. Cynthia bent over and kissed among
the stitches the poor fingers had toiled at day after day, sorry for the
toil, glad for the love that came at the last.

The Leverett house opened its doors with a generous hospitality. People,
men at least, began to think of something beside money-making, and some
fine plans were broached. Chilian Leverett seemed to grow younger.
Cynthia should not miss the joys of youth out of her life. He did
something more than dance minuets, for her sake he essayed quadrilles.
The exquisite motion with her, her dainty hand in his, or at times
resting on his shoulder, filled him with an all-pervading delight.

"Chilian, do you realize that you are a really beautiful dancer?" she
said one evening after they had returned from a small company.

"Then I must have caught it from you. In my youth dancing was considered
frivolous."

"And in India you hire the men and women to dance for you, and follow
the enchanting motions with your eye. But it is so warm out there."

She had been playing one evening when she started up, exclaiming, "Let
us try that new thing--the waltz. It is just made for two people very
much in love."

"It is?" He smiled in the eager face. It was said that she could twist
him around her finger. "Why, we have no music."

"I can sing the measure, just la, la!" and she started the melody. There
were two long paths of moonlight through the wide-open shutters.
Moonlight and sunshine were welcome visitors. She held out her hands.
Just that way she had charmed others, and he yielded to the seductive
influence. For, oh, she was so young and sweet.

It was a little awkward at first, but they soon found the steps. It was
rather slow and graceful, not the mad whirl of later times. It _was_
considered rather reprehensible, but between husband and wife it was
right enough. They found it very fascinating.

After a while a sort of grave, sweet seriousness came over her. She
liked to sit in the study and have him read poetry to her while she
sewed. She had never loved sewing, but now she had taken a fancy to it.
Dainty little lacey things, with the softest of muslins, treasures that
had come from India. For there were stacks of towels and sheets and
useful articles, so why should she bother about them?

Jane was married and a middle-aged, homeless widow was very glad to
come. Miss Winn took the head of the housekeeping, and Cousin Eunice was
very willing.

Then there came to them both a little son. Women often dream of babies
of their own, but men have so many outside interests. There really were
people at that time who thought children a boon and blessing of the
Lord. Chilian Leverett was amazed, rendered speechless with joy. His own
little son, Cynthia's little son, the life and love of both hearts. His
cup of joy and thankfulness ran over. For he had never imagined there
could be such perfect bliss. He thought over the time when the little
girl had come, and he had not wanted her. Now she had brought him life's
choicest blessing.

Meanwhile events ran on which were to thrill all hearts and make
stirring history. For war had been declared.

Handsome, pleasure-loving Edward Saltonstall volunteered in the army.
Perilous times there were on the northern frontier, dreadful losses, few
gains, until suddenly the Lake battles changed the aspect and won the
splendid victories that thrilled every heart.

But Salem's almost meteoric prosperity came to a sudden halt, for there
was war on the high seas as well. The whole mercantile marine was
refitted and turned out to win what it might in other channels.
Privateering was held right enough in those days.

There was the electrifying capture of the _Guerrière_ and her being
towed into Boston with Captain Dacres as a prisoner, and another to be
quite as famous, that of the _United States_ and the _Macedonia_, where
the American loss seemed incredibly small. Other splendid victories as
well. But it was not until February, 1815, after nearly four years of
struggle and war, that peace was again declared with the Colonies as
victorious. America had won her right to the liberty of the seas, as
well as that of the land.

But the supremacy of trade no longer could be claimed for Salem. Other
ports were built up, other markets opened. Cities saw the advantage of
foreign trade. American products were shipped hither and thither. No one
city had the monopoly.

But romances flourished all the same and were to be handed down to other
generations. There was the old Forester house, with its legends, its
lovely gardens, and fine pictures. And the beautiful house of Elias
Hasket Derby, in which he had lived but such a short time. No one felt
rich enough then to undertake such a costly establishment, and finally
the estate came into possession of the city, and the big area was named
Derby Square, and a commodious market built and a Town Hall. When that
was opened President Monroe made a visit to Salem, and was
enthusiastically received there, citizens thronging to see him. The next
day Judge Story entertained him, and Mr. Stephen White, of Washington
Square, gave a ball in his honor. The Leveretts were among the guests,
and Captain Edward Saltonstall, who had won promotions by brave conduct
under General Harrison, but was now a private citizen and a fine-looking
man, with a new bevy of girls as eager for his attentions as the others
were seven or eight years before.

There was another guest who claimed, or at least received, a good share
of attention. This was the naval Captain Marsh, who had been in the
encounter between the _Macedonia_ and the frigate _United States_,
Captain Decatur, which was considered one of the greatest of the naval
battles. For his bravery then and afterward, he had been promoted and
was now a captain in command of a fine vessel.

Cynthia was delighted to see him; but she said he must visit them to
talk over matters and the wonders that had happened to him. She would
not dance any, although she was in the grand march with her husband. Mr.
Saltonstall she saw quite frequently. His parents were quite old people
and he was devoted to them.

She wondered at times if any old fancy kept him single. If so, she was
sincerely sorry. For she had been very, very happy with the husband of
her love. And in the household there were two merry, frolicking boys,
and a sweet little girl, with her mother's eyes.

Captain Marsh did come and he was delighted with his visit. The little
boys climbed over him as if they had known him always. He told the story
of the terrific battle at the Canaries, and many another battle that had
left him unscathed.

"And I used to think if I came back to old Salem and found you
unmarried, it would go hard with me if I could not win you," he said to
Cynthia in his cordial, manly fashion. "And I confess to you now if Dame
Wilby had struck you that day at school, I should have rushed at her
like a tiger. I like that remembrance of you standing there so brave and
defying."

They both laughed over it.

She had changed very little. Chilian said she grew younger with the
birth of every baby. She was happy and merry, truly the light of the
house, and Cousin Eunice was the happiest grandmother in all of Salem.
Miss Winn shared their joys--so far there had been no sorrows.

Chilian grew a little stouter with advancing years, which really
improved him. He took a warm interest in the new projects. There was the
Essex Historical Society, gathering portraits and relics of the older
Salem, and the East India Marine Society was enlarging its scope. The
new Salem was to be curiously intellectual, historic, and one might say
antiquarian. Modernized and transformed in many respects, it still has
the old-time fragrance of sandalwood and incense when the chests in the
old garrets are turned over for fine things that came from India a
century before.

Cousin Giles aged more rapidly, but then he was considerably older than
Chilian. He did adopt young Anthony, and insisted upon his taking the
name of Leverett, and a share of the business burthens. And he married
quite to the approval of the elder man, though not such an heiress as
Cynthia.

And no one was dreaming that the little boy born in Union Street in 1804
was to add such interest and lustre to his native town that the scenes
of his curious wizard-like romances were to be settled upon by those
interested in them and handed down as actual occurrences. Do we not all
know Hester Prynne and Mr. Dimmesdale, Phebe and Hephzibah and Judge
Pyncheon, and weird old Dr. Grimshawe, and many another that have
flitted through the pages of Hawthorne's strange romances, leaving Salem
the richer by the memories?

There was another little girl who was to grow up and take a great
interest in all these things, and finally to see the old Leverett house
pass away, after its more than two hundred years. But it was a new and
doubly interesting Salem then, with its several evolutions that have
passed and gone.

She lived a long and happy life, this little girl who came back to her
birthplace consigned to Chilian Leverett's care, and won his love that
never changed, or grew any less. Her sons never tired of the old
reminiscences. Many of the old houses were still standing. Here
President Washington had been entertained; here the artist Copley had
lived and painted portraits that are heirlooms; Justice Story and his
gifted son, poet and artist; Prescott, the historian, and many another
of whom the country is proud to-day, and civilians whose fine thought
and noble work have made the city a Mecca for intellectual tourists, and
a beautiful and interesting abiding-place for her citizens, a town of
three striking epochs that linger not only in tradition but in history.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes:

   Obvious punctuation errors were corrected.

   Table of Contents, the final "VIII" was changed to "XVIII".

   Page 41, "spinnet" changed to "spinet". (a thin-legged spinet)

   Page 148, "exlaining" changed to "explaining". (fond of explaining)

   Page 174, "Chilan's" changed to "Chilian's". (Cousin Chilian's
             memory)

   Page 200, "detatched" changed to "detached". (of detached sounds)

   Page 216, "beutifully" changed to "beautifully". (a beautifully
             engraved)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE GIRL IN OLD SALEM***


******* This file should be named 20722-8.txt or 20722-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/7/2/20722



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
