The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Outdoor Girls in the Saddle, by Laura Lee
Hope


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Outdoor Girls in the Saddle
       Or, The Girl Miner of Gold Run


Author: Laura Lee Hope



Release Date: September 18, 2006  [eBook #19318]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE***


E-text prepared by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Emmy, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 19318-h.htm or 19318-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/3/1/19318/19318-h/19318-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/3/1/19318/19318-h.zip)





THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE

or The Girl Miner of Gold Run

by

LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of "The Outdoor Girls of Deepdale," "The Outdoor Girls at Wild
Rose Lodge," "The Moving Picture Girls," "The Bobbsey Twins," "Bunny
Brown and His Sister Sue," "Six Little Bunkers at Grandma Bell's," Etc.

Illustrated







New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers
Made in the United States of America


       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS FOR GIRLS

BY LAURA LEE HOPE

       *       *       *       *       *

12mo. Cloth. Illustrated.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES

          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN ARMY SERVICE
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT THE HOSTESS HOUSE
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT BLUFF POINT
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT WILD ROSE LODGE
          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS SERIES

          THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS AT OAK FARM
          THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS SNOWBOUND
          THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS UNDER THE PALMS
          THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS AT ROCKY RANCH
          THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS AT SEA
          THE MOVING PICTURE GIRLS IN WAR PLAYS

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BOBBSEY TWINS SERIES

(Fifteen Titles)

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BUNNY BROWN SERIES

(Twelve Titles)

       *       *       *       *       *

SIX LITTLE BUNKERS SERIES

(Eight Titles)


       *       *       *       *       *


Grosset & Dunlap, Publishers, New York
Copyright, 1922, by Grosset & Dunlap


       *       *       *       *       *



THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE

[Illustration: A LANDSLIDE--AND THEY WERE DIRECTLY IN ITS PATH!

_The Outdoor Girls in the Saddle._ _Frontispiece_--(_Page_ 96)]




CONTENTS

          CHAPTER                           PAGE

              I A SUMMER IN THE SADDLE        1

             II GREAT HOPES                   9

            III ENTER PETER LEVINE           22

             IV AN IMITATION HOLD-UP         33

              V THE HANDSOME COWBOY          43

             VI AT THE RANCH                 52

            VII A SUDDEN STORM               62

           VIII ALONG THE TRAIL              72

             IX DANGER AHEAD                 81

              X THE LANDSLIDE                88

             XI IN THE CAVE                  97

            XII IN THE DARKNESS             106

           XIII THE LURE OF GOLD            112

            XIV A DISCOVERY                 120

             XV ALLEN ARRIVES               129

            XVI A TIP                       137

           XVII THE NET TIGHTENS            145

          XVIII IN THE SHADOWS              154

            XIX THE NEW MINE                165

             XX THE VIOLINIST AGAIN         173

            XXI A STARTLING TALE            180

           XXII THE PLAN                    188

          XXIII GREAT DAYS                  198

           XXIV THE END OF PETER LEVINE     202

            XXV INNOCENT                    210




THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE




CHAPTER I

A SUMMER IN THE SADDLE


"Hello, hello! Oh, what is the matter with central!"

The dark-haired, pink-cheeked girl at the telephone jiggled the receiver
impatiently while a straight line of impatience marred her pretty mouth.

"Oh dear, oh dear!"

"At last! Is that you, Mollie Billette? I've been trying to get you for
the last half hour. What's that? You've been home all morning twiddling
your thumbs and wondering what to do with yourself? Of course! I knew it
was central's fault all the time! Now listen! Goodness, what are you
having over at your house? A jazz dance or something? I can hardly hear
you speak for the noise."

"No, it isn't a dance," came back Mollie's voice wearily from the other
end of the wire. "It's just the twins. They want to talk to you. Hold
the wire a minute while I shut them in the other room."

Followed a silence during which Betty Nelson could distinctly hear the
wails of Mollie's little brother and sister as they were ushered
forcibly into an adjoining room. Then Mollie's voice again at the phone.

"Hello," she said. "Still there, Betty? Guess I can hear you a little
better now. Mother's out, and I've been taking care of the twins. Just
rescued the cat from being dumped head down in the flour barrel."

"Sounds natural," laughed the dark-haired, pink-cheeked one, as she
visualized Mollie's little brother and sister, Dodo and Paul. They were
twins, and always in trouble.

"Anything special you called up about?" asked Mollie's voice from the
other end of the wire. "Want to go for a ride or something?"

"Not the kind of ride you mean," said the brown-eyed, pink-cheeked one,
with a knowing little smile on her lips.

At the lilt in her voice Mollie, at her end of the wire, sat up and
stared inquiringly into the black mouth of the telephone.

"Betty," she said hopefully, "you are hiding something from me. You
have something up your sleeve."

"You're right and wrong," giggled Betty. "I'm hiding something from you,
but I can't get it up my sleeve, it's too big!"

"Hurry up!" commanded Mollie in terrific accents. "Are you going to tell
me what's on your mind, Betty Nelson?"

"When will you be around?" countered Betty.

"In five minutes."

"Good!"

"Betty, wait! Is it good news?"

"The best ever," and Betty rang off.

She twinkled at the telephone for a minute, then called another number.

"That you, Gracie?"

The fair-haired, tall, and very graceful girl at the other end of the
wire acknowledged that it was.

"Please suggest something interesting, Betty," she added plaintively, as
she took a chocolate from the ever-present candy box and nibbled on it
discontentedly. "I woke up with the most awful attack of the blues this
morning."

"What, with a whole summer full of blessed idleness before you?" mocked
Betty.

"Too much idleness," grumbled Grace. "That's the trouble."

"Enter," said Betty drolly, "Doctor Elizabeth Nelson."

Grace digested this remark for a moment, staring at the telephone in
much the same manner as Mollie had done a few minutes before. Then she
swallowed the last of her chocolate in such haste that it almost choked
her.

"Betty," she said, "I have heard you use that tone before. Is there
really something in the wind?"

"Come and see," said Betty and a click at the other end of the wire told
Grace that the conversation was over.

"Oh bother!" she cried, her pretty forehead drawn into a frown. "Now I
suppose I've got to get dressed and go over there before I can find out
what she meant."

In the hall she nearly ran into her mother, who was dressed to go out.
Mrs. Ford was a handsome woman, prominent in the social circles of
Deepdale. She was kindly and sympathetic, and all who knew her loved
her.

So now, as she regarded her mother, a loving smile erased the frown from
Grace's forehead.

"I declare, Mother, you look younger than I do," she said fondly.
"Whither away so early?"

"The art club, this morning," replied Mrs. Ford, her eyes approving the
fair prettiness of her daughter. "Are you going out? I thought you were
deep in that new book."

"I was," said Grace, with a sigh for what might have been. "But Betty
called up and said she wanted me to come over. There's something in the
wind, that's sure, but she wouldn't give me even the teeniest little
hint of what it was. I wasn't going at first, but I----"

"Thought better of it," finished Mrs. Ford, with a smile. "Better go,"
she added, as she opened the door. "My experience with Betty Nelson is
that she usually has something interesting to say. Good-by, dear. If any
one should 'phone while you are here, will you tell them that I shan't
be back till late afternoon?"

Grace promised that she would and moved slowly up the stairs.

Meanwhile Amy Blackford, the last of the trio to whom the dark-haired,
pink-cheeked little person who was Betty Nelson had telephoned, had
stopped merely to remove the apron from in front of her pink-checked
gingham dress and was now flying along the two short blocks that
separated her house from the Nelsons'.

As for poor Mollie Billette, she was nearly distracted. Torn with
curiosity, as that young person very often was, to know the facts that
had prompted Betty's early call, she yet could not satisfy that
curiosity. When she had told Betty that she would be around in five
minutes she had fully meant to make that promise good. But--she had
forgotten the twins!

Upon entering the room where she had locked them while she talked to
Betty, she found a sight that fairly took her breath away.

Unfortunately, some one had left an open bottle of ink on the table. One
of the twins, deciding to play "savages," had pounced upon the ink
bottle as a means of making the play more realistic!

"Oh, Dodo! Oh, Paul! How could you be so naughty?" moaned Mollie,
sinking to the floor, while the tears of exasperation rolled down her
face.

"Paul did it," accused Dodo, waving a pudgy, ink-stained little fist in
the direction of her brother. "He said, 'let's use this ink and play
we're savagers----'"

It was upon this scene that Mollie's little French-American mother, Mrs.
Billette, came a moment later.

"Oh! Oh!" she cried, raising her hands in the French gesture all French
people know so well. "What is this? Mollie, have you gone quite mad?"

Whereupon Mollie shook the tears of woe from her eyes and explained to
her mother just what had happened.

"And I was in such a hurry to get to Betty's," she finished dismally. "I
just know she has something exciting to tell us. And now I don't suppose
I will get there for hours."

"Oh yes, you will," said Mrs. Billette, with the delicious, almost
imperceptible, accent she had. "The ink has not yet dried, and luckily
there is not much about the room. Run along, dear. I fully realize," she
added, with the smile that made Mollie adore her, "that this, with you,
is a very important occasion."

"And you are the most precious mother in the world!" cried Mollie,
flinging young arms about her mother and giving her a joyful hug. "I
might have known you would understand." And before the words were fairly
out of her mouth she was flying up the stairs.

When she reached Betty's house at last, out of breath but happy, she
found that Grace and Amy were there before her. She found them all,
including Betty, up in Betty's room, a pretty place done in ivory and
blue, awaiting her coming as patiently as they could.

"Betty wouldn't tell us a thing until you came," was the greeting Grace
flung at her.

"So don't be surprised if you aren't very popular around here," laughed
Betty, sitting very straight in her wicker chair, feet stretched out and
crossed in front of her, hands tightly clasped in her lap. Her face was
a pretty picture of animation.

"Who cares for popularity?" cried Mollie, as she flung her sport hat on
the bed and turned to face Betty. "Betty Nelson, bring out that
surprise."

"Who said it was a surprise?" asked Betty tantalizingly, but the next
minute her face sobered and she regarded the girls gravely.

"Girls," she said, "I think I see a chance for the most glorious outing
we have had yet. How would you like----" she paused and regarded the
expectant girls thoughtfully. "How would you like a summer _in the
saddle_?"

"In the saddle?" repeated Grace wonderingly, but Mollie broke in with a
quick:

"Betty, do you mean on horseback?"

"Real horses?" breathed Amy Blackford.

"Yes," said Betty, nodding. "That's just exactly what I mean."




CHAPTER II

GREAT HOPES


"But where are we to do all this?" asked Grace skeptically. "Is somebody
giving away steeds for the asking? Wake me up, somebody, when Betty gets
through dreaming."

"Keep still, you old wet blanket," cried Mollie. "Can't you see Betty is
really in earnest?"

"Never mind them," said Amy, leaning a little breathlessly toward Betty.
"Let them fight it out between themselves. What is the great news,
Betty?"

"It _is_ great news," said Betty radiantly. "Listen, my children. Mother
has received a legacy from a great uncle that she had almost forgotten
she had."

"Money?" queried Grace, interested.

"No, that's the best part of it," said Betty. "Oh, girls, it's a ranch,
a great big beautiful ranch in the really, truly west!"

"Honest-to-goodness, wild and woolly?" queried Mollie, beaming.

"Better than that," answered Betty with the same lilt to her voice that
the girls had heard over the telephone. "I shouldn't wonder if we should
find the real old-fashioned, movie kind of cowboys there--sombreros, fur
leggings, bandannas, and all."

"But where," interrupted Mollie, who had been waiting with more or less
patience for Betty to come to the point, "do we come in, in all this? I
fail to see----"

"Oh hush," cried Betty, her eyes dancing. "You interrupt entirely too
much. Where do we come in, she wants to know," she paused to bestow a
beaming glance on Grace and Amy. "That's the biggest joke of all. Where
do we come in? Why, honey dear, we're the whole show!"

"The whole show," they murmured, beginning to see the light.

"You bet," said the brown-haired, rosy-checked one slangily. "Now
listen. I think I've about argued mother and dad around to the point
where they'll agree to let us have the use of this wild and woolly
rancho for a real outdoor adventure. How does that idea strike you?"

"Listen to the child," cried Mollie pityingly. "Such a question!"

"It would be heavenly!" raved Grace. "Think of riding around all day in
fur leggings and a sombrero. Wide hats are always becoming to me," she
added musingly.

The girls laughed and Betty threw a pillow at her, missing her by a
hair's breadth.

"You needn't worry about your hat," laughed Betty. "Reckon there won't
be anybody around there to admire you but Indians and broncho busters."

"Oh, aren't the boys coming?" Grace asked, her disappointment in her
voice.

"They haven't been asked, silly," Mollie interrupted impatiently. "Tell
me, Betty," she cried, turning to the Little Captain. "Is it really
certain that we'll have this chance?"

"No, it isn't," admitted Betty, her bright face sobering. "That's why I
don't want you to get too excited about it. You see," her voice lowered
confidentially, "dad might decide to sell it."

"Sell it!" they cried in dismay, and Grace added, with a decision that
made the girls laugh:

"Oh, he mustn't do that until the fall, anyway."

"All right, Gracie," said Betty, with a chuckle. "I'll give dad his
orders."

"But why does he want to sell it, Betty?" Amy questioned.

"We-el," said the Little Captain slowly. "You see mother has already
received an offer of fifteen thousand dollars for it. There's a ranchman
out there, I think his name is John Josephs, or some such name, who
seems to want to get hold of our ranch. So his lawyers have offered
mother fifteen thousand for it."

"That's a pretty good lot of money," said Amy thoughtfully.

"Yes, it is," agreed Betty. "And dad seems to think that the best thing
mother could do would be to take the money and get rid of the ranch. He
says it will be a sort of white elephant on our hands, since there isn't
very much chance of our going out there to live," she ended, with a
chuckle.

"Well," said Grace, with an injured air, "I don't see why you called us
all over here just to disappoint us. If your father is going to sell the
place, then we certainly sha'n't be able to make ourselves beautiful
with bandannas and picturesque hats----"

"Ah, but you did not let me finish," hissed Betty, melodramatically. "We
have one ally--my mother."

"Your mother!" cried Mollie, eagerly. "Then she doesn't want to sell the
ranch?"

"Right, the first time," cried Betty hilariously. "I think mother has a
sneaking notion that she might look pretty good in a cowboy make-up
herself. You see," she added, with a twinkle, "mother has never had a
chance to own a real honest-to-goodness ranch before."

"Oh, isn't she sweet!" cried Mollie fervently, adding, as one to whom
inspiration had come: "I tell you what, Betty, we'll take her with us!"

"How sweet of you," drawled Grace. "Especially since the ranch belongs
to her!"

The other girls chuckled and Mollie looked rather sheepish.

"Oh, well," she admitted, "I guess it would be a case of her taking us
along."

"And I don't envy her the job," said gentle Amy unexpectedly, while the
girls gazed their reproach.

"Betty," said Mollie, "there is one very important thing that I would
like to know."

"Well, I'm the original little information bureau," Betty assured her.
"What will you have?"

"Does your dad really want to sell the ranch? Or is your mother likely
to win out?"

"Oh, mother always gets her way," said Betty confidently, adding:
"Besides, the ranch was left to mother, you know, and not to dad. So
really she has the say about it."

"Yes, but she might change her mind," said Grace pessimistically.
"Fifteen thousand dollars is a lot of money, you know. She might decide
to sell the ranch, after all."

"Well," said Betty, with an air of importance that the girls were quick
to notice, "there is another reason why mother will probably hold on to
the property, for a little while at least."

"Yes?" they queried eagerly.

"You see," Betty continued thoughtfully, "mother has an idea that this
John Josephs is a little too anxious to buy the ranch. It's right up in
the gold region, you know----"

"Gold!" shrieked Mollie. "You never said a word about gold, Betty
Nelson! Do you mean there may be gold----"

"Now she _is_ getting interesting," admitted Grace, shaken out of her
usual calm.

"How romantic," murmured Amy, breathing fast.

"Yes," said Betty ruefully. "That's what dad says mother is--romantic!
He says there isn't a chance in a thousand that there is real gold
anywhere near that ranch----"

"Stop, woman, stop!" cried Mollie, with her most tragic scowl. "Wouldst
put an end to all our dreams in one fell swoop----"

"Probably that is all we shall do--just dream," said Betty, insisting
upon being practical. "It's an idea of mother's, that's all. But she is
really determined to see the ranch, at least, before she makes up her
mind whether to sell or not. In fact," she hesitated, colored a little,
then went on bravely, "dad has decided to send Allen out there to look
up the title. There is some trouble about that, I think----"

"Oh, now we know why she is so anxious to be a little cow girl," teased
Grace, while the others regarded Betty's pretty color gleefully.

"Oh, Betty, Betty!" cried Mollie, shaking her head dolefully, "you are
altogether hopeless!"

For Allen Washburn, of whom Betty had spoken in connection with the
ranch, was a very promising young lawyer. Also this promising young
lawyer was very fond of Betty Nelson. And while the girls are shaking
their heads over this fact a little time will be taken to describe the
Outdoor Girls to those readers who have not already met them and to
review briefly the many and varied adventures they had had up to this
time.

Betty Nelson, dark-haired, dark-eyed, and rosy-cheeked, was the natural
leader of the four Outdoor Girls, a fact which had led to her being
dubbed "Little Captain" by the adoring girls. Betty's father, Charles
Nelson, had made a good deal of money in his manufacture of carpets,
and Betty's mother was a very sweet lady whom the name of Rose fitted
exactly.

Next came Mollie Billette, dark-haired and with snapping black eyes, who
was almost as French in her manner as her very French mother.

Readers of the present volume must already feel very well acquainted
with Grace Ford. Grace was the Gibson type, tall and slender and
fair-haired and very pretty, with a decided liking for looking in
mirrors.

Last of the quartette came Amy Blackford. Amy was the ward of John and
Sarah Stonington, and for a long time she had thought her own name was
Stonington. The mystery of her past had been cleared up, however, and
Amy had come into her own. Shy, gentle, sweet, she was beloved and
protected by the more hardy and active Betty and Mollie. And Amy, as shy
girls sometimes will, had begun to think very much of Grace Ford's
attractive brother, Will--which is a reminder that it is time to
introduce "the boys."

Allen Washburn and his open fondness for Betty have already been spoken
of. Allen was tall, nearly six feet. Sunburned and handsome of face and
quick of action, Allen attracted every one wherever he went. And, truly,
Betty was no exception to this rule! Allen had been one of the first to
volunteer his services to the good old army of the U. S. A., and while
he had gone over only a buck private, he had come back a lieutenant.

There was Will Ford, Grace's brother, whom Grace and Amy both adored.
Will had been in the secret service when our country entered the war,
and because of this he had been the victim of considerable
misunderstanding. Afterward he had joined the army with the other boys.
This was after some skillful secret service work that won the praise of
the government, as well as the fervent admiration of the boys and girls.

The other two boys were Frank Haley and Roy Anderson who had come into
the little group because of their friendship for Will and Allen. They
were fine, clean-cut, likable boys, who had come through the war with
colors flying.

The young folks had lived all their lives in Deepdale, a thriving little
city with a population of about fifteen thousand people and situated in
the heart of New York State. Deepdale was situated on the Argono River,
a beautiful and romantic stream where pleasure craft of all sorts
disported themselves. A branch line of the railroad connected with the
main line directly to what the four Outdoor Girls believed to be the
most wonderful of all cities, New York.

The name of "Outdoor Girls" had come to the quartette from the fact
that they invariably spent their summer vacations, and winter holidays
also, in some sort of outdoor sport. They could ride, swim, play tennis,
drive, and, in fact, do everything that is expected of the athletic
young girl of to-day.

They would never forget that first tramping tour when they had tramped
for miles over the country, meeting with a great many unusual adventures
on the way, as related in the first volume of this series, entitled,
"The Outdoor Girls of Deepdale." Nor those other times at Rainbow Lake,
in Florida, at Ocean View, and later at Pine Island, where they had come
across that marvelous, mysterious gypsy cave.

Then had come the war with the boys on the other side, and the girls
doing their "bit" at a Hostess House. And a little later what black
distress overwhelmed them, when Will Ford was reported wounded and
Allen's name was among the missing! This all happened while they were at
Bluff Point taking a much-needed vacation from their work at the Hostess
House.

In the volume directly preceding this, entitled "The Outdoor Girls at
Wild Rose Lodge," the girls had had same very exciting experiences. An
old man, Professor Dempsey, by name, who had retired to a little log
cabin in the woods to recover his health, had chanced to do the girls a
very great favor. Of course the girls were grateful to him and were very
much interested when he told them of his two sons who were in the war.
Later, when the girls read of the death of his two sons in the paper,
they went to the old man's lonely cabin in the woods, but found
themselves too late. According to a friendly neighbor, the old man had
become temporarily insane at the terrible news, had wrecked his cabin in
an insane frenzy, and disappeared.

Later, at Wild Rose Lodge, the girls were frightened several times by a
strange apparition lurking in the woods around the lodge and Moonlight
Falls, a beautiful fall of water not far from the cottage where the
girls were staying. Later the boys came home from France and helped the
girls solve the mystery.

And now here was Betty proposing another outing that promised to be more
fun than any the Outdoor Girls had had yet. No wonder that in the clamor
of their excited questions and answers no one heard the telephone
ringing noisily in the hall.

Finally the Nelsons' maid came trudging up the stairs to answer it
herself.

"If I can hear myself think," she grumbled, as she took the receiver
from the hook. "With all them girls a-gabberin' an' a-talkin' at the
top o' their lungs. Hello--I can't hear you--you'll have to talk
louder--you don't know the noise they is in this house. Miss
Betty?--jus' a minute----"

"A gen'leman to speak to you, Miss Betty," she announced a moment later,
looking in on the hilarious girls. "An' le's hope you can hear him
better'n I could, that's all," she grumbled, as Betty pushed by her in
the doorway and gave her a friendly pat on the shoulder.

"Oh, they'll keep quiet now, all right," she said, with a laughing
glance over her shoulder at her chums. "They'll want to hear what I have
to say."

At which taunt the girls started such a dreadful clamor that she really
had all she could do to hear Allen at the other end of the wire. Oh,
yes, it was Allen!

"Sech a noise," grumbled the maid, as she trudged down the steps again.
"I never did see sech wild uns!"

"Hello, hello, Allen," called Betty into the telephone. "The girls are
here and--what's that? At Walnut Street? All right, that will be fine. I
can't talk now. Tell you why later. Yes, we'll be there. Don't be silly.
Good-by!"

Her face was flushed when she confronted the girls again.

"The boys have a half holiday--it's Saturday, you know," she told them,
while they regarded her mischievously. "And they want us to pick them up
in the car, get some lunch somewhere, and make a day of it. I told him
we would."

"By 'him' I suppose you mean Allen," said Mollie, to which Betty ducked
her a bow and the other girls giggled. "I like their nerve wanting us to
pick them up. Why doesn't Frank come for us in his big car?"

"Allen figured it would take too long for them to come home and get it."

"My, they must be in a hurry to see us," said Grace, with a simper that
sent the girls off into gales of laughter.

"Well," said Betty finally, "are you coming, or are you not?"

For answer Mollie jumped up, pressed a hat upon Grace's indignant head,
handed Amy her coat, and crushed her own sport hat down on her dark
hair.

"Be this our answer," she said dramatically.




CHAPTER III

ENTER PETER LEVINE


It is to be feared that the boys did not have as pleasant a time on that
Saturday afternoon motor drive as they had hoped to have. For, whereas
the girls should have showered their attentions upon them, the boys,
they insisted upon talking about nothing but Gold Run Ranch, which was
the name of the property left to Mrs. Nelson by her great uncle.

"You aren't very complimentary to us," Frank grumbled, as he hunched
himself over the wheel of Mollie's car. "You seem mighty glad to go out
to this forsaken old ranch where you won't see us for the whole summer."

"I guess we can stand it if you can," Mollie responded lightly, which
only caused him to glower the more.

"Now I'll say Allen knew what he was doing when he studied law,"
remarked Roy Anderson gloomily, as he glanced over his shoulder at young
Allen Washburn, who was driving Betty's neat little roadster with Betty
herself beside him. "He sure falls in soft on this job."

"Meaning, I suppose," drawled Grace, "that he will have the pleasure of
our company at Gold Run Ranch. Never mind, old boy, you needn't look so
dreadfully gloomy. Have a chocolate and brace up."

"You give it to me," said Roy, laughing. Grace obediently popped a large
juicy one into his mouth. It may be remarked that after this performance
he really did look more cheerful.

"Anyway, we'll be back sometime, I suppose," said Mollie, continuing on
the subject that was uppermost in her mind.

"Yes, if we don't run away with some of those handsome cowboys," put in
Amy, with a chuckle. "Betty says they abound around Gold Run Ranch."

The girls giggled, but Will looked fierce.

"You had better not," he said, and though his look was for all the
girls, Amy knew that the words were for her. She colored prettily and
promised with her eyes that she wouldn't.

Grace caught this by-play as she munched a chocolate grumpily. Adoring
her brother Will as she did, she had always been a little jealous of his
fancy for Amy.

"Anyway, they don't have to be so silly in public," she told herself
resentfully. As she roused herself from her musing, she heard Mollie
say, with a laugh:

"Don't be surprised if we come home with our pockets full of gold. Mrs.
Nelson thinks there is some of it about there."

"Oh, are you still talking about that silly old ranch?" Grace broke in
petulantly. "I don't know why you are getting so excited about it when
there is more than a chance that we sha'n't go at all."

"Hooray!" cried Frank, and stepped on the accelerator.

Mollie, beside him, turned to look at him coldly.

"I'm glad you feel that way about it, Frank Haley," she said primly.
"But I'm very sorry to say we don't."

"Now, I have put my foot in it," cried Frank ruefully, turning his
irresistible smile full upon her. "What shall I do to make up, Mollie?
Hold your hand or something?"

His free hand closed over hers, but she snatched her own away with
indignation that ended in a chuckle.

"Tend to your knitting," she warned him. "Didn't you see that we almost
ran over that dog?"

But however much they might joke about the possibility of their not
realizing their dreams for the summer, the Outdoor Girls were really
worried about it, and the next few days were anxious ones for them.

Suppose Mrs. Nelson should yield to her husband's arguments and resolve
to sell the ranch after all? For awhile it almost seemed as though she
were about to do this very thing, and the suspense nearly drove the
girls frantic.

Then something happened to turn the tide in their direction. And how the
girls afterwards blessed that loud-necktied, check-suited man!

It was Betty who came to the door to admit this angel in disguise, it
being the hired girl's day out. Her first glance at the stranger served
to stamp him as one of those loud-voiced, flashily dressed persons
commonly referred to as "sports," and at this first glance Betty took a
violent dislike to him.

However, being accustomed to treat every one with kindliness, she asked
him gravely whom he wished to see.

"Is Mrs. Nelson at home?" he asked ingratiatingly.

"Why, yes," hesitated Betty, then her natural courtesy getting the
better of the dislike she felt for this person, she added politely:
"Won't you come in? I will call mother."

With blandly murmured thanks the owner of the checked suit stepped over
the threshold, his eyes still on Betty to such an extent that she was
glad to be able to slip upstairs out of his sight.

"Mother," she explained hurriedly, finding that lady in her pretty
dressing room, "there's a horrid person downstairs who wants to see you.
I don't like his looks, and if you don't want to see him I can tell him
you aren't at home----"

"Heavens, Betty, is he as bad as all that?" asked Mrs. Nelson, as she
rose hastily and gave an automatic pat to her hair. "I hope he doesn't
steal the silver. You shouldn't have left him alone, dear----" and with
these words she swept out of the room and down the stairs.

Betty heard her greet the man, and then slipped off to her own room and
picked up some half-finished embroidery.

"I hope he doesn't bother mother too much," she mused aloud. "I never
saw a more unpleasant looking person in my life. I wonder what he can
want, anyway."

It was fully half an hour later that she heard the closing door
downstairs that told her their unwelcome visitor had left. A minute
later her mother herself opened the door of Betty's room, looking so
troubled and unsettled that Betty jumped to her feet in quick alarm.

"Mother, did that man say anything to make you feel bad?" she cried.
"Because, if he did----"

"No, no, dear," said Mrs. Nelson, sinking into a chair, while her eyes
sought the window thoughtfully. "I am worried, that's all."

Betty drew a low chair over beside her mother, and, sitting down, took
Mrs. Nelson's hand in both her own.

"Tell me, dear," she urged.

Mrs. Nelson drew her troubled gaze away from the window and looked at
the Little Captain intently.

"Betty," she said, "there is something strange about this Gold Run Ranch
of ours. This man----"

"Yes?" prompted Betty, as her mother paused.

"This man who called this morning wanted to buy the ranch for a western
client of his. It seems this client is willing to pay me my own
price--within reasonable limits of course. He seemed so strangely eager
to make a deal with me----"

"Yes?" prompted Betty again, beginning to look worried herself.

"Well," continued Mrs. Nelson, "I decided then and there that I
wouldn't sell to anybody."

"Oh, Mother!" Betty was all eagerness now, "do you really mean it?"

"Yes, I do," said Mrs. Nelson, determination replacing uncertainty.
"There must be something unusual about Gold Run or John Josephs and this
man, too, wouldn't be so anxious to get it away from me. I am certainly
not going to let them drive me into selling, until I see my property at
least."

"Good for you, Mother!" cried Betty enthusiastically. "I've been
fearfully worried for fear you wouldn't see it that way. Did you tell
the man in the check suit that?"

"No, I didn't," said Mrs. Nelson, smiling as she pressed Betty's hand.
"Now you will see what a schemer your mother is, my dear. I told him I
hadn't definitely decided yet on any course, that I had already had a
very good offer for my ranch, and that he would have to see Allen
Washburn, our attorney. I wanted Allen to have a chance to size this man
up and see if he has the same impression of him that I had."

"Mother," breathed Betty admiringly, "I think you are wonderful." Then
after a little pause, she added shyly: "You really think a great deal
of--of Allen's ability, don't you, Mother?"

"I do, dear," said Mrs. Nelson, stroking the brown head gently. Then she
added with a hint of mischief in her voice: "Your father and I have come
to feel toward him almost as if he were our son."

"Oh--" murmured Betty, very faintly.

Two days went by--anxious ones for the girls. In the Nelson home, this
time in the pretty living room, Allen Washburn was now a guest.

"Well," Mrs. Nelson said, with more than a hint of eagerness in her
voice, "what did you think of our loudly-dressed friend, Allen?"

"Was he as bad as Mrs. Nelson's description makes him out to be?" asked
Mr. Nelson, smiling genially through a cloud of cigar smoke.

Betty, in a corner of the lounge, was trying her best to be calm while
she waited eagerly for Allen's reply.

"I don't know just how Mrs. Nelson described this fellow to you, I'm
sure," he answered, with a smiling glance toward Betty's mother. "But
I'm quite sure that she didn't say anything bad enough."

"Then you didn't like him either?" asked Mrs. Nelson quickly.

"I neither liked him nor trusted him," Allen replied decidedly, adding
with a wry smile: "He calls himself Peter Levine, but I'm willing to
wager about anything I have that that isn't his real name."

"You think he's a sharper then?" Mr. Nelson interjected.

"Yes, sir," responded Allen, his young face earnestly intent. "He looks
to me like one of these confidence men who abound in the western boom
towns--men who can talk the other fellow into putting his last cent into
some 'sure thing.' 'Sure thing,'" he repeated disgustedly. "The only
sure thing about most of those schemes is the certainty of 'going bust'
and losing every penny you have in the world."

"And yet," Mr. Nelson commented, "these sharpers, 'confidence men,' as
you call them, often manage to keep just within the law."

"Oh yes," said Allen, "they manage to keep the letter of the
law--sometimes. But that is just a caution to save their own necks. It's
the spirit of the law that they violate. But we are getting away from
the point," he added, pulling himself up short with an apologetic smile
toward Mrs. Nelson. "We were speaking of this Peter Levine. My summing
up of him is that he is entirely untrustworthy."

Mrs. Nelson shot a triumphant glance at her husband.

"You see?" she said. "I was sure Allen would agree with me."

"Of course I may be mistaken," Allen continued, rather hesitantly. "But
I have a very distinct impression, a sort of seventh sense we fellows in
the law game call it, that this Levine is in league with John Josephs,
the man that offered you fifteen thousand for the ranch."

"Oh!" said Mrs. Nelson, startled. "How can you know that?"

"I don't know it," Allen told her. "I only suspect."

"Then what would you advise us to do?"

"Hold tight and not sell till you have had a chance to look matters over
on the ground--not from a distance."

"Well," said Mr. Nelson rising resignedly and knocking the ashes from
his cigar, "I suppose that settles it. I shall have to leave my business
to go to smash," he added, with a chuckle, "while I take my family into
a barbarous land where every second man you meet has designs on a
well-filled pocketbook----"

But he got no further, for Betty had run over to him and turned him
imperiously around till his smiling eyes looked down into her gleeful
ones.

"Daddy," she cried, "do you really mean it? We can all go to Gold
Run--you and mother and the girls? We'll have to have the girls, you
know!" she ended on a pleading note.

"Oh yes, of course," said Mr. Nelson resignedly. "We will have to have
the girls."

It was a very radiant Betty who, a few minutes later, saw Allen Washburn
to the door.

"And to think," she murmured, while Allen smiled down at her, "that I
didn't like that perfect angel, Peter Levine, at first. Why, I should
have welcomed him with open arms!"

"Why?" asked Allen, taken by surprise.

"Don't you know?" asked Betty, mischievously wide-eyed. "If he hadn't
happened along just when he did our glorious adventure would have
dwindled into a might-have-been. Why, I could love him for it."

"Good-night, I'm going!" ejaculated Allen, and before Betty could gasp
he had flung out of the door.

"Where are you going?" she called, laughter in her voice.

"To kill Peter Levine," growled a voice out of the darkness, and Betty,
closing the door very softly, chuckled to herself.




CHAPTER IV

AN IMITATION HOLD-UP


It was all over. The bustling days of preparation for the long trip,
during which the girls had hardly had time to give vent to their
excitement, had passed, and here they were actually finding their places
in the puffing, western bound train.

"Here's number five," Grace said, as she slid into a velvet-covered seat
with a sigh of thankfulness. "Who is coming in here with me?"

"Guess I'm elected," laughed Betty. "And here's number seven for Mollie
and Amy, and mother and dad are in six right across the way. That
completes the family party."

They were hardly settled when there was a last warning cry of "All
aboard" and the train began to move ever so slowly from the station.

The girls peered out to wave good-by to the boys and some of their other
friends who had come to see them off. The young fellows looked rather
gloomy--all except Allen. The latter shouted something that they took to
be "See you later!" and then the train swept around a curve, hiding the
station from view.

"Well," said Grace, with a sigh, as she opened her grip to fish for the
inevitable candy box, "the boys seemed to take our flitting pretty hard.
They looked as if we were already dead and buried."

"Far from it," murmured Betty happily, her eyes on the ever changing
view from the window. "I feel as if we were just beginning to live."

The hours of the morning passed like minutes to the girls, and they were
surprised when the porter came through with his "Foist call fo' dinnah!"

The afternoon passed uneventfully, and they amused themselves by making
up stories about their fellow passengers. There was the quaint little
man in number four who reminded them of Professor Arnold Dempsey and who
might very easily have been a professor, judging from the number of
books he carried.

Then there was the freckled-faced small boy in number three whose antics
kept his mother in a continual state of "nerves." Once when he bounced
one of those implements commonly known as "spit balls" off of the
bookish little man's bald head, the girls thought they would die trying
to stifle their merriment.

Then there was the very pretty, but much be-powdered and rouged girl
behind them in number nine. Grace embarrassed Betty very much by turning
around to look at her every five minutes or so.

"She's a moving picture actress or something, I'm sure of it," Grace
confided in Betty's unsympathetic ear. "I wonder if I could fix my hair
the way she does. She fascinates me."

"She seems to," Betty retorted dryly, adding with a twinkle. "You may be
able to fix your hair like hers--though I doubt it--but please remember
that your mother doesn't want you to use rouge."

"Well, you know I wouldn't do that," said Grace in a huff, adding
maliciously, "I guess you are just jealous, that's all."

"Uh-huh, that must be it," said Betty, with an unruffled good-nature
that made Grace secretly ashamed of herself.

"I'm sorry, Betty," she said after a rather long pause, adding
generously: "You don't need to be jealous of anybody."

"Thanks," Betty answered, with a smile. "I knew you didn't mean it,
dear."

And so the long hours of the afternoon wore away, dusk came, shrouding
the swiftly moving landscape in a veil of mystery. So engrossed were
the girls in contemplation of the changing beauty of nature that it
seemed almost sacrilege when the blatant lights of the train flashed
forth, bringing them violently back to a realization of time and place.

"Don't you want any supper?" Mr. Nelson was asking, in his pleasant
voice. "It isn't like the Outdoor Girls to overlook meal time."

"Far be it from us to spoil our good reputation," cried Mollie
buoyantly, and away they rushed to the dressing room to wash for supper.
Though dining on a train was no novelty to the girls, they never lost
the keenness of their first delight in the experience.

"It's fascinating," Mollie remarked once, spearing desperately at an
elusive potato as the train jerked and jolted over the rails at sixty
miles an hour, "to see how often you can raise your coffee cup without
spilling the coffee all over your food!"

On this night at supper Mollie was so screamingly funny that the girls
had all they could do to keep their hilarity from making them
conspicuous.

Mr. and Mrs. Nelson at a table for two across the aisle smiled
indulgently at their charges, and once Mrs. Nelson met her husband's
glance and chuckled fondly.

"Pretty nice set of girls?" she said softly.

"Pretty nice!" Mr. Nelson agreed.

"I'm beginning to wish we were at Gold Run now," confided Mollie, after
dining. She and Amy had slipped into the seat opposite Betty and Grace.

"Oh, I think it's all fun," cried Betty, for she was always the last of
the Outdoor Girls to feel tired. "We change at Chicago to-morrow
afternoon," she added. "And then two more nights on the train, and then
Gold Run!"

"Oh, that sounds good," cried Mollie, adding eagerly: "Tell me, Betty,
shall we be able to choose any horse we want for our own particular
mount?"

"Oh, yes," said Betty, adding with a smile: "It will be interesting to
see the kind of horse each one of you will choose. Amy will like the
gentle one, Grace will choose hers for its looks and yours will be the
most vicious one in the pack, Mollie."

"Well, I like that!" said Mollie unperturbed. "She wants to kill me off
even before I get there."

"Pack?" murmured Amy. "Is a 'pack' of horses right?" But no one answered
her.

"I wonder," mused Grace dreamily, "if there will be a tan one--all tan,
you know, without even a spot of any other color----"

"Oh, of course," laughed Betty. "If we haven't an all tan one in the
corrals at Gold Run, we'll send to the nearest ranch and have one
imported for you. Don't worry your little head about that."

A little while after that they stopped at a water station, and most of
the passengers got off to stretch their cramped limbs. And, as the
conductor informed them that they would be there for fifteen minutes at
least, the girls followed the general example.

However, in their enthusiasm at finding the good old solid earth under
their feet once more, they wandered too far, and the warning toot of the
starting train found them quite a distance from the platform.

They had not earned the title of Outdoor Girls for nothing, however, and
by sprinting for all they were worth they were able to make the last car
just in the nick of time.

"Whew, that was a close call," said Betty as they made their way,
panting, through to their own car, where Mr. and Mrs. Nelson were
looking frantically for them. "No more water stations for us."

Darkness fell, and the porters moved about, making up berths and
answering the hundred and one insistent calls of the passengers.

The girls went to bed with no protest whatever and were soon sleeping
the sleep of healthy youth. It was toward midnight that they were rather
rudely jerked out of this beautiful sleep by a sudden and almost violent
stopping of the train.

Betty, who was sleeping in a lower berth, she and Grace having decided
to take turns, sat up and peered out of the grimed window into the
gloom. No station lights greeted her, as she expected confidently they
would. Nothing but inky, startling blackness.

That she was not the only one roused was proved by the subdued sound of
voices raised in sleepy protest.

"They ought to put that engineer in prison for stopping like that," said
a man's voice.

"Gee! I thought it was a wreck, sure," came another surly voice.

At this moment a couple of legs dangled themselves over the side of
Betty's berth and in another minute the owner of them slid down beside
Betty. Betty giggled nervously, but Grace clutched her arm and shook it.

"Listen!" she said. "There's nothing to laugh about. This is a hold-up,
that's what it is! You know what your father said about there being a
lot of them around this place."

That this conclusion had been reached by some one else in the car was
proved by a woman's voice that rose shrilly above the rest.

"It's a hold-up, that's what it is!" she cried, adding, with what seemed
to Betty ridiculous panic: "Oh, what shall I do, what shall I do?"

"Better stop making a fuss, first off," growled another masculine voice,
and again Betty giggled nervously.

"Goodness, I hope I don't have to get out in my nightie," she said, and
poked her head out through the curtains.

"Look out," warned Grace, pulling her back. "You may get shot or
something."

"Don't be silly," retorted Betty, not altogether decided whether to be
frightened or amused by the situation. "There isn't anything out there
but a lot of funny looking heads sticking through the curtains."

"I don't see how you can laugh about it," said Grace, through chattering
teeth. "I don't think it would be any j-joke to have all our m-money
taken from us----"

"Sh-h--be quiet," warned Betty, peeping again through the slit in the
curtain. "Somebody's coming. Listen!"

Grace listened, and so, evidently, did every one else in the car. No
wonder that, scared though she undoubtedly was, Betty found humor in
the situation. Heads of every kind and description stuck through the
curtains, women's, some in boudoir caps, some without, men's heads,
either bald or with hair grotesquely ruffled by sleep, and on every face
depicted every one of the varied emotions which have disturbed the human
race since time began. And there they were, all frozen to immobility by
the sound of two men's voices raised in heated discussion.

Then the owners of the voices came into view, and the expression on all
the faces changed to bewildered amazement. Instead of the masked bandit
which they had half expected to see there was a very portly and very
excited gentleman and with him was a conductor, not so portly but just
as excited.

"I tell you," the conductor was saying, his face red with wrath, "you
are violating the rules of the company by flagging this train for a
personal matter----"

"You have told me that before," roared the portly gentleman, waxing
almost apoplectic. "And I've told you I don't care a hang for the rules
of the company. What I want to find is my daughter and that young scamp
she ran away with. And if you don't help me, I'll wring your neck!"

"I tell you there is no couple answering your description on this
train," rasped the conductor, as the two made their way, shouting and
gesticulating, through the two rows of amazed heads and so on into the
next car.

"Well, I'll be blowed," commented the voice belonging to one of the
heads; and as if that were a signal, all the other heads promptly
withdrew to the accompaniment of exclamations and laughter.

In the darkness of the berth Betty chuckled.

"Oh, they did look so funny, Gracie," she said. "All those people with
their heads stuck out into the aisle. You should have taken a peek."

"Humph," grunted Grace, unsympathetically, as she prepared to climb into
her berth again. Then she said: "I hope if that man's daughter takes a
notion to run away again, she won't do it on our train, that's all!"




CHAPTER V

THE HANDSOME COWBOY


Next morning the girls were hilarious over the mirthful episode in the
train the night before. Betty and Mollie "took off" the expressions on
the faces of their fellow passengers till Amy and Grace shouted with
glee.

"Oh, stop it, you two," gasped Grace, finally. "I'm sore from laughing.
I think you would make a hit as clowns in a circus."

"My, isn't she complimentary?" lisped Mollie, and the girls went off in
fresh gales of merriment.

"I wish," said Grace, after a pause, "that we were going to reach Gold
Run this afternoon, instead of Chicago. I'm half afraid to spend another
night in the sleeper after the scare we got last night. It might be a
_real_ bandit this time."

"Oh, what would we care?" said Betty carelessly. "I'd rather like to
meet a train robber, myself."

"About all a bandit could do would be to take our money," added Mollie.

"All!" cried Grace indignantly. "Yes, that's all. And what would we do
without any money, I'd like to know!"

"Goodness, we could always sell the ranch," said Betty, so
matter-of-factly that the girls chuckled. "We have Peter Levine to fall
back on, you know."

"'Peter Levine,'" repeated Amy, then added quickly: "Oh yes, he was the
man who wanted your mother to sell the ranch."

"Yes, and it was too bad of you to keep him all to yourself, Betty,"
said Grace reproachfully.

"You might at least have shown him to the rest of us."

"He wasn't anything to show," said Betty, experiencing again the feeling
of distaste she had had for the man. "He was one of the most unpleasant
looking men I ever saw. Just the same," she added lightly, "we owe him a
lot. If it hadn't been for him we probably wouldn't be sitting in this
beautiful train, speeding to our great adventure. I told Allen I could
almost love Peter Levine for it."

"You did?" queried Mollie, her eyes dancing. "What did he say?"

"He left me rather suddenly," said Betty, with a chuckle at the memory.
"He said he was on his way to kill Peter."

"Poor Allen," laughed Grace. "It must be awful to be that way. When is
he coming out to Gold Run, Betty?"

"As soon as he finishes this case he is on now," answered Betty,
flushing in spite of herself as she thought of Allen. "There is really
no great hurry about it, you know. Dad has made up his mind to take a
regular vacation while he's about it, and I imagine mother won't care if
she never gets home."

That afternoon they changed trains at Chicago, bemoaning the fact that
they had not time to see something of the great city before they
traveled farther west. There was only half an hour between trains and,
as every one knows, there can be little sightseeing done in that limited
space of time. As it was, for some reason they could not ascertain, the
outgoing train was over an hour late in starting. If they had known this
fact in advance they might have managed to spend their time more
profitably than in cooling their heels in the station waiting room.

As it was, it was a rather disgruntled set of girls who boarded the
train for Gold Run and allowed Mr. Nelson and the porter to find their
seats for them.

"I don't see why trains can't be on time," grumbled Mollie, as she
peered at the rather distorted image of herself in the narrow mirror
between the windows. "Here it is nearly seven o'clock and I'm as hungry
as a bear."

"Well," said Betty, cheerfully, "something tells me they have a diner on
this train. Come on, girls, let's wash our hands and get something to
eat."

The girls hardly knew which they enjoyed the most, their dinner or the
novel scenery that slipped past them so swiftly. It was their first
venture into this part of the world, and they found the initiation
fascinating.

"The trouble is," complained Amy, "it will be dark before long and we'll
have to miss all this," with an expressive sweep of her hand toward the
car window.

"It is too bad," said Betty, regretfully adding, with a light laugh: "If
we were only like the princess in the story, the members of whose royal
house never slept, we would probably see more of the scenery."

That night the girls proved that Grace was not alone in her fondness for
sleep. There being no more interruptions in the shape of fuming
gentlemen on the trail of runaway daughters, they slept soundly through
the long hours while the train plunged onward through the inky
blackness of the night. They did not stir until the sun, shining on
their faces, roused them to the realization that another beautiful day
had dawned.

That is, it was beautiful up to noon. Then it clouded down, and they ate
lunch while the rain dashed furiously on the windows of the dining car.

"I am thankful we are under cover," said Betty.

"Fancy riding on the ranch in this rain," put in Amy.

"No life in the saddle for me when it rains," broke in Grace.

During the afternoon the girls napped and read. When the time came to
get supper they were glad to see that they had run away from the storm
and the sun was setting clearly.

"Funny, how sleepy one gets," drawled Grace, about nine o'clock. "I'll
not stay up late."

No one wanted to do that, and in less than an hour all were sleeping
soundly while the long train rumbled along on its trip westward.

"And this is the day," breathed Mollie the next noon, as they made their
way from the dining car through some half dozen other cars to their own.
"Betty, I feel as if I couldn't wait to see your beautiful ranch."

"I wonder," said Grace as they dropped into their seats once more, "if
those cowboys are really as good-looking as you say, Betty. I must
admit," she added, as she viewed the rather monotonous landscape
petulantly, "I haven't seen anything that looks like a cowboy yet."

"Goodness, hear the child!" cried Betty airily. "She hasn't been near a
ranch, yet she expects to see whole droves of cow-punchers----"

"Look," Mollie interrupted, grasping her arm. They were slowing down at
a station and there were no less than three picturesque looking young
fellows loitering about the place. One was astride an extremely nervous
horse that shied as the train puffed to a standstill and rose on his
hind legs as though trying his best to shake his rider off. "There's a
real show for you," Mollie cried joyfully. "How does that look to you,
Gracie? True to life?"

"Um, that's better," admitted Grace, while the girls craned their necks
for a better view of the horseman. "Now if they only have that sort of
thing at Gold Run----"

"Well, we'll have a chance to find out pretty soon whether they do or
not," broke in Betty, the thrill of suppressed excitement in her voice.
"Dad says we ought to get there in an hour."

"An hour!" wailed Amy, as the train jolted on its way once more and the
romantic group on the station were lost to view. "And I thought we were
almost there!"

But the hour passed more quickly than the girls had anticipated, for the
view from the car windows, becoming more and more interesting, absorbed
their attention. As a general rule the country was flat, but now and
then in the background could be caught glimpses of heavily wooded
mountain ranges that would offer chances for all sorts of adventures to
the four eager Outdoor Girls.

"I wonder if there are wild animals in those woods," said Amy, her eyes
widening at the thought. "Real ones."

"You don't suppose they import stuffed ones, do you?" asked Grace dryly.

"Of course there are wild animals--lots of 'em," said Betty, feeling
more and more gloriously excited as they neared their destination.
"Maybe we can borrow a gun or two from the cow-punchers and have a shot
at 'em--animals, I mean, not cow-punchers," she explained, with a
giggle.

On top of these rather wild imaginings came Mr. Nelson, telling them it
was time to get their things together, for they were within a few
minutes of Gold Run.

"I know how long it takes you girls to put a hat on," he laughed. "So I
think you had better start right away."

Then--Gold Run! with the dash for the door and Grace running back to
rescue a half-empty but still precious candy box and Mollie wanting to
know if Amy would please stop pressing her suitcase in the middle of her
back----

Someway, Mr. Nelson managed to get them all safely to the station
platform, whereupon he breathed a sigh of relief.

"Whew! that's the hardest job you ever gave me, Rose," he remarked to
his wife, with a chuckle.

Here, as at most of the other stations, was a handful of cowboys who had
come to meet the train. One of these, a handsome young fellow, detached
himself from the rest and approached Mrs. Nelson, sweeping off his
sombrero as he did so.

"Mrs. Nelson, ma'am?" he asked in a soft drawl that captivated the girls
immediately.

Mrs. Nelson smiled assent and the young fellow indicated a buckboard
drawn up to the station.

"I brought the wagon," he said, with a grin that showed a beautiful set
of white teeth. "An' some saddle hosses, thinkin' you might like to
ride----"

However, the ladies decided on the buckboard, which was driven by a
shy-eyed, sandy-haired young fellow who gave the girls one frightened
glance and looked swiftly away again, for all the world, Mollie said
afterwards, as if he expected them to bite him.

Mr. Nelson elected to ride horseback with Andy Rawlinson, which was the
name of the good-looking cowboy.

As the driver chirruped to the horses and they clattered over the bumpy
road, Grace turned to Betty with a smile.

"I have realized the ambition of a life time!" she said dramatically. "I
have seen one handsome cowboy!"




CHAPTER VI

AT THE RANCH


To the girls, that jolting ride was like an adventure straight from the
Arabian Nights. The fact that they were squeezed four in a seat which
was meant to accommodate only three, served to dampen their enthusiasm
not a trifle. Mrs. Nelson, riding in front with the bashful driver,
vainly sought to engage him in conversation. After repeated failures she
settled down to enjoy the ride in silence.

A dozen yards or so ahead of them Andy Rawlinson and Mr. Nelson cantered
up the dusty road, their horses' hoofs making the dust fly in a white
cloud.

"Goodness!" sneezed Betty, extracting a small handkerchief from her
pocket and applying it to her nose, "I do hope those two keep their
distance. We'll be simply choked with dust."

"I wonder," said Grace, as she rubbed her dust-filled eyes, "if they
don't have any rain in this part of the world."

"Of course they do; only this happens to be the dry season," said
Mollie, instructively, from the heights of her superior intelligence. At
least, that is what she called it.

"I'll say it's dry," grumbled Grace.

"Ooh, look," Amy interrupted ecstatically. "Isn't that a cactus over
there? Oh, I've wanted all my life to see some real cacti. Now I know
we're in the West."

The girls were silent for a moment, gazing out over the rolling plain--a
plain studded with stunted trees and sickly-looking bushes with here and
there a cactus plant for variety's sake--out to the hazy mountains
beyond, serene, calm, majestic, jutting jaggedly into the dazzling blue
of a cloudless sky.

"The mountains!" murmured Betty, half to herself. "How I love them. The
plains are fascinating in a cruelly romantic way, but somehow the
mountains make one think of hidden springs rushing swiftly into noisy
foolish little brooks, of bird songs, and the smell of cool damp earth,
of the crackling of dry twigs under one's feet, and the pungent woodsy
smell of camp fires--but there," she broke off confusedly, as she
realized the girls were regarding her with fond amusement. "I didn't
mean to wax so poetic."

"It's all right, honey," said Mollie, giving her hand a warm little
squeeze. "You rave right along. I know just how you feel, for I get that
way myself sometimes."

"There _is_ something mighty wonderful about the mountains," added Grace
softly.

"Oh, I love them, too," broke in Amy, adding with such earnestness that
the girls looked at her wonderingly. "They are everything that Betty has
said. And yet when Betty spoke of the plains as being cruel I couldn't
help wondering if the mountains weren't sometimes like that, too."

"What do you mean?" they queried, with quick interest.

"I was thinking," Amy continued slowly, "that the mountains might not
seem so kind to one who was lost in them--without a gun perhaps. I have
heard Will say that a person who had no knowledge of woodcraft would
find it almost impossible to recover his path, once he had lost it.
And," she added, with a shudder, her eyes fixed steadily on the distant
mountain range, "there are wild animals in those forests."

"Of course there are," agreed Betty lightly, as she saw how serious the
girls' faces had become. "Oodles of foxes and bears and raccoons and
things. Why, how would you expect to get pretty furs when you wanted
them if those things didn't exist? Cheer up, Amy dear. We're a long way
from being lost in the woods without a gun!"

A minute later the girls lost interest in everything but the immediate
present. For, in the distance, but distinctly visible, loomed a long low
ranch house which the silent driver beside Mrs. Nelson deigned to admit
was on Gold Run Ranch.

"You see it, girls?" cried the lady, turning a beaming face to the
girls. "You know, I feel just like a little girl with a beautiful new
toy."

"And we're awfully glad you've got the toy, Mrs. Nelson," said Grace,
fervently.

"Look," cried Mollie suddenly. "Your father and that cowboy are turning
off from the main road. That must be where the ranch begins. Oh, girls,
oh, girls, I'm glad I came!"

A few minutes later their jolting buckboard turned in after the two
horsemen, and since the new road proved to be nothing but two deep ruts
worn in the grass and as the ponies attached to the buckboard showed
considerable excitement at coming near home, the girls found themselves
holding on to each other convulsively to keep from being thrown out on
the stubbly grass at the side of the road.

"Whew, I'm glad that's over!" exclaimed Mollie, as the driver drew in
the rearing horses and spoke to them soothingly. "Come on, girls," she
added, making ready to jump out. "I'm going to remove myself from this
buckboard before one of those horses decides to sit in my lap."

The girls laughed and followed her with alacrity.

"Oh," cried Betty, hugging Amy ecstatically, simply because she happened
to be the nearest one to hug. "There are the horse corrals over there!
And, oh, girls! look at the cows, dozens and dozens and dozens of 'em.
Mother," she cried, turning wide-eyed to the latter, "do all those
'anymiles' really belong to you?"

"I presume they do, dear," said Mrs. Nelson, her own face flushed with
excitement. "I can't quite take in the amazing truth of it yet."

They were standing beside the first of a long line of low buildings that
seemed little more than glorified sheds and which the girls decided must
be the "bunk houses" for the ranch hands.

And while they were wondering if it would be possible to slip over to
the corrals for a closer look at the horses, Mr. Nelson sauntered up to
them, with handsome Andy Rawlinson keeping diffidently a little in the
rear.

"It's nearly supper time," he informed them smiling. "And Andy here," he
indicated young Rawlinson, who grinned an acknowledgment, "says that
everybody has supper sharp on the minute of six. So what do you say if
we go up to the house and have a little refreshment?"

The girls were not altogether reluctant to obey, much as they desired a
closer look at the bronchos, for they realized that they were pretty
hungry.

The ranch house was one of those quaint old structures which had begun
as a tiny, one-story frame cottage and had gradually been added to until
now it seemed, Betty said, to "spread all over the landscape." It had
porches and doors in the most unexpected places, but the whole house was
painted such an immaculate white and the shutters were such a friendly
green that the effect of the place was indescribably charming.

"If the house is as clean inside as it looks outside," whispered Grace
to Betty as Andy Rawlinson led them up on to one of the many porches,
"I'll never dare go in. I never felt so mussy and dirty in all my life."

"Never mind, we're all in the same boat," said Betty encouragingly, and
then they stepped into one of the pleasantest rooms they had ever seen.

It was big and cool and airy, in spite of the fact that supper
preparations were going on at one end of it. Rough picturesque looking
chairs were scattered about, and over near the windows a long table was
invitingly set for six. And oh, the delicious odor of cooking things
that was wafted on the air!

At sight of them a stout but immaculately neat and rosy-faced woman left
whatever she was doing with a frying pan on the stove and came over to
them, wiping her hands on her apron, her face wreathed in smiles.

"Go long with you, Andy Rawlinson," she cried as the youth lingered
rather awkwardly in the doorway. "There's no need for you to tell me who
these folks are, for I already know them for the new master and his lady
and the young ladies, bless their pretty sweet faces. Come right in, all
of you, and Lizzie here," turning to a wholesome-looking, mouse-haired
girl who had come in from the other room, "Lizzie will take you to see
the rooms and you can have your pick. But don't be long," she cautioned,
as they started to follow Lizzie and she turned back to her frying pan
on the stove, "for supper is all ready and you must be nearly famished."

If the girls had been impressed by the quaintness of this quaint old
house from the outside, they were even more delighted by its interior.

They passed down a rather dark and narrow hall at the end of which were
three low steps leading to such a series of rooms as the girls had never
seen before, each furnished neatly but plainly, the only touch of color
being the gay cretonne curtains at the windows. The rooms all seemed to
be connected by doors and to reach these doors one was obliged to go up
two steps or down three or up one, as the case might be.

"Goodness," cried Betty, when Lizzie had led the way through three of
these quaint little rooms and the open doors seemed to reveal several
others, "I wonder if all these rooms were really occupied."

"Yes, miss," said Lizzie, halting and speaking unexpectedly. "They was a
time when these rooms wuz all filled. Old Mr. Barcolm"--this being the
name of Mrs. Nelson's great uncle--"had a many children and
grandchildren an' seemed like he was sot on 'em all livin' with him. But
they got to quarrelin' and all left th' old man an' he was so mad he cut
'em all out o' his will. At least," she finished, as though warned by
the intent look of her listeners that she had said more than she had
intended to, "that's what they says. But mebbe it ain't the truth, fer
all I knows."

Then she led them on again through the maze of rooms while the girls
thought amazedly of what she had told them. Finally she came to a stop
in a room, larger than the rest, and turned her rather stolid gaze upon
Mr. and Mrs. Nelson.

"Miz Cummins," she announced, dully--the girls were afterward to find
out that Cummins was the name of the rosy-faced woman who had met them
so cordially at the door and who seemed to be general housekeeper for
the place--"Miz Cummins thought as how this would be a good room fer the
mister and missus. They is some nice rooms back of these fer the young
ladies. She sed, if you liked any of the other rooms better, to take
your pick. They's fresh water in the pitchers," indicating a washstand
with a bowl and two pitchers of gleaming water upon it, "an' if you want
anythin' else, you wuz please to tell me." And with these words, uttered
so precisely that it sounded like a rehearsed speech, which, in fact, it
was, Lizzie disappeared, leaving the travelers to themselves.

"Come on, girls," cried Betty, pushing them before her into the next
room. "Let's see what kind of rooms 'Miz Cummins' has picked out for
us."

They were not at all unusual rooms, being both about the same size and
nearly square and furnished about as simply as they could possibly be.

"If it weren't for the different colored cretonne at the windows," said
Mollie, with a chuckle, "these rooms might be twins. You and Grace can
have the lavender cretonne, Amy, and Betty and I will take the blue."

"Don't those beds look heavenly?" sighed Grace, as she pulled off her
hat and threw herself upon the big, snowy-sheeted bed.

"Goodness!" cried Amy, in dismay. "She's flopped. Get her up, somebody,
before she gets the bed so dirty I can't sleep in it to-night."

For answer Betty made a dash for Grace, pulled her to her feet, and
pushed her over to the washstand.

"See that water, Grace Ford?" she cried sternly. "Now use it!"

"And make it snappy," added Mollie slangily, as she and Betty
disappeared into the adjoining room. "I can smell 'Miz Cummins'' cooking
clear in here!"




CHAPTER VII

A SUDDEN STORM


The girls spent the rest of that day getting acquainted, at which
agreeable task Andy Rawlinson, the head cowboy, assisted pleasantly. The
latter introduced them to several others of the ranch hands, all of whom
were as picturesque and good-natured as Andy himself.

Escorted by Rawlinson and followed by the admiring glances of the other
cowboys, the girls were introduced to the interior of the bunk houses
which, with their rude wooden cots built into the side of the walls,
their scanty and rather severe furniture, and the romantic looking
trophies fastened to the bare boards of the walls, filled the girls with
curiosity and interest.

Then on to the corrals, where some spectacular broncho busting was
staged for the sole benefit of the visitors. In this dangerous business
Andy himself took a part, and the girls gasped with dismay and later
with admiration as the boy ran alongside a vicious looking animal for a
few paces, then flung himself recklessly upon the beast's back and
clung there, seemingly defying all the laws of gravitation.

"Oh, he surely will be killed!" cried Amy, clutching Betty in terror.
"That horse will throw him----"

"Keep quiet, can't you, Amy?" cried Mollie impatiently, beside herself
with excitement. "Don't you suppose he has ever done this sort of thing
before?"

Then followed such an exhibition of sheer grit and skill and dauntless
courage as none of the girls would ever forget.

The vicious brute raced madly around and around the corrals, cruel head
upflung, nostrils dilated, but still the man upon his back clung with
maddening persistence. Then he stopped so suddenly that the man was
almost flung over his lowered head and the girls held their breath, but
Andy recovered himself and touching the spurs to the beast's belly, sent
it flying round the corral once more. There was sweat on its body and
the flaring nostrils were blood red with the effort, but the spirit of
the beast was still unbroken.

Around and around the ring he plunged, the other horses galloping wildly
from his path, then suddenly as though the thing on his back had
maddened him past bearing, he began to buck and to plunge and to rear
himself on his hind legs in a desperate effort to throw himself
backward, until it seemed to the fascinated, terrified girls that Andy
Rawlinson surely must be killed.

[Illustration: HE CLUNG TO THE HORSE'S BACK AS THOUGH HE HAD BEEN A PART
OF HIM.

_The Outdoor Girls in the Saddle._ _Page 64_]

But Andy Rawlinson had not spent his twenty-eight years in the saddle
for nothing. He clung to that horse's back as though he had been a part
of him, and when the outraged beast tried to throw himself over backward
for the second time, Andy evidently decided that he had played enough.

A cruel blow of his spurred heel brought the beast almost to its knees
with a whinny of pain. Then it jumped high in the air, and once more
began its furious race with this mysterious and horrible being that
clung so tenaciously to his back.

Andy rode him hard, cruelly hard, and when the beast, panting, sweating,
beaten, would have stopped he dug the spurs in and drove him on, on,
until the broncho's breath came in sobbing gasps and his legs trembled
under him.

Betty, who could never bear to see anything hurt, shouted to Andy
Rawlinson as man and beast came abreast of her:

"Isn't that enough?" she cried. "You've beaten him. Stop! Please
stop!"

And Andy Rawlinson, flashing his pleasant smile, flung himself from his
mount, while the beautiful horse stood there, quivering, head hung in
shame----

"Game hoss, that," said Andy, as he vaulted the low railing and
approached the girls. "Fought like a thoroughbred."

"And you were wonderful," cried Betty, with her warm impulsiveness. "I
never saw finer riding. We were all afraid you were going to be killed."

Andy was pleased, but he looked at Betty rather quizzically.

"Strange," he drawled, with a smile on his face, "strange what
impressions you get sometimes. Now I kind o' thought you was mad at me,
the way you called out to stop. Anyways, you looked mad."

"I was only sorry for the horse," Betty explained gravely. "He was game,
as you say, and I hated to see his spirit entirely broken."

Andy Rawlinson looked at her with admiring approval in his nice eyes.

"There speaks the real lover of animals," he cried enthusiastically. "I
hate to break a good hoss myself, but you see it has to be done--for the
sake of the hoss. A hoss that's a bad actor is mighty like a mad dog.
It has to be killed--or broke. So we break 'em. But now," he said,
glancing toward the corrals, "I reckon you young ladies would like to
pick out some nice gentle hosses to ride while you're here."

The girls nodded and crowded forward eagerly while Andy called to some
of the cowboys who had been lingering enviously near.

"Bring out the sorrel and Nigger, will you, Jake?" he said to one of
them. "I'll corral Lady and Nabob."

The girls watched with interest while the boys corraled the four horses
Andy had selected and led them forth for the visitors' inspection.

They were splendid specimens of horse flesh, and for a moment the girls
were simply lost in admiration. Nigger, as his name implied, was a
magnificent coal-black animal without a speck of white upon him
anywhere. He and Betty seemed to form a mutual admiration society on the
instant, for with a gentle whinny he cantered up to the girl and began
nosing inquisitively in her pocket in search of sugar. Luckily Betty had
brought some with her, and she fed a couple of lumps to the beautiful
animal, thereby definitely sealing their pact of friendship.

"Oh you, Nigger!" crooned Betty joyfully, as she rubbed the velvet
muzzle. "You and I are going to be great little pals, aren't we? You
perfect old darling!" And Nigger whinnied again and nosed about for more
sugar.

"Well, I like that," cried Grace, breaking the silence in which they had
all been enjoyably regarding the little scene. "Betty doesn't have to
choose her horse--it chooses her."

"Oh well, Betty always did have a way with her," laughed Mollie, and
promptly turned her attention to the remaining three horses.

"Lady" was a lovely white filly with whom Amy fell in love immediately.

"This one's mine," she cried, putting a possessive hand on Lady's flank
while the latter turned her dainty head and regarded the girl out of
softly-wistful brown eyes. "I wanted her as soon as I saw her."

Her claim was not disputed, for Grace was raving over the horse called
Nabob, who was, by a strange coincidence, that very light tan color
which she most adored.

"How did you know I always wanted a horse just like this?" she cried,
turning joyfully to Andy Rawlinson who, with the other "boys" had been
looking on amusedly.

"Well," drawled Andy, with a grin, "seems like you are all suited pretty
well."

For Mollie, whose adventurous spirit craved a spice of the dangerous in
everything, had taken immediately to the sorrel, who had apparently been
given no name. He was a skittish horse, gentle, as Andy explained, but
"pow'ful nervous--had to be sort o' coaxed along."

"You're my horse, all right," Mollie declared, stroking the animal's
muzzle fearlessly, unmindful of rolling eyes and nervously twitching
ears. "I don't like 'em too tame, old boy. And by the way," she added,
struck by a sudden inspiration, "I've thought of just the name for you.
I'm going to call you 'Old Nick.'"

And so, when the selection had been made, to everybody's satisfaction,
nothing would do but the girls must try their mounts that very evening.
They had brought their riding tags in preparation for their summer in
the saddle, and when they had slipped into the tight breeches, and
leather leggings, tailored coat, and snug fitting hat, they looked like
what they were--four thoroughly modern and very pretty Outdoor Girls.

Later, when they rode proudly about the ranch on their splendid mounts,
the ranch hands were lost in admiration of them.

"Gosh," said one, removing his hat and fanning himself with it, for the
evening was warm, "when Andy said they was four girls comin' from the
city to visit us I was plumb skeered. But these here girls, they ain't
no ordinary kind, no siree. An' they sho' does know how to ride."

However, the girls were satisfied with a rather short ride that evening
for they were out of practice and they knew that sore muscles would be
the price of over-exertion.

In the days that followed they took longer and longer rides, even
venturing along the rough forest trails when Andy Rawlinson was with
them as guide and protector. Mr. and Mrs. Nelson rode, too, but, not
being as strenuous as the girls, they were glad to have any one as
capable as Andy Rawlinson to look out for their charges.

But one day, much as they liked him, the girls got a little tired of
Andy's chaperonage, and at Mollie's suggestion they decided to "give him
the slip."

"Anybody would think he was our granny, the way he dictates to us," she
complained, as she flicked a fly from Old Nick's side, thereby causing
him to shy wildly. "We know our way about all right now, and I'm sure we
Outdoor Girls never needed anybody to look out for us, anyway."

"Hear, hear," laughed Betty, half way between conviction and protest. "I
don't like to have Andy around all the time, any more than you do,
Mollie, but I'm not sure that we know our way about as well as we might.
If we should get lost----"

"Oh, don't be an old wet blanket," cried Mollie impatiently, and as Amy
and Grace seemed for once to be of her mind, Betty had nothing to do but
to surrender as gracefully as she could.

It was after lunch that the girls managed to slip away without being
observed to where their mounts were tethered at the edge of the
woodland. And oh, what a glorious sense of freedom when they were
mounted and cantering down a cool forest trail--alone!

They had been this way with Andy before, so they had no fear of losing
their path and they urged their horses to more and more speed,
intoxicated by the sense of freedom.

What they did not notice was that the sun had disappeared behind an
ominous bank of clouds and the wind was rising threateningly. And so
they were caught fairly and squarely by the deluge that swept upon them
with a bewildering suddenness.

Where to go? Where to turn for shelter from the driving rain and moaning
wind? They checked their horses while they gazed at each other wildly.

Suddenly Betty's straining eyes made out what seemed to be the outline
of a little shed or cabin, half hidden by surrounding foliage.

"There's a house over there," she cried, hastily dismounting and tying
Nigger to a tree a little off the path. "Maybe whoever lives there will
let us in till the rain stops."

The girls followed her example and hurriedly made their way on foot
toward their one hope of refuge. When they reached the house Betty
started to knock, then paused uncertainly, her hand uplifted. For above
the beat of the rain and the shrill whine of the wind came a strain of
music, mournful, yet exquisitely beautiful. Amazed, forgetful of their
discomfort, the girls listened while the throbbing, haunting melody
wailed itself to a close.

"I--I've heard that music before," Betty murmured, then rapped gently,
almost timidly, on the door.




CHAPTER VIII

ALONG THE TRAIL


Betty's knock had to be repeated twice before the occupant of the cabin
responded.

"Knock harder, Betty, if----" Mollie was beginning when the door opened
at last and a very strange person stood upon the threshold. Tall, with
stooped shoulders and a head bent a little as though he had spent
countless hours over his violin, with long, curly hair, and with the
visioned eyes of the musician, the man was a figure that would have made
people turn to stare at him anywhere.

"I--we--we are very sorry to trouble you," said Betty hesitatingly, as
the musician made no effort to break the silence. "But it is raining
hard, as you see, and we thought----"

The man started and frowned.

"Ah yes, of course," he said, moving aside and motioning them into the
room. "You will find shelter here, but very little else, I fear."

As the girls entered rather hesitantly the man turned from them
abruptly and, lifting the violin that lay upon the rough board table, he
began with the utmost gentleness to put it in its case. The girls had
the rather uncomfortable impression that the man was forcing himself to
be polite to them--that if he had been any other than a gentleman he
would have refused them admittance.

They looked uneasily at each other and then toward the one window in the
room, and one thought was in the minds of all of them--to escape from
the enforced hospitality of this man.

"I think the rain is letting up a little," said Grace softly.

"I reckon we won't have to stay more than a few minutes," agreed Betty,
then, as their long-haired host put down his case and turned toward
them, she ventured a shy compliment.

"We heard you playing as we came along," she said. "It was very
wonderful."

"Thank you," said the man gruffly, and turned away so abruptly that
Betty felt as if some one had struck her.

Mollie looked indignant and Amy put an arm about Betty as she whispered:

"The rain has nearly stopped, honey. Don't you think we had better go?"

So, with half-hearted expressions of thanks from the girls and no
expression of regret at all from the man, the new acquaintances parted,
the girls hurrying down the dripping path to where their horses were
tethered.

Once Mollie looked back toward the cabin, and her indignation burst
forth.

"Look, he could hardly wait for us to get outside to shut the door," she
said. "Of all the ill-mannered----"

"Oh, I don't think he meant to be ill-mannered," interposed Betty
mildly, as she reached Nigger and he whinnied a welcome. "He was just
distantly polite, that's all. He didn't want to be bothered, probably,
and he had a hard time to keep from showing it."

"Huh," grunted Mollie, as she flung herself upon Old Nick's back and
patted him soothingly. "I'm sure he has some real reason for not wanting
folks around. He acted mighty funny to me," she said.

"Goodness, hear the child!" cried Grace, as they rode swiftly back the
way they had come through the fine drizzle. "She never can resist making
a thief or something out of a perfectly ordinary person."

"Seems to me he is anything but ordinary," interposed Amy thoughtfully.
"No ordinary person could play the violin the way he was playing it
when we came up to the house. That sounded like the work of a master."

"Yes," agreed Betty, a faraway look in her eyes. "He plays exquisitely,
if he does live in a little house away up in the woods. And I can't
shake off the impression that I have heard that same selection played in
just that same way somewhere before."

Though this first excursion had been somewhat of a failure, the girls
were by no means discouraged and in the days that followed they rode
almost constantly. Finally they began to know their way about like the
natives.

Their rides were taken mostly in the open country, however, for in the
woods they knew lurked very real dangers. But these they avoided more to
save Mrs. Nelson worry than from any personal fears.

But one day, feeling more than usually adventurous and growing more and
more confident of their ability to find their way around alone, they
dared venture along a rocky trail that offered wonderful romantic
opportunities.

"Oh, this is the life!" cried Grace, as Nabob stepped daintily over the
rocks and underbrush that almost completely overgrew the narrow path. "A
peach of a horse under you, the whole day before you, and nothing to do
but enjoy yourself. Whoa-up there, Nabob. What's the matter with you?"
for the horse had whinnied softly and shied almost imperceptibly to the
side of the trail.

At the same time the other horses seemed to catch some of Nabob's
uneasiness, and the girls were kept busy for the next few minutes
soothing them and coaxing them back into a normal mode of progress.

"Something scared them," said Amy nervously. "Don't you think we had
better go back, girls? This trail seems to be getting narrower and
narrower. I don't believe anybody comes along here very often."

"Well, what of it?" cried Mollie sharply. "That's what we are here for,
isn't it? If we wanted people, we could have plenty of them right back
on the ranch."

"Stop quarreling, girls," said Betty, matter-of-factly. "We'll eat
pretty soon and that will make everybody feel better." Kindly Mrs.
Cummins had put up an appetizing lunch for the girls.

"Look!" she cried a moment later, as the trail broadened out and they
reached a rather open space in the woods through which they could look
straight down--for they were on a considerable elevation--into the
thriving little mining town of Gold Run. "I didn't know you could see
Gold Run from here."

"Doesn't it look funny and tiny?" cried Mollie, reining in beside her.
"It must be an awfully long way off."

"Wouldn't this be a good place to eat?" queried Amy hopefully, and the
girls laughed at her.

"We aren't hungry enough yet," said Betty, as she turned her horse to
continue down the trail.

They rode on, following the trail as it wound deeper and deeper into the
woodland, catching glimpses now and then of the mining camp down in the
hollow.

It seemed as if they were really getting closer to Gold Run and,
fascinated by the new game they were playing, forgetting their fears in
the new sights and sounds all about them, the girls rode farther and
farther into the heart of a forest, whose smiling face often served to
hide some hideous danger.

But to the girls all was beauty and sunshine and they conversed merrily
as they cantered along.

"When is Allen coming, Betty?" asked Grace. "I had an idea he would be
here before this."

"Why, dad has written, asking him to come as soon as he can," answered
Betty, striving to look unconscious. "You know what that girl Lizzie
said about mother's relatives--she never knew she had them till she came
here--and dad thinks some of these people may make up their minds to
contest the will. They haven't made trouble yet--but you never can tell.
Listen, girls," she added suddenly. "Will you promise not to breathe a
word of it if I tell you a big secret?"

"Hope to die," they chorused piously.

"Well, our old friend Peter Levine has been around pestering mother
again."

At this news, Grace, who was riding ahead, checked her mount so suddenly
that Betty had all she could do to keep Nigger from swallowing Nabob's
tail.

"For goodness' sake, put out your hand when you do that next time,"
laughed Betty.

"Well," said Grace as she gave Nabob a gentle slap that started him on
again, "Peter Levine must want that ranch very badly, to be following us
all over the continent this way."

"He seems to be rather anxious," said Betty dryly. "He has offered
mother twenty thousand for it this time."

"Going up," cried Mollie, with a chuckle. "If your mother holds on much
longer, Betty, she will be a millionaire."

"Well, mother is more certain than ever that there is something unusual
about Gold Run Ranch," went on Betty, as she urged Nigger up a gentle
slope. "She confidently expects to discover a gold mine, and so that's
another reason why she thinks Allen ought to be here."

"Goodness, let's all get out and dig," cried Mollie.

"Can we have all we find, Betty?" called Amy, with a laugh.

"Every last gold brick," answered Betty happily, and then they came upon
another open space, and there, lying not more than half a mile below
them, was the mining town of Gold Run.

"Now here's the place to have some lunch," said Betty, slipping to the
ground and leading Nigger off a little way into the woods where she
tethered him securely. "We can look right down into the town and eat our
lunch at the same time."

The girls followed suit, and it did not take them long afterward to
discover that they were very hungry. So out came the lunch basket, and
never did biscuits and cheese and fried chicken taste more delicious
than they did to the girls right there in that romantic little spot in
the woods.

"I hope it doesn't rain the way it did the other day," said Mollie, as
she lazily surveyed a cloudless sky.

"We haven't even a cabin in the woods to go to this time," said Grace,
adding, as the thought brought up a picture of the long-haired musician
who had been so painfully polite: "I wonder what our friend, Long Hair,
lives on, anyway. Maybe he goes out and kills bears and things. They say
bear meat is very good eating," she added reflectively.

"Maybe we can catch one ourselves and take it home for dinner,"
suggested Mollie, and the girls looked as if they did not like her
suggestion at all.

"Methinks the bear would be more likely to catch us," Betty was saying
when a chorus of low whinnyings and stampings coming from where the
horses were tethered caused them to jump to their feet in alarm.
Suddenly the nervousness of the animals changed to panic and they began
to rear and plunge, straining madly at the tethering straps, snorting
and screaming with terror.

"Look!" cried Mollie, her voice shrilling above the noise. "There! In
the woods! Oh, run for your lives, girls! Run!"




CHAPTER IX

DANGER AHEAD


Coming toward the girls through the trees, crouched low, sinister eyes
fixed upon them, were two great timber wolves. The girls, terrified as
they were, saw at a glance that it would be of no use to run, the
movement would only infuriate the beasts and precipitate their attack.

"The trees!" gasped Betty, feeling herself in the grip of the deadly
inertia that one experiences sometimes in a nightmare. "Make for the
trees, girls; they are our only chance."

Luckily, the branches of the trees swung low to the ground, or the girls
could never have saved themselves. As it was, they had barely time to
swing themselves free of the ground when the great beasts darted into
the open, fangs bared, snarling hideously. Then----

Bang! Bang! Two sharp reports from the direction of the woodland and one
of the wolves sprang clear of the ground, then slunk into the
underbrush, while the other staggered, fell, struggled to its feet,
fell again, and after one convulsive movement, lay still.

While the girls stared, unable to follow this swift turn of events,
there was the sound of running feet coming in their direction and the
next moment two figures broke through into the cleared space.

One was a little wizened man who seemed, for all his apparent age,
extremely agile. The other was a girl, a splendid, big creature, who
stood as tall as the man, and who, like him, carried a rifle.

The two ran to the fallen animal, talking excitedly, and turned it over
to be sure it was dead. They were so absorbed that they did not notice
the girls, who dropped down quietly from their perches in the trees. The
sight of the guns carried by the newcomers had had a tremendously
reassuring effect upon them. The wonderful sensation of relief that
swept over them as they realized their almost miraculous escape, was so
keen as to be almost pain.

Still, they were not quite free from fear as they approached the
prostrate body of the big beast, over which their rescuers were still
bending. It was the girl who first discovered them.

"Hello!" she cried, straightening up and turning upon the girls a frank
regard. "You was the ones this old boy was after, eh? Look, Dad," she
added, pointing to where the four horses were still bucking and snorting
in fright. "There's the hosses we heard, but I reckon 'twas these gals
the wolves was after."

"I guess you're right," said Betty, trying to smile through a shiver.
"It wasn't very much fun while it lasted, either."

At this the old man, who had very kindly, keen blue eyes in his seamed
and wrinkled face, turned and spat upon the ground meditatively.

"You don't mean to tell me," he said, looking from one to the other of
the girls, "that you purty young girls was out hyar all alone, without
even a gun to protect yourselves with?"

"I guess we were." It was Mollie who spoke this time, and her tone was
rueful. "We aren't used to this part of the world, you see, and so we
didn't know what a risky thing we were doing."

"They are most as bad as the Hermit of Gold Run, aren't they, Dad?"
asked the big girl, her eyes twinkling. "He goes about everywhere
through the woods without a gun and only his violin for company; and,
somehow or other, the beasts never molest him. Some says he charms 'em
with his violin, but I think it's just luck," she added, with a wise
shake of her head.

The girls, whose curiosity had revived as their fears subsided, listened
with interest to this rather long speech of the mountain girl.

"Has this--er--hermit, as you call him----" Betty interrogated eagerly,
"has he long curly hair and is he tall----"

"With stooped shoulders?" finished Amy.

The mountain girl looked amazed.

"Why yes. Do you know him?" she asked, adding, as though to explain her
surprise: "He doesn't like to see people, you know, and folks round here
don't know much about him 'cept that he plays the violin. That's why
they calls him the hermit, 'cause he lives alone an' hates everybody."

"All except Meggy, here," interposed the old man, a look of pride in his
eyes as he gazed at his daughter. "He likes her fust rate. She says it's
'cause she takes him grub an' good things to eat. But I know better."

"Pshaw, Dad," cried the girl, flushing with embarrassment. "It's jest
one of your idees that people like me better'n most when they don't at
all." As though to change the subject, she touched the stiff animal at
her feet with the toe of her stout boot.

"What you aim to do with this one, Dad?" she asked. "It was your bullet
got him. Mine went wild, an' I jest injured the other feller."

"Waal," said the old man, his gaze fixed speculatively on the big beast,
"he's not wuth the trouble o' skinning an' his meat ain't much good, so
I reckon we'd better leave him, daughter. Time I was gettin' back to the
mine."

He turned to go, but Betty was before him, hand outstretched
impulsively.

"Oh, but you must let us thank you," she cried. "If you and your
daughter hadn't happened along just then I don't know what we should
have done."

"Oh, thet's all right, thet's all right," said the old miner, too
embarrassed to meet her eye. "Glad we could be some use to you, ma'am.
But ef you'll take an old man's advice," he added, as he and his
daughter started through the woods in the direction of Gold Run, "you
won't go roaming around in these parts without a gun onto you. 'Tain't
safe, noways."

"We won't," they promised.

Once their protectors were gone they were wild with impatience to get
out of this place of dangers. Their fingers trembled as they untied the
horses, and it was as much as they could do to get the animals to stand
still long enough to mount them.

However, once in the saddle, they galloped along that narrow trail at
full speed, regardless of rocks and old stumps of trees and treacherous
holes, their one thought to reach the open road--and safety.

When at last the plain stretched before them, level and red hot in the
blazing afternoon sun, they all uttered a silent prayer of thankfulness.

"You were right, Amy," said Betty suddenly, as Amy came up abreast of
her, "when you said the mountains could be cruel too."

"We'll not ever dare tell the folks," said Grace, shuddering at the
memory of their close escape. "They would never let us out of their
sight again."

"It was mighty lucky for us that Meggy and her father happened along
just as they did," said Mollie. "I know I couldn't have held on very
long where I was, and once on the ground I'd have made a lovely tender
morsel for the little wolves."

"You flatter yourself," retorted Grace, and Amy shivered.

"I don't know how you girls can joke about such a thing," she said. "I
was about frightened to death."

"I suppose you think the rest of us enjoyed it," said Mollie, and at
this point Betty thought it was about time to interfere.

"Wasn't it odd--Meggy's speaking of our friend the musician and calling
him the Hermit of Gold Run?" she said. "I'm glad the poor lonely fellow
has a nice girl like Meggy to befriend him."

"Huh, he didn't seem to want befriending very much when we saw him,"
said Mollie. "We couldn't have been frozen more completely if we had
dropped on an iceberg."

"Oh, well, he has 'ze temperament,'" said Grace, with an elaborate
gesture.

"Seems kind of strange, his living up there all alone," said Amy
thoughtfully. "You would think any one who could play the way he can
would hate to bury himself in the wilderness. Unless----" she paused,
and Mollie jumped joyfully into the opening.

"Unless there is some reason why he has to," said the latter, adding
with an I-told-you-so air, "I thought there was some mystery about that
man, and now you are beginning to think so yourselves. You just keep
your eyes open and watch for a surprise!"




CHAPTER X

THE LANDSLIDE


After their perilous adventure, the Outdoor Girls shunned the forest
unless they were accompanied by one or more of the cowboys at the ranch.
Andy Rawlinson escorted them whenever he could, but his duties as
foreman of the ranch kept him very busy and he sometimes appointed one
of the ranch hands to take his place.

However, these excursions became less and less frequent as the girls
became more interested in the booming mining town of Gold Run.

This they had visited with Mr. and Mrs. Nelson and Andy, and the whole
thing made them feel more than ever as if they were living some motion
picture drama.

There was the regulation general store and the inevitable dance hall
where the lucky miners came to spend their golden nuggets and the
unlucky tried to drown their misery in the companionship of others.

Their eyes wide with interest and pleasure and their tongues busy with
questions, the girls cantered down the narrow, crooked wagon road called
"Main Street." They read the names over the doors of the dingy little
shops, commenting gayly upon their queerness.

"Peter Levine, Attorney," read Betty aloud from a sign just a little
dingier than the rest. Then she drew rein and waited for her mother, who
was riding more slowly with Mr. Nelson. The other girls, who had ridden
on ahead, suddenly missed her, saw that she had stopped, and came back
curiously.

"Look, Mother," Betty was saying as they came up. "This is where dear
Peter Levine hails from. His checked suit and loud tie must look funny
in that dingy little shop," she added, with a chuckle.

"Well, let's ride along," suggested Mrs. Nelson nervously. "He might see
us and take it into his head to come out. And I don't want to have
anything more to do with him until Allen comes."

"Allen," thought Betty, as they turned and cantered on again. "I wish he
would hurry a little. He seems an awfully long time coming."

After they had seen all that there was to see of the town itself, Andy
led them to some of the important mines on the outskirts. They listened
with lively interest while the young fellow explained to them how the
ore was extracted from the mountain side where it had lain unmolested
for thousands of years.

"It almost seems a shame to disturb it," said Amy at this point, and the
girls laughed at her.

"Just give me a chance at it, that's all," said Mollie longingly.

At one of these mines they met the old man and his daughter, Meggy,
whose timely arrival a few days before had saved their lives. The two
were in the midst of their work, the girl lifting and hauling with all
the strength of a man, and they scarcely looked up as the party passed
them, although the old man responded with a wave of his hand when Andy
Rawlinson called to him.

"How's it goin', Dan?" asked the former.

"Oh, well enough, well enough," responded the man, with what seemed to
the girls enforced cheerfulness. "We'll strike gold afore to-morrow,
sure."

"Poor old Dan Higgins," said Andy, with a sobering of his good-natured
face. "He's always goin' to strike gold 'to-morrow.' Sure, there's no
one I'd rather see strike it rich than Dan an' that girl of his. But I'm
'fraid they're jest plumb unlucky. Funny thing, luck--and gold," he went
on to soliloquize. "Some young fellers they come out here, thinkin' they
can get back to the girl at home in a couple o' years with their
pockets plumb full o' nuggets, an' instead, they toil their lives away
till their hair grows white an' their skin gets crackly like parchment,
an' never even a glimpse o' yellow. An' mebbe the feller next to him
drills a hole three feet deep and he strikes a vein. Yes siree, if ever
there was a real thing in this world, that thing is luck."

The girls were impressed and their hearts ached for Dan Higgins, his
years of hope and work and his profitless mine. As for the girl, his
daughter, Meggy----

"Are you sure Dan Higgins hasn't any chance of striking gold?" asked
Betty, gravely.

"Not a bit of it," returned Andy Rawlinson quickly. "There's gold all
around here--everybody thought Dan was mighty lucky when he staked out
his claim. He may find gold yet. But," he added, and there was a
fatalistic quality in his tone that chilled the girls, "you always have
to reckon on luck."

In the days that followed it became quite the usual thing to see the
Outdoor Girls, mounted on their splendid horses, galloping along the
open road or cantering through the town of Gold Run. It was not long
before they became general favorites in this country where girls of
their type were scarce, and the girls knew most of the rough but
good-hearted miners by name. But perhaps of them all, their best and
staunchest friends were old Dan Higgins and his daughter, Meggy.

The girls often visited the mine and were always greeted with the utmost
heartiness by its owners. Once Betty had caught Meggy looking longingly
at Nigger as he was trying his best to get some nourishment from the
stubbly grass, and with the quick impulsiveness that was hers, she asked
the girl if she would like a ride.

At the sudden radiance that flooded Meggy's face, Betty turned away
abashed. She felt as though she had been given a glimpse of the girl's
soul.

Meggy had her ride, and in the days that followed she had many others
and the girl's fondness for Betty became almost worship. She liked the
other girls, for they were always kind to her, but Betty was her idol.

"I have wanted all my life to own a horse," she confided to the Little
Captain one day, as she stroked Nigger's shining coat with almost
reverent fingers. "It would be the first thing I would buy for myself if
dad should strike it rich." Her tone was brave, but the eyes that sought
her father's toiling figure were sad. "Poor old dad," she said softly,
"I don't think he would keep on any longer, if it wasn't for me."

On one of their visits to the mine the girls were astonished to find
their mysterious musician there ahead of them. He seemed to be trying to
help, but from where the girls watched unobserved, it looked as though
he were more in the way than anything else.

Meggy was the first to discover them, and as she called out a greeting,
the Hermit of Gold Run rose quickly to his feet and disappeared into the
woods.

"Poor fellow," said Meggy, looking pityingly after him. "We let him try
to help us because it seems to amuse him, but he really doesn't know how
to work with his hands. His fingers were made for the fiddle."

"I certainly would like to find out more about that man," said Mollie,
her forehead puckered into a puzzled frown. "He sure does act pretty
funny."

"We'll have to visit him again some day," said Betty lightly, and then
turned to question Meggy on the progress of the mine.

On their way home they took up the subject of the strange musician whose
queer comings and goings had begun to be of more than usual interest to
them.

"He acts--in a--a stealthy way," said Grace, striving for the exact
words to express her meaning. "He positively sneaked away from us this
morning. It seems to me people don't act like that unless they are
afraid of something."

"He might just be afraid of people," Betty reminded her. "Or he may
dislike people and want to be left alone. That would account for the
name of 'hermit' that the natives around here have given him."

"But an ordinary hermit wouldn't be able to play like a virtuoso,"
objected Amy.

"Well, nobody said he was an ordinary hermit," retorted Mollie.

"To change the subject before you girls get to the hair-pulling stage,"
laughed Betty, as she turned Nigger's head toward the ranch, "I wish we
could do something for Dan Higgins and Meggy. It's a shame for that
splendid, loyal girl to have to spend all her youth, when she might be
having good times like other girls, in doing the kind of work that's
only fit for a man to do."

"And she's so brave about it, too," added Grace admiringly. "She keeps
her head up like a thoroughbred."

"I've asked her to come over to the ranch," Betty went on thoughtfully.
"She has a passion for horses, you know, and I told her we'd have Andy
Rawlinson pick her out a beauty from the corrals. I could see that she
was awfully tempted, but she said no, she couldn't leave her father."

"Probably the real reason she refused was because she hadn't decent
clothes to wear," said Mollie sagaciously. "The poor girl is almost in
rags."

"I wish we could help," sighed Betty. "But she and her father are proud,
like most of the other people around here. They just have to stand on
their own feet."

"I wonder if they have enough to eat," mused Amy. "It would be dreadful
to think of them actually hungry."

"Oh, I guess there's no danger of that," said Mollie. "As long as there
are wild animals in the woods and Dan Higgins and Meggy have guns they
won't starve to death."

"And maybe they really will find gold, anyway," said Grace hopefully.

They rode along silently for a while. In their abstraction they had
taken the long way home, instead of cutting directly across the ranch in
the direction of the house. They were on a rather narrow trail, so
narrow, that they could not ride two abreast but were strung out in
single file, Indian fashion. On one side of them rose the mountain, huge
and majestic, and on the other was a sheer drop of a hundred feet or so
into a rocky canyon.

The girls had always loved this ride because of the wonderful view it
afforded them of the surrounding country. But that very morning Dan
Higgins had warned them not to go that way.

"The mountain is pow'ful oncertain," the old man had told them. "Part of
it is apt to fall on you any time if you get too close to it."

Betty thought of this warning, but too late. An ominous rumbling jerked
her eyes upward and she saw a sight that almost froze the blood in her
veins. It seemed indeed to her terrified fancy as if the whole mountain
were falling upon them. A great mass of dirt and brush and rock was
hurtling down upon them with sickening velocity. A landslide--and they
were directly in its path!




CHAPTER XI

IN THE CAVE


Luck was with the Outdoor Girls that day--or fate--call it what you
will. In the side of the mountain close to where they were, had been
drilled a hole forming a large, artificial cave--probably the work of
some miner who had abandoned operations almost at the beginning either
from lack of funds or ambition.

Into this hole the girls dashed, driven on by their frightful peril. Amy
was the last to enter, and she had barely urged her nervous little filly
into the opening when, with a terrific rumbling and rattling, the mass
of earth and stones fell, covering the mouth of the cave and leaving
them in such absolute darkness that it seemed as if they must suddenly
have been stricken blind.

"Oh! oh!" moaned Amy, her trembling hand striving vainly to quiet the
frightened animal under her. "We're buried alive, girls, we're buried
alive! We'll never get out of this--never!"

"Please stop that, Amy," Betty's voice came out of the darkness, harsh,
unnatural, like the crack of a whip. "The only danger we're in is the
danger of losing our heads. Whoa, there, Nigger, old boy. Take it easy,
beauty--there's nothing to be frightened about--there--there----" and
she crooned to the big beast soothingly.

Someway, the other girls managed to follow her example, enough at least
to quiet their restless mounts. Grace was sobbing, more from nervousness
than fright, but she managed to say with a catch in her breath, "Stand
still, Nabob--don't be such a s-silly. Isn't your Auntie Grace here with
you?"

But it was Mollie who had the real problem. For while "Old Nick's"
skittishness was more amusing than dangerous in the open, here, in this
small place, with the other horses already difficult to manage, any real
panic on his part would be more than likely to precipitate a real
tragedy.

In the dark, unable to see a foot before their faces, only the power of
their wills to prevent a stampede of their panicky horses which would
mean death to them all and, worst of all, the possibility of smothering
or starving to death in this walled-in cave! This was the appalling
situation which confronted the four Outdoor Girls.

Mollie, her teeth grimly set, her knees dug into Old Nick's sides, was
doing her best to keep him from trying to climb on the back of one of
the other horses.

"Oh, Mollie, make him stop it," cried Amy frantically. "He'll kill poor
Lady. Make him stop!"

"What do you suppose I'm trying to do," gritted Mollie between clenched
teeth. "Do you think I like riding the side of a wall? Get down there,
Old Nick, you wicked beast. Just wait till I get you outside."

Although this threat was uttered sternly, Mollie had never been nearer
to crying in her life. Luckily, a cruel dig of her spurs in the horse's
side brought the big beast to his senses. He dropped to the ground and
stood there, quivering in every muscle and nickering plaintively.

"Good work, Mollie, old girl," cried Betty's voice encouragingly, and
Mollie, wiping a tell-tale drop from the corner of her nose, answered in
a voice that held never a quiver: "I couldn't fail you, Little Captain.
Not at a time like this," and then she felt very brave and heroic.

The horses were quiet, huddled together at the farther end of the cave
as though they found comfort in company, and thus one great danger was
passed. But the girls had still the other and greater one to face.

"We'd better dismount," said Betty's voice, surprisingly calm and
matter-of-fact. It was this ability of Betty Nelson's to keep her nerve
and her head in any difficulty, to see almost at a glance the best thing
to do and the best way to do it, that had led the girls to call her
their Little Captain. And now as they listened to her cool voice,
directing them as always in an emergency, some of her self-control
communicated itself to them and they followed her leadership without
question.

"The horses will stand quietly now, I think," she said, and swung
herself cautiously from Nigger's tall back and felt her way slowly past
the horses, out to the small open space between them and what had once
been the mouth of the cave.

The girls followed her example, the horses making no protest, save to
whinny anxiously and crowd a little closer together.

"Where are you, Betty?" cried Grace plaintively, stubbing her toe on a
stone and emitting an injured "ouch."

"I'm over here," responded Betty reassuringly. "Stretch out your hand
and I'll grab it."

"Oh, for a match, my kingdom for a match!" said Mollie, brushing her
hand across her eyes as though to relieve them of the weight of that
terrific darkness. "Why aren't we men so we could carry 'em in our
pockets--the matches I mean, not the men," she added with a chuckle that
ended in a sob.

"Well, here we are," said Grace, when they had found each other in the
inky blackness. "Now you've got us, Betty, what are you going to do with
us?"

"I don't know--yet," responded Betty honestly. "I guess we've got to
talk it over and decide what it is best to do."

Amy groaned.

"Meanwhile we smother," she said.

"Nonsense," retorted Betty briskly. "There's enough air in this place to
keep us alive for twenty-four hours at least."

"Twenty-four hours," protested Amy, the panic she had felt at the first
threatening to overwhelm her again. "But, Betty, there isn't a chance in
the world that anybody will come along here in the next twenty-four
hours."

"That's right, too," agreed Mollie, a prickly sensation of pure fright
tickling the roots of her hair. "Dan Higgins said this trail was
practically never used because of the danger from the mountain. This is
a pretty pickle, this is!"

"And even if anybody should come along," Grace pointed out gloomily,
"they couldn't be expected to guess that there are four girls and four
horses buried in this hole in the wall."

"And I don't believe we could ever in the world make ourselves heard
through that mass of rocks and dirt," added Mollie. "Looks as though we
had just about come to the end of our rope, I should say."

Amy began to cry again softly, and Betty, who had been listening with
increasing irritation to this conversation, burst forth indignantly:

"Of all the silly things I ever heard!" she denounced them hotly, "I
think you girls are the worst. You seem to forget that you are Outdoor
Girls and that we have been in a good many tight places that were almost
as bad as this. Why, we can't expect to have good times and adventures
without once in a while getting the worst of it. If this is the way you
are going to take a little bad luck," she finished her tirade in a fury
that whipped the girls like a lash, "then I'm through, that's all. I
refuse to be one of four Outdoor Girls that don't deserve the name."

She paused, and the girls were silent for a moment, feeling a little
dazed. The tongue-lashing had been just what they needed, as Betty very
well knew. It made them angry.

"Oh well," said Mollie sullenly, "if you are so much better than the
rest of us, Betty, perhaps you can tell us what to do. I'm sure we would
be just as glad to get out of this as you."

"Then help me think of some way to do it," Betty retorted, more quietly.
"Surely we can't accomplish it by making up our minds ahead of time that
we are doomed."

"Suppose you suggest something, yourself," said Grace resentfully.

"All right," said Betty, whose quick mind had been working busily. "I am
as sure as you girls are that the possibility of rescue from anybody
outside is slight. Of course," she added breathlessly, "when we don't
come home dad and mother would become worried and start a search party."

"They wouldn't miss us before night though," said Grace.

"Exactly," Betty caught her up. "And at night they wouldn't be as apt to
discover the landslide as they would in the daylight. They would
naturally think of the woods first. But the next day, anybody familiar
with the trail would be sure to notice that there had been a landslide
and they would be almost sure to connect it with us----"

"But Betty," wailed Grace, forgetting that a moment before she had been
angry with the Little Captain, "all that is just supposition, and you
know as well as we do that we are likely not to be discovered
until--until----"

"It's too late," finished Mollie. "Why don't you say it? It's the
truth."

"And since it is the truth," Betty took her up briskly, "there is all
the more reason why we should take things in our own hands and work out
our own salvation."

Betty impatiently cut short Amy's discouraged "How?"

"Now listen," she said. "There are plenty of stones in this cave----"

"My toes cry aloud that they know it," interjected Grace, but no one
laughed--they were too intent upon Betty. They were beginning to realize
what she had in mind, and the realization brought a thrill of hope.

"If we could find any sharp enough--stones I mean," Betty went on, "we
might use them as a sort of shovel and try to dig our way out. Of
course," she added, as the girls began to grope eagerly among the dirt
and débris at their feet for stones sharp enough to answer the purpose,
"the mouth of the cave may be choked up too solidly with dirt and
underbrush and things for us to get through. But in that case we'd just
have to think up some other way, that's all."

"I've got a peach," cried Mollie slangily, as her hand struck a big
stone sharp enough to serve her purpose. "I ought to be able to dig my
way through the side of a house with this fellow."

"And here's the very one that got too familiar with my toe," said Grace,
as she picked up another serviceable stone. "I'm going to get even with
it now. I shall make it work as it never worked before."

After much groping and knocking of heads together, Betty and Amy also
armed themselves with imitation shovels, and so the work began.

And it was work indeed. For what seemed hours to the anxious girls they
toiled, digging sometimes with the stones, sometimes in desperation with
their hands until it seemed to them they must have dug their way half
through the mountainside. And still that blank wall of dirt, that
impenetrable darkness, that stubborn barrier between them and the
blessed sunshine. Amy was the first to give way.

She sank back on the dank floor of the cave and buried her face in her
dirt-stained hands.

"We'll never get out of here!" she sobbed. "And I'm st-starving to
d-death!"




CHAPTER XII

IN THE DARKNESS


Now the girls had been hungry before the accident occurred and, it being
several hours since then, they were, by this time, as any one could
readily see, in a rather bad state. Therefore, Amy's complaint was very
unfortunate and, had it not been for Betty, it might have ruined the
morale of the girls completely.

"Good gracious, Amy, don't talk about starving to death," cried Mollie,
dismayed. "That's coming too near the truth for comfort. Oh, this
miserable stone. It's cutting clear through my hand!"

"And my back is nearly broken," said Grace, adding, as she turned
ferociously upon the still-sobbing Amy: "Stop that crying, Amy
Blackford. Don't you know it is catching?" and a suspicious break at the
end of her sentence, proved the truth of the assertion.

"Girls, please don't," begged Betty, still digging automatically at the
stubborn wall of stones and dirt. "If you all begin to cry, then we
might just as well throw up our hands and say we are beaten."

It was not long after that that the girls found what they called their
"second wind." They forgot that they were ravenous, that their backs
ached and that their hands were scratched and torn. They worked
furiously in the darkness, their goal the out-of-doors they loved so
well.

For a long time they did not notice that the air was becoming very close
and oppressive and that the perspiration that bothered them so was
caused not alone by their exertion. And when the realization did come it
had the effect of goading them on to more furious effort.

That the horses also felt the change in the atmosphere, was attested to
by their increased nervousness. The trampling of their hoofs sounded
ominous to the girls--they made queer little puffing noises as if they
were getting their breath with greater and greater difficulty.

In one terrible instant the girls realized what might happen when what
was discomfort to the animals now, should become torture. Maddened by
pain and fright, it would be no longer possible to quiet them. And
then--and then----

"Don't you think we'd better stop and try to quiet the horses?" asked
Mollie once, as the champing and snorting in the blackness behind them
became more marked.

"I don't think it would do any good," Betty answered between clenched
teeth as she scooped and dug, scooped and dug. "Better keep on working,
girls. It's the one chance we have."

Oh, the horror of it, the nightmare of it! The heavy air, the hideous
dark, the nervous trampling of those death-bearing hoofs---- The girls
spoke no longer. They were beyond speech. Almost maddened by terror
themselves, they scooped and dug, scooped and dug----

Once they thought they heard voices outside, and shrilly they cried to
their imaginary rescuers. No answering "hallo" reached them, and the
only effect of their cries seemed to be to add to the fright of their
horses and so endanger themselves still more.

On, on, on--while their aching muscles seemed to grow numb with the
strain and their lungs nearly burst with the pressure upon them.

At last they gave in--it seemed that they had to give in. All except
Betty, who kept on desperately, doggedly, her muscles barely able to
respond to the last call she was making upon them.

"I can't go on any more. I'm all in," said Mollie, a desperate quiet in
her voice. "My arms are like lead and my hands are so numb I can't feel
the stone. I guess this is the last adventure of the Outdoor Girls. We
have just had one too many, that's all."

"Oh, Mollie!" Betty drew in a labored breath that caught on a sob.
"Please don't give up--please! I've counted on you----" she paused,
jerked her head up, her attention turned on the spot where her hand
still automatically dug at the earth.

She sniffed, experimentally, sniffed again, stilling the wild throb of
hope that was almost a pain at her heart.

"What is it, Betty, what is it?" cried Mollie, sensing something
strange. Amy and Grace fought off the dizziness that was stealing over
them and leaned forward.

But Betty had jumped to her feet, had dropped the stone and was tearing
with her bare hands at that thin place--that thin place---- It gave
under her mad onslaught, and suddenly her hand slipped through into the
air--the air---- A breath of it swept into her tortured lungs, and she
leaned there, laughing, crying, the tears of sheer weakness running down
her dirt-stained face.

"Girls!" she babbled, "out there is the air--the good old air--enough of
it for all of us! We're saved, do you hear? We're saved!"

Exhausted as they were, the girls tore at the tiny hole that Betty had
made until there was an opening big enough for them to crawl through.

And oh! the indescribable ecstasy of it, the joy of it, just to lie
there, trembling with weakness, and drink in great drafts of that
life-giving air, thinking of nothing, caring for nothing but that they
were alive there in their great out-of-doors. One never comes really to
appreciate life until one has been close to death.

It was a long time before they ventured to go on. They had not realized
how near exhaustion they had been until the tension had relaxed. When at
last they did start for home, on foot, they were still trembling and
they dared not glance down the canyon at their right for fear of
becoming dizzy.

They had been long hours in the cave, and when they finally left the
trail and cut across the plain toward the ranch it was nearly dark. They
did not realize the startling sight they must present to any one who
might not know of their plight until they met Andy Rawlinson and some
other boys from the ranch starting out to search for them.

At sight of the mud-stained, blood-stained Outdoor Girls, Andy Rawlinson
fairly tumbled from his pony and came running toward them while the
other boys stood agape.

"What in the world----" began Andy, but Betty stopped him with a weary
gesture. As briefly as she could she told him what had happened and
asked him to go back and get their horses.

"It's getting pretty dark now, you know," she reminded him, when he
seemed inclined to linger and ask questions. "Soon you won't be able to
see what you're doing. Won't you please hurry?"

"Surest thing you know," responded the boy quickly, his nice eyes full
of sympathy for them. "Some of the boys will see you home--your folks
are getting awfully worried about you, you know--and the rest of us will
go on and dig out the poor bronchos. So long. We'll be back pronto."

"And now home," sighed Betty, as she looked at the ranch house just
visible in the distance. "And a bath--and something to eat. What does
that sound like, girls?"

"Heaven!" they answered.




CHAPTER XIII

THE LURE OF GOLD


The task of releasing the imprisoned horses was not such an easy task as
the girls and even Andy Rawlinson had thought it would be.

In the first place, it took Andy and his company some time to discover
the place along the trail where the landslide had occurred, for Betty's
account had been hasty and excited and she had overlooked several
details that might have helped them in their work.

And when they did reach the scene of what might have been a tragedy the
ranch hands were appalled by the immensity of the landslide. There had
been several small ones in that vicinity, but this was what Andy termed
a "humdinger."

There was a stamping and snorting from inside that dirt-choked cavern
that, there in that lonely spot on the very edge of night, seemed
positively uncanny to the men who stood and listened.

"Better get busy, boys," said Andy suddenly. "Those hosses ain't goin'
to get any easier in they minds an' it's about time we dug 'em out of
there. Back to Gold Run as fast as we can get there for the right kind
of tools from the miners. We may need some more men, too. Gosh, but I
didn't know it was as bad as that," he added with a glance over his
shoulder as he turned his pony and dashed back down the trail in the
direction of Gold Run. "Reckon 'twas just plain grit that got those
girls out."

Back in Gold Run they found several miners who were willing to offer
both themselves and their tools toward the work of liberation, and soon
the cowboys returned, accompanied by men with lanterns, and fell to work
with a will.

Two hours later, Andy Rawlinson ventured into the blackness of the cave,
swinging his lantern before him, and led forth the first of the
frightened horses.

Meanwhile the girls had bathed away the stains of their adventure, and
after a hearty meal cooked by an over solicitous "Miz Cummins" and
served by a frankly envious and inquisitive Lizzie, they felt
considerably more like their old self-confident selves.

However, they begged not to have to go to bed, as Mrs. Nelson anxiously
suggested, until the boys had returned with their horses.

"I'm beginning to get dreadfully worried," Betty confessed after an
interval of staring out into the darkness. They were on the biggest of
the many porches boasted by the quaint old ranch house, waiting eagerly
for the first sound that would announce the return of Andy and the
others with their horses.

"I'd never get over it if anything happened to Old Nick," said Mollie,
taking up Betty's theme. "Maybe we'd better borrow some other horses
from the corral and follow them."

"You'll do nothing of the kind," said Mr. Nelson, his voice sounding
unusually stern there in the darkness. "I am going to keep my eye on you
for the rest of to-day, at least!"

And so they contented themselves as well as they could with waiting and
finally were rewarded by the regular beat of galloping horses in the
distance.

"They're coming!" cried Betty, springing to her feet, then turned to her
father pleadingly: "You won't mind if we go down to meet them, will you,
Dad?" she asked. "They are our chums, you know--the horses, I mean."

Mr. Nelson nodded, and down the steps the girls sprang, racing out to
meet that sound of galloping hoofs which was coming ever nearer. A few
minutes later they were caressing the nervous animals that had gone with
them into the very shadow of death, rubbing their noses, laughing and
crying over them and calling them endearing names till it's a wonder the
cowboys, who stood by, grinning sympathetically, did not turn green with
envy.

"Some anymiles do have all the luck," said one of them.

After that the girls and their horses were almost inseparable. If left
to themselves, the latter would follow the girls around like dogs. Even
"Old Nick," who had been the most difficult to understand and win, now
was devoted to Mollie. She was the only one who could quiet him, and
though there were some who did not care to ride him because of his
skittishness, he was never anything but gentle and docile with her.

As the days passed the girls became more and more interested in Meggy
Higgins until the longing to give her one good time, in spite of her
pride, became almost an obsession with them.

One day Betty begged so hard that the girl finally consented to take a
holiday and go out with them for a day's fun. But Meggy surrendered
reluctantly, in spite of the fact that this invitation of the girls had
been like a glimpse of wonderland to her.

"I reckon dad can get along one day without me, specially as the hermit
can do part of my work. Pa's broke him in so he can be real helpful
now----"

But she got no farther, for Betty threw her arms around the surprised
girl and hugged her happily.

"I'm awfully glad!" she cried, adding with eyes that sparkled: "I tell
you what I'll do. I'll let you ride Nigger. There's a darling little
brown colt over at the ranch that I've been just dying to try out."

Sudden tears sprang to Meggy's eyes, and with the disgust of all
mountain folk for the expression of sentiment, she turned away
impatiently to hide this tell-tale sign of weakness. But Betty had
glimpsed the tears and she was satisfied.

The day was all that even Meggy Higgins' starved imagination could have
expected of it. The miner's daughter was so beatifically happy that the
girls found a new and most satisfying thrill in her enjoyment.

All her short, work-driven life Meggy Higgins had wanted a horse, a
beautiful, sleek animal with supple limbs and shining coat like the one
that she was riding now--Betty's Nigger. Many have desired a fortune,
some political fame, others social position, but Meggy merely desired a
horse. And even this had been denied her because her father had been
dazzled by the lure of gold, a fortune always just before his eyes, but
never to be grasped.

The girls were sorry for old Dan Higgins and his thwarted hopes. But
they were infinitely more sorry for this girl of his to whom hardship
was a daily reality and pleasure a golden vision to be indulged in only
by girls whose fathers did not own a worthless claim.

"Sometimes," spoke up Mollie, as she reined Old Nick into a walk, "I
wish I had the courage to rob somebody else's mine, Meggy, and plant the
gold in yours. It doesn't seem fair for you to work all the time and get
nothing for it."

The girl smiled sadly.

"I'm used to that," she said, with a grim philosophy far beyond her
years. Then she added, with a quick loyalty that made the girls' hearts
warm to her: "I don't mind. I'd do anything for dad an' I guess if he
thought I was gettin' discouraged he'd jest plum up an' quit. He's
gittin' old, he is, an' he ain't that spry like he used to be. All he
has is his hope in that mine--an' me. Ef you killed that you might as
well kill him."

After a while they stopped in the shade of some stunted trees and had
lunch. The girls could tell from Meggy's popping eyes that the
delicacies they drew forth from Miz Cummins' lunch basket had never
been dreamed of in all her hum-drum, joyless life.

Tongue sandwiches, buttered corn-bread, fried chicken that you were at
perfect liberty to take up in your fingers and nibble to your heart's
content, jelly and olives and hot cocoa in the thermos bottle with rich
cream already in it--truly a feast even worthy of the Outdoor Girls!

After lunch the girls strolled around a bit, leaving their mounts to
graze lazily. They talked of many things, the adventures they had had,
the curious people they had met in their adventuring, while Meggy
listened to it all, drinking it in thirstily.

"To think of all the things you've seen," she breathed at last. "An'
I've spent all my time sence I was able to toddle, I reckon, betwixt our
cabin an' the mine--back an' forth, back an' forth----"

After that they rode on again and it was quite late in the day when they
decided it was time to be going back.

"I don't see," said Grace, as they neared the ranch, "why we don't lay
out some claims and start digging ourselves, girls. The north end of
this ranch is quite near the other mines. We might strike gold."

The words were spoken laughingly, but Meggy took them seriously.

"Mebbe there's some truth in that," she said soberly. "Dad allus
reckoned they might be gold on Gold Run Ranch."

A short time later they left her at the mine and Betty mounted Nigger,
leading the brown colt by the reins. Meggy had tried to stammer some
words of thanks, but the girls would have none of it. They waved to her
gayly and started for home.

After an unusually long and thoughtful silence, Amy spoke up softly.

"Betty," she said, "if Meggy is right about the ranch, there being gold
here, I mean, then what your mother had thought all along may turn out
to be the truth."

"Well," said Betty, a joyous lilt to her voice that the girls knew well,
"Allen will be here in a few days and then we'll start our gold hunt.
Gold!" she repeated softly. "There is something romantic in the very
sound of it!"




CHAPTER XIV

A DISCOVERY


Up to this time the weather had been remarkably fine, but on this
particular morning the Outdoor Girls woke to find that the sky was
overcast and there was every indication of a stormy day.

"Oh bother," grumbled Mollie, as after their breakfast she gloomily
surveyed the landscape from the cretonne-curtained window. "Just as I
was about to suggest a real adventure, too!"

"What do you mean--'real adventure?'" queried Grace, lazily. The day
before she had bought a new box of candy and a magazine, and so it
happened that she was the only one of the four of them who really did
not care whether it rained or not.

Mollie turned from the window and regarded them resentfully. Then she
looked more hopeful as her eyes rested on Betty, who was sorting the
contents of a too-crowded dresser drawer.

"You are with me, anyway, aren't you, Betty?" she asked, almost
wistfully. "We'll leave these other two at home, and you and I will go
on our adventure."

"All right," said Betty, with a lack of enthusiasm that fell with a
dampening effect upon Mollie's ears. The disastrous quality of their
last adventure had had a dampening effect on the girls' enthusiasm for
this form of entertainment, and for the present they preferred the
safety of the ranch to the lure of the great unknown, as it were.
However, this condition of mind was only temporary. They would soon be
as eager as ever for new experiences. "I'm game for anything, Mollie
dear, as long as you keep away from land-slides and wild animals."

"Just hear the child!" said Mollie disgustedly. "As if an adventure
would be an adventure without a little danger mixed in!"

"Just what is your great idea, Mollie?" asked Betty mildly. Mollie was
beginning to glower. And if somebody did not stop her at the beginning,
there was sure to be a fracas. Betty knew this from experience. "Suppose
you tell us about it and get it out of your system. As I said before,
I'm willing to do anything if it isn't hunting lions and tigers."

Mollie grunted disgustedly.

"Well, there isn't a thing really exciting about it, if that's what you
mean," she said. "I just thought that since we had nothing special to do
to-day we might visit the Hermit of Gold Run again. We might be able to
solve the mystery about him in some way," she added as a special
inducement, since the girls still seemed unenthusiastic.

Grace laughed indulgently.

"Just how do you expect to solve this mystery?" she asked, with a
giggle. "You certainly can't do it by looking at him."

"Oh well, if that's the way you feel," retorted Mollie, feeling very
much abused, "I'm sorry I spoke about it. Only I thought we had already
decided to pay him a visit."

"And so we had," said Betty, closing the dresser drawer with a bang and
coming unexpectedly to her aid. "And I, for one, am with you in that,
Mollie. I have felt from the first," she went on earnestly, while Mollie
regarded her with growing hope, "that I had not only heard the selection
that that man played but that I had seen him somewhere before--quite a
long time ago."

Impressed by Betty's earnestness, Grace had laid down her magazine and
Amy was becoming interested.

"I know it's ridiculous," Betty continued, as though to justify
herself, "but I can't help feeling that way, just the same."

"That thing he played sounded familiar to me, too," Grace admitted, now
entirely abandoning her magazine and sitting up. "It has been haunting
me ever since we heard him playing that day, and yet I can't think of
the name of it."

Softly Amy began to hum a popular song, but Mollie interrupted her
impatiently.

"Well then, since you all feel that way about it," she said eagerly, "I
don't see why it wouldn't be fun to scout around his cabin a little bit
and see if we can't pick up some information. I'm really curious about
him."

"All right, let's," said Betty, with the decision for which she was
famed. "Get your riding togs on, girls, and we'll play detective."

This time it was Mollie who held back.

"How about the weather?" she demurred. "Looks as if we were likely to
get wet."

"Who cares?" said Betty airily, adding, as she stopped at the door to
make them a little bow: "It would give us an excuse to see His Highness
again."

Half an hour later they had saddled their ponies and were cantering off
briskly to visit the Hermit of Gold Run.

"Aren't you a little bit afraid to go in there?" asked Amy, reining in
as they reached the narrow trail through the woods that led near the
musician's cabin. "We might run into some wolves, as we did that other
time."

"We were much further in the woods than the Hermit's cabin," said Mollie
impatiently. "And it was in an entirely different direction, too. Go
ahead, silly, or I'll ride right over you," and as she was urging Old
Nick forward until he crowded uncomfortably against the little white
filly, Amy had no other course but to do as she was bid.

Nevertheless, she was not the only one who was uneasy, and it might have
been observed that the girls glanced often into the shadows of the
underbrush on either side of the narrow trail.

There were wild animals in that forest, as they had good reason to know,
and though they seldom ventured this close to civilization, still there
was no use in tempting fate!

"I didn't know it was as far in as this," said Grace, after they had
ridden some distance in silence. "Are you sure we haven't passed the
cabin, Betty?"

"Why, we aren't nearly there yet," was Betty's discomforting reply.
"It's quite a way beyond that next turn in the trail."

Grace said nothing, but she gripped the reins harder in her hands. She
had made up her mind that at the first sign of danger she would turn
Nabob and make a dash back down the trail for safety.

After that the silence became so pronounced that Mollie noticed it and
laughed nervously.

"Why all the noise?" she asked jocosely. "It nearly breaks my ear
drums."

"Hush," cried Amy warningly. "I thought I heard something."

"That was your own heart hammering against the tree trunks," retorted
Mollie dryly, at which the girls giggled and the tension relaxed.

"Let's talk about something nice," Betty suggested. "Gold, for
instance."

"Or Allen," teased Grace. "I reckon you won't be glad or anything when
he gets here."

"I guess mother will be gladder than any of us," replied Betty promptly,
trying to shift the spotlight from herself. "She was so excited when I
told her what Dan Higgins said about the possibility of there being gold
on the ranch that she hardly closed her eyes all night. I told her she
was getting to be a regular adventuress."

"Like her daughter," said Mollie, with a chuckle.

"Just think of the story we can tell the boys when we get home," said
Amy rapturously, adding apologetically as the girls glanced at her: "If
we find the gold, I mean."

"Listen to the child!" cried Betty gayly, while the other girls laughed.
"And we haven't begun to dig yet. Hold your horses, Amy dear, hold your
horses."

They did this very thing literally the next moment, for they came in
sight of the queer little cabin of the man whom the natives called the
Hermit of Gold Run.

Quickly they jumped down, tethered the horses as they had done before on
the day when they had first made the acquaintance of this remarkable
man, and started rather hesitantly down the path toward the house.

As they came nearer the haunting strains of the music that had puzzled
them before once more floated out through the open windows and they
paused, lost once again in the spell of it.

The music stopped, and they went on, hardly knowing what their next move
was to be, yet drawn irresistibly by their curiosity. Then once more
they heard the violin, but evidently the mood of the player had changed.
The melody fraught with pathos, wailing, pleading, no longer reached
them. The theme had changed--light, airy, sparkling, it reminded the
girls of fairies dancing on the grass in the moonlight.

Mollie grasped Betty's arm.

"I know that!" she cried excitedly. "It's something of Chopin's, a
nocturne, I think. Girls, I know where I heard that selection played
just that way before."

They gazed at her, their eyes asking the question before their lips
could form it.

"At the Hostess House!" cried Mollie. "Don't you remember that concert
we gave with some of the great artists?"

"That big benefit!" cried Betty excitedly. "You've got it, Mollie!
That's what I was trying to think of!"

"Sh-h," said Grace, a finger to her lips. "He has stopped playing. He
may hear us."

"All right," said Betty. "Let's get back to the trail where we can talk
this thing over."

They did not stop at the trail, however, for some memory of the danger
lurking in the woods drove them out on to the main road where they might
talk in peace.

"Now then," said Betty eagerly, as they reached the road, crowding their
horses close together and reining them in to a walk. "What do you make
of this, girls? If this man is really one of those artists that played
at that big concert, then he is famous and there is something more than
strange in his hiding up here in the woods."

"Goodness, we don't need anybody to tell us that," said Grace. "He
certainly must be in hiding for something he's done--unless he has been
disappointed in love," she added sentimentally.

"I don't believe he was ever in love with anything but his violin," said
Mollie.

"Can't somebody think of the name of the violinist that played at the
benefit?" asked Betty, who had been trying for some minutes past to
accomplish that very thing.

"It was something like Croup, I think," said Mollie, wrinkling her
forehead.

"Goodness, how romantic," said Grace, with a laugh.

"I tell you how we can find out the name," said Amy suddenly.

"How?" they questioned.

"I think I have a program, and I can send home for it," said Amy.

"Good girl!" cried Mollie, slapping her on the back with a violence that
nearly threw her from Lady's back and caused that gentle little animal
to turn her head inquiringly. "We little thought we had a genius in our
midst!"




CHAPTER XV

ALLEN ARRIVES


Amy was delighted with the praise she received from the girls and the
first thing she did after they returned to the ranch was to write home
to her guardian for the concert program she had so luckily saved.

Naturally the girls were more curious than ever after this second trip
to his little cabin in the woods and longed to find out about this
strange musician who hid himself so persistently from the world.

"Of course," Grace said, during one of the many times when they talked
the matter over, "we're not at all sure that the Hermit is the same man
who played at our benefit."

"Of course we're not," Mollie agreed with her. "There must be a great
many musicians who can play those same selections that we heard him
play."

"That's all very true," said Betty argumentatively. "But if he is really
this same musician that played at our benefit, then that explains the
queer hunch I've had of having seen him somewhere before."

"Well," said Mollie resignedly, "I guess all we can do for the present
is to wait until Amy gets her program. When we find out the name of the
violinist that played for us then we can decide what to do next about
the Hermit."

Reluctantly they admitted that what she said was true, and for the time
being let the discussion rest there.

Then came the day when Betty received a letter from Allen announcing
that he would reach Gold Run the following afternoon on the
four-thirty-five train. The letter ended by begging her to meet the
train herself and please not to send any one else, for no one else would
do!

Betty's pretty face flushed a deeper pink and her eyes shone brighter as
she read this passage--and two or three others--several times over. Then
she went to find the girls and tell them the good news.

They also had received mail from the other boys and some of the folks at
home, and she found them all together on the eastern porch having the
time of their lives. Mollie and Amy were perched on the railing while
Grace and a box of candy reposed in a hammock.

"Well, have you finished reading yours already?" Mollie greeted the
Little Captain as she swung up the steps. "It was such a fat one I
thought it would take you till lunch time at least to get through with
it."

"Speak for yourself," retorted Betty, too happy to mind being teased.
"Guess what, girls!" she added, unable to keep the news to herself for
another minute, "Allen arrives via the Western Limited at four-thirty or
thereabouts to-morrow afternoon."

"Hooray!" cried the girls, and momentarily forgot their own letters in
very real delight. Allen Washburn was a favorite with all of them.

"Will you let us all go to meet him, Betty dear?" asked Grace, with a
twinkling smile. "Or does he insist on seeing you alone?"

"Don't be silly," retorted Betty good-naturedly. "I know he would take
it as a personal slight if you weren't all there to welcome him."

"Well, I don't know," Mollie commented ruefully. "Something tells me he
would manage to live through it even if we weren't there. But go on,
Betty," she added. "Tell us what else he has to say."

"That's pretty nearly all," said Betty truthfully. "He said he would
save all the news until he saw me--us. One thing he did say," she
added, dimpling: "The boys are simply wild with jealousy. They say it is
all a deep dark scheme on Allen's part to get out here with us."

"Us!" repeated Grace, with a giggle. "Much he cares about the rest of
us."

Be that as it may, they certainly all turned out that following
afternoon to meet the Western Limited which was bearing Allen swiftly
toward them.

There was the usual gathering of picturesquely garbed miners and
cow-punchers on the platform, and for most of these the girls had a
smile and a nod.

"Seems funny to think how strange everything looked to us when we first
came," remarked Grace, as they waited for the train. "Now we feel as
much at home as if we had lived here all our lives."

"The people are all so nice and friendly, too," said Amy. "It's
wonderful how soon you come to know them."

"It is a nice atmosphere," Betty agreed. "At home in the East we want to
know pretty much all there is to know about people we make our friends.
But out here they take you for granted. Nobody seems to care where you
came from or who your relatives are----"

"Huh," grunted Mollie. "I guess in a good many cases it wouldn't do to
be too curious," she said cynically. "If you believe the stories you
read and the movies you see everybody who has committed a crime anywhere
from petty larceny to murder skips out West to escape just punishment."

"Then at this moment," drawled Grace, glancing around at the rather
harmless looking crowd on the station platform, "we are surrounded by
thieves and murderers. Though I must say they are a pretty nice looking
set," she added, and the girls giggled.

"Grace could forgive a man anything, if he was only good-looking
enough," remarked Amy.

"Here comes the train!" cried Betty suddenly, as the Western Limited
thundered around a curve in the distance and steamed toward them.
Immediately she forgot everything but that Allen was on that train and
that in a moment more she would see him----

Then Allen himself, handsome as ever, eagerly scanning the faces on the
platform as he jumped from the train the instant the porter opened the
door.

It took him barely a moment to discover the group of girls, and he came
toward them, hand outstretched, eyes alight with greeting.

"Well, if this isn't great!" he cried in his hearty voice, shaking
hands with all of them but looking mostly at Betty. "Knew I could trust
the Outdoor Girls to turn out for a rousing welcome. How's everything?"

"Just fine," they assured him, and then Betty took him in hand.

"We've brought a wagon along from the ranch to carry your luggage," she
said, dragging him over to the wagon beside which two of the boys from
the ranch were waiting bashfully. "Come over and meet a couple of our
cow-punchers, and they will help you load your trunk on board."

All this accomplished, the cowboys and Allen having formed an immediate
and staunch friendship, Betty introduced the latter to the horse she had
brought for him to ride. The pony was a magnificent animal, dark brown
in color with a curve to his graceful neck and a flash to his eye that
proclaimed his thoroughbred ancestry.

"Say, you old peach of a horse," said Allen, fondly stroking the soft
muzzle, "you're just about the most perfect thing of your kind I've ever
seen. It seems almost a sacrilege to ride you."

"His name is Lightning," Amy volunteered. "The boys call him that
because he can outrun almost any other horse on the ranch. Though," she
added loyally, "I shouldn't wonder if Lady could beat him if they
should give her a head start."

This characteristic speech brought a laugh, and Allen regarded the four
other beautiful horses in the group.

"You girls seemed to have picked winners yourselves," he said
admiringly. He studied them a moment, then his eyes narrowed quizzically
as he turned to Betty.

"I'll bet you a box of candy against a pair of gloves," he said, "that I
can tell which horse belongs to which. Do you take me?"

"Of course," said Betty. "Go ahead."

He guessed them nearly right, except that he gave Nigger to Mollie and
Old Nick to Betty.

"Almost does not avail," sang Betty gayly. "You owe me a box of candy,
Allen Washburn."

He looked at her for a moment laughing, and suddenly her gaze faltered.
There had been something new and forceful about Allen ever since he had
come back from the war that had made Betty a little afraid of him. But
she did not think any the less of him--oh, no indeed!

"I'll give you a dozen of them if you'll take them," he was saying
ardently--evidently in reference to the candies.

"And if she won't take 'em, I will," said Grace, with a gusto that made
them all laugh.

On the way home the girls, with what they thought was great
consideration, cantered along in front, leaving Allen and Betty to bring
up the rear. Allen blessed them for it, but Betty was furious and kept
up such a running fire of comment and laughing narrative that Allen had
no chance to say the things he had wanted to say.

Only once as they neared the ranch she paused a moment, pointing out
over the dazzling plains to the purple tipped mountains in the distance.

"Isn't the country beautiful, Allen?" she asked breathlessly. "I've
fallen dead in love with it."

"It looks too good to be true," Allen agreed seriously, then added
boyishly, with a glance that took her in, as well as the scenery: "Just
now, I don't care if I never go home!"




CHAPTER XVI

A TIP


For the next few days the girls took possession of Allen, showing him
the sights with a will and showering him with details of their
adventures till the poor fellow's head was in a whirl and he could
hardly tell whether it was the wolves or the landslide that had
frightened the girls into the cave on that memorable afternoon.

"Seems to me," he said, as the girls showed him the cave--at a safe
distance from the mountain, one may be sure--"that you young ladies need
a chaperone pretty badly."

"Do you think you're it?" teased Mollie.

"Great guns! I should hope not," said Allen, with a flash of his white
teeth. "I would rather face a dugout full of Boches than try to keep
tabs on you girls. See here," he added, suddenly serious. "Do you mean
to tell me that you were really caught in that cave with your horses and
nothing to dig your way out with but your hands?"

"And a few sharp stones that we found," Betty nodded soberly.

Allen whistled softly.

"No, I should think not," he said slowly. "It's a wonder that with you
and your horses, too, in that small space, you didn't smother before aid
could reach you."

"We should have," spoke up Amy quickly, "if it hadn't been for Betty.
She was the one who kept us at it when we were ready to give up."

"Yes, and she was the one that kept at it when the rest of us _had_
given up," Mollie reminded her. "She was the one who kept digging until
she forced the hole through. If it hadn't been for her we would have all
given up and just died there, I guess."

Betty, who had been getting redder and redder through this recital of
her heroism, found it hard to meet Allen's eyes as he turned to her with
all his heart in his own.

"The girls give me altogether too much credit," she protested. "Anybody
will fight when he has his back against the wall. And now let's take
Allen to see Dan Higgins' mine," she added lightly. "Dan Higgins and his
daughter Meggy are great friends of ours, Allen, and I know you will
love them as much as we do."

"Your friends will always be mine," Allen assured her gallantly, and
they rode off gayly toward Gold Run.

On the way they told him a good deal of Dan Higgins and Meggy, and Allen
listened with sympathetic interest.

"That surely is tough," he said boyishly. "But of course his case is no
different from that of hundreds of others who have come out here to
'God's Country' in the hope of beating the daily grind and jumping to
fortune at one fell swoop. That sounds rather Irish, doesn't it?" he
added, with his contagious grin.

"You're right about that, I suppose," said Betty gravely. "As you say,
Dan Higgins is just one of a hundred others in the same pitiful fix. But
at least he has had his dreams and the excitement of gambling. He chose
this sort of life, and so we don't feel so awfully sorry for him. But it
is his daughter Meggy that we pity. She is really a wonderful girl,
Allen, and to condemn her to a life of work and poverty is really a
crime."

"Well, I didn't do it," said Allen plaintively, adding quickly as
Betty's face clouded: "I beg your pardon, little girl, I didn't mean to
be flippant. But, like her father, there are many others in the
position of this girl. A man can't choose to live a life like that
without dragging his family into it too."

"Then he shouldn't have a family," said Mollie hotly. "He should make up
his mind to be an old bachelor--though I don't think there is anything
worse under the sun," she added, with such emphasis that the girls
giggled.

"I agree with you there," said Allen, adding whimsically: "But what a
man should do and what he does do are often very different things."

"But you speak of Dan Higgins and Meggy as if they were just ordinary
people," Grace objected, as she flicked the reins gently on Nabob's
arching neck. "You seem to forget that they saved our lives--probably."

"No, I don't forget that," said Allen gravely. "And I respect your wish
to do something in return. I also owe them a debt of gratitude." His
eyes unconsciously sought Betty's, and a quick glance passed between
them that was more eloquent than words.

"Then you will help us to help him?" said Betty quickly.

"I'll do anything I can," Allen answered, adding, rather dubiously: "But
I don't see what any one can do for them. If the old man hasn't struck
gold yet and is short of funds to finance further search, I don't see
what any one can do for him. Do you?" he added, looking at her.

"No-o," admitted Betty reluctantly. "I haven't thought of a way yet. But
I'm sure I shall," she added so bravely that the girls wanted to hug
her.

They reached the Higgins' mine soon after this, and at the sound of
their approach Meggy ran eagerly out to them, as she always did. But
when she saw Allen, looking to her unsophisticated eyes like some hero
out of a story book, handsome and city-bred, she halted and turned red
with embarrassment.

However, Allen, by his own gracious and friendly manner, soon set her at
ease, but her eyes continued to follow every movement of his as though
in amazement that such a perfect creature could live.

"Better look out, Betty," Grace whispered to the Little Captain when
nobody was looking. "Meggy thinks Allen is pretty nice. Just watch her,
she's hypnotized."

But Betty only smiled. Somehow, she felt pretty sure of Allen.

The latter struck up a great friendship with old Dan Higgins right
away--wonderful how everybody took to Allen, thought Betty proudly--and
soon they were talking like old friends. In five minutes Allen had
found out more about Dan Higgins' mine and his prospects than the girls
would have learned in a year.

Toward the end Allen managed to put a few adroit questions concerning
Gold Run Ranch and the possibility of there being gold upon it.

"Waal now," drawled Higgins, spitting upon the ground reflectively,
"folks here'bouts used to wonder why old Jed Barcolm didn't get busy and
find out if there was gold on thet property, but somehow th' old man
never seemed to get interested. Conservative old fellow, Jed Barcolm,
anyways--allus said he'd made enough raisin' cattle and didn't aim to do
no prospectin' at his time o' life."

"But you think there is a good possibility of there being gold on the
ranch?" insisted Allen, and the girls held their breath.

Dan Higgins gave him a shrewd look and spat once more.

"You thinkin' of doin' a little prospectin' on your own hook, Son?" he
inquired.

"Heavens, no!" answered Allen with convincing sincerity, adding with a
smile: "It is barely possible that my client might, though."

The old man started and stood upright, squaring his thin shoulders
belligerently.

"You don't mean to tell me you're one o' those ornery lawyer cusses,"
he said, with a disgusted emphasis that angered the girls but apparently
left Allen unmoved.

"A lawyer--but not ornery, I hope," he said pleasantly. "And my client
is Mrs. Nelson, the new owner of the ranch. Is there anything else you
would like to know about me?"

But the old man's anger had departed and he regarded Allen with a shrewd
twinkle in his kindly blue eyes.

"Sorry, Son," he said. "I reckon there are some honest lawyers, though I
never ain't met one yet--not round here leastways."

"Thanks for a rather doubtful compliment," laughed Allen. It was evident
that he was enjoying the old man extremely. "I assure you, though I am
not always honest, there are times when I try very hard to be." Then he
suddenly added: "By the way, do you happen to know a man around
here--one of those ornery lawyers--by the name of Peter Levine?"

Again Dan Higgins spat disgustedly.

"Know him!" he answered with a wealth of scorn in his voice. "I reckon
most everybody round here knows him--an' they's mighty few knows any
good o' him. Take my advice, Son, an' keep away from him."

"Thanks," said Allen dryly. "But the problem seems to be to keep him
away from us. He is representing a client who wants to buy Gold Run
Ranch."

The old man started and a gleam of excitement shot into his eyes while
Meggy, seeming to share his emotion, crept closer to him.

"Peter Levine wants you to sell," he repeated eagerly, then relaxed once
more into his drawl, though his eyes reflected a strange inward turmoil.
"Listen, Son," he said. "Ef you let that snake in the grass argy you
into sellin', you're a bigger fool 'n I take you to be. An' what's
more," his voice lowered and the girls leaned forward eagerly, "if Peter
wants that there property of yourn there's gold on it, you can bet your
last dollar onto it. Pete ain't no angel, an' he don't work for
nothing."

Burning with excitement themselves, the girls marveled that Allen could
take this statement so calmly.

"Thanks for the tip," he said, in his ordinary voice. "I had some such
idea myself, but it certainly helps to have my judgment backed by
somebody who knows the people in the case."




CHAPTER XVII

THE NET TIGHTENS


Allen learned much about Peter Levine and his associates and about Gold
Run itself in the following conversation, and when he and the girls
finally said good-by to the old man and his daughter and started off
down the trail again, he was more than satisfied.

As for the girls, they could hardly wait to get out of earshot of the
mine before letting loose a flood of excited comment.

"Well, I don't see anything to get so excited about," said Allen, after
they had rattled on for several minutes. "Dan Higgins didn't tell us
anything we didn't already know--or suspect, anyway. He simply confirmed
our suspicions, that's all."

"Seems to me that's enough," retorted Mollie. "It's one thing to think a
thing yourself and an entirely different thing to find out somebody else
thinks it too."

"Don't be an old granddaddy, Allen," Betty said, adding threateningly:
"If you don't look out we won't let you have any of that wonderful gold
we are going to find--not one little tiny nugget."

"That's gratitude for you," said Allen reproachfully. "Not one little
nugget for a fellow who finds her a fortune."

"You haven't found it yet," Amy reminded him.

"No," said Allen suddenly animated, "I haven't found it--not yet--but
I'm pretty sure I'm on the right track. Look here," he appealed to them:
"It seems reasonable to me to suppose that if Peter Levine and the
people above him are so anxious to get the property they know pretty
well where they stand. They don't want the ranch simply because they
_think_ there is gold on it."

"Then you think----" Betty was beginning breathlessly, when Allen
interrupted her with a rush of words.

"Yes, that's just what I think," he said. "I've been pretty well over
the whole of this ranch since I came, and I've noticed that this extreme
northwest portion of it, the only part where there would be any
possibility of finding gold, is pretty well deserted most of the
time--absolutely so at night----"

"Then you think," Betty burst forth, "that these people, whoever they
are, may have made actual tests? That they are sure there is gold here?"

Allen nodded.

"That is my theory," he said gravely. "But of course the only way to
prove the truth of it is to keep my eyes open and catch them, if that is
possible, in the act."

"But how could one conceal such a thing?" Grace objected. "A big thing
like a mine can't be hidden away in the daytime like a rag doll. There
must be some signs about the place to show that people have been
here----"

"Exactly," said Allen. "There probably are signs--only nobody has had
the incentive--or the interest, maybe--to hunt for those signs up to
this time. Although," he added thoughtfully, "there are many ways of
camouflaging the entrance to a mine so that a casual observer, even an
interested one, possibly, would be fooled--branches, leaves, a rock or
two."

"But wouldn't there be noise?" It was Amy who put the objection this
time. "I should think they would make enough disturbance to rouse
suspicion at least."

"They might not," Allen contended. "Remember, they are right in the
mining territory, so that if any of the miners heard an unusual noise
they would think it was one of their neighbors working late. Anyway,"
he finished, "their operations would necessarily have to be small, and
they might be so small as not even to arouse suspicion. Sometimes," he
added, and the girls hung on his words as though they were prophetic,
"there need be no actual digging to ascertain that there is gold in a
certain region. Sometimes the bed of a spring if sifted to get rid of
pebbles and other débris will reveal gold enough to make the finder
certain that there is a rich gold vein close by."

"Goodness, let's go and hunt up some springs!" cried Mollie
irrepressibly. "What's the use of leaving all this gold finding to Mr.
Peter Levine?"

"I remember seeing an old broken sieve around the ranch house
somewhere," Grace suggested helpfully. "Don't you suppose we can go back
and get it?"

"But, Allen," Betty asked anxiously, "how do you expect to find out
about these men? I suppose you intend to show them up?"

"I most certainly do," responded Allen cheerfully. "It would give me the
greatest delight to land Mr. Peter Levine and his associates in jail."

"Well, you'd better look out you don't get landed yourself," said Mollie
sagely. "I imagine these particular gentlemen are pretty handy with
their guns--like most of the other people around here--and I reckon they
wouldn't be very backward about using them."

"It would be fifty-fifty, at that," said Allen, adding grimly: "I'm not
so very unhandy with a gun myself. But the war's over and I haven't any
idea of staging a tragedy," he added lightly, anxious to banish the
cloud that had come over Betty's bright face. "I shall keep out of sight
till I have them just where I want them, and when they find themselves
caught I don't think they'll do much fighting. All crooks are more or
less cowards, you know."

"But what are you going to do in the meantime--while you are waiting for
a chance to show them up?" Betty persisted. She did not half like the
way things were going--even if there was a chance of finding a fortune
on the ranch. It seemed to her that Allen was putting himself into too
great danger. And if anything happened to him, what would all the gold
in the world be worth?

"'In the meantime?'" Allen was answering her question lightly. "Why, in
the meantime I intend to keep my eyes and ears wide open and do a little
scouting around Gold Run until I get a line on the doings of Peter
Levine and his crowd--if he has a crowd. He may just be in partnership
with one other rascal like himself, for all I know. That's one of the
first things I want to find out. After the information of our friend,
back there at the mine," he added, "there is no longer any doubt in my
mind that this Levine is a crook."

"Humph," said Betty, "I was sure of that the first time I laid eyes on
him."

"And yet you said you could almost love him for making your mother
decide to come out here," Allen reminded her quizzically.

"And you said you were on your way to kill him," said Betty, adding with
a chuckle: "What made you change your mind?"

"I didn't change my mind," retorted Allen, with a grin. "I just didn't
happen to meet him, that's all."

They had nearly reached the ranch house before Betty thought to ask
Allen if he had talked his plans over with her mother.

"No, I haven't," he admitted. "As a matter of fact, I hadn't made any
definite plans until I had this confab with Dan Higgins. He made me see
the whole thing straight, so to speak. I'll have a talk with your mother
and father to-night," he promised.

He kept his promise and had the satisfaction of knowing that both his
clients were backing him heartily.

"Go to it, Allen," Mr. Nelson said at the end of the conference. "Seems
to me that you have gotten the correct angle on this thing, and if you
need any help from me just call on me. Only," he warned, "don't run
yourself into unnecessary trouble."

"I've found, sir," said Allen, with that straight-forward look that made
every one like and admire him, "that it's usually the fellow who runs
away from trouble who gets the most of it. I'm not worrying about that
end of the business."

But if he did not worry, Betty certainly did in the days that followed.
She had dreams at night in which she saw Allen riding about in the
shadows. There would be a report, two reports, and he would topple over
backwards to lie crumpled up and motionless. No wonder that she became
pale and lost her appetite and made her mother worry even in the midst
of the excitement over this double hunt--the hunt for men and gold.

One night after dinner Allen asked her to ride with him a little way,
said it would do him a lot of good just to talk to her. Betty agreed,
and they cantered off in the twilight, their bodies swaying to the
rhythm of the beautiful animals under them.

For a long time they were silent, just enjoying the rapid motion, the
sweet scented air that fanned their faces, the beauty of the hazy
mountains in the distance. Then, suddenly Allen spoke.

"Betty," he said, swinging round toward her, "you aren't letting this
thing get on your nerves, are you?"

"Wh-what do you mean?" she asked faintly. "What thing?"

"This gold business--the excitement of it all," he said, waving his hand
largely as though to take in the whole landscape. "I've noticed you
looked tired lately," he went on gently, "and I've worried about it,
little Betty. I--I have almost dared to hope," he leaned toward her, but
Betty was looking the other way, "that you were a little anxious about
me. Were you?"

"Why--I--yes--no--why--I don't know," cried Betty wildly, then, meeting
his eye, she laughed, a twinkling little laugh. "You shouldn't ask
questions like that, not so suddenly, anyway," she said primly. "It
isn't fair."

"Never mind, I got my answer," said Allen jubilantly, and again Betty
found it a little hard to look at him. "You mustn't worry though,
little girl," he went on gently. "There isn't any danger--really. I'm
just playing a delightful little game--and I'm going to win. Went to see
Levine to-day, representing your mother," he added, and his tone
suddenly became grim. "He made me feel, or at least he tried to make me
feel, that he had as much respect for my ability as he would for a
little speck of dirt."

"The very idea!" cried Betty indignantly. "I'd just like to tell him
what I think of--your ability----" she faltered on these last words, for
Allen was gazing at her with a most disconcerting light in his eyes.

Suddenly she whirled Nigger's head about and urged him to a gallop.

"Race you home, Allen!" she challenged. "Winner gets the other fellow's
piece of cake."

"Who cares for cake!" cried Allen, but it might have been noticed that
he followed her just the same.




CHAPTER XVIII

IN THE SHADOWS


Allen was acting in two capacities at this time--that of lawyer and that
of private detective. He probably would not have taken this rôle for
anybody but Betty and her family, but in order to serve them he was
willing to do pretty nearly anything.

So he had taken to scouting around the northern end of the ranch after
dark, in the hope that he might possibly discover something that would
help him in his theory that there was really gold on the ranch and,
also, that Peter Levine and his cronies, whoever they were, knew of it.

However, as the days passed, bringing no new developments, the young
fellow began to think that he had let his imagination run away with him.
He even began to formulate plans by which he could lure the unsuspecting
Peter Levine into telling what he knew.

And then--just when he was beginning to despair of being any help at all
to Betty and her family--fate or luck, or whatever one wishes to call
it, chose to smile upon him once more.

He was prowling around when quite unexpectedly he found himself
confronted by Andy Rawlinson. He had struck up quite a liking for the
head cowboy, and the two walked along together.

Gradually they neared a patch of timber near the northern boundary of
the ranch. The cowboy said he was looking for two calves that had
strayed away.

"And it ain't no use to follow 'em into the woods on hossback," he
explained.

"I have an object in coming here," declared Allen, at last. "I am
watching out for Peter Levine." He felt he could trust Rawlinson.

"I thought as much," replied the head cowboy, with a chuckle. "Believe
me, I wouldn't trust Levine out o' my sight, if I was the boss. I've
seen him prowlin' around here several times."

"Then you think he has some secret motive in getting hold of the ranch?"

"Sure as shootin'. That feller is a bad one--take it from me."

"Please don't make too much noise around here," went on Allen. "I was
thinking he might come again in the dark some night--to do a little
prospecting, or something like that."

"I get you. It would be just like him. Quiet it is." And after that the
pair spoke only in whispers.

Nothing was seen of the calves, and presently Rawlinson was on the point
of going back, when, all at once, something occurred to make him remain.

The night was intensely dark; not a star twinkled through the storm
clouds that scudded across the sky. Allen had just stubbed his toe on a
projecting root and had muttered something uncomplimentary to the
darkness of the night when an unusual sound caught the ears of the two
young men and stopped them dead in their tracks.

Some one was coming through the brush. Some one, like Allen, had
stumbled and was muttering under his breath.

"Shut up, can't you?" a second voice growled, and Allen's hand
instinctively went to Rawlinson's arm to quiet him.

"Two of them," he thought exultantly, as he held himself and the cowboy
against the trunk of a tree. "There may be some action after all."

The two strangers passed close enough to Allen and Rawlinson to have
touched them. But they did not notice the young men.

Allen and the cowboy, their blood tingling with excitement, followed the
pair, and when, some hundred yards on, the strangers stopped, they
stopped too, keeping within the shadow of the trees.

The strangers were bending over some sort of paper which they were
examining by the light of an electric torch.

"Here's the place, Jim," one of the men said, pointing first to the
paper and then into the shadow of the woods. "There's gold running wild
around here, man. I've tested the bed of the creek that runs down there,
and it's chock full of yellow men. Why, if we can get hold of this ranch
we're rich men--rich over night, I tell you!"

"Huh!" grunted the other, noncommittally. "How are you goin' to get hold
of this ranch? Ain't done it yet, so's any one could notice it."

"No, that's where you come in, Jim," replied the other, and as he turned
eagerly to his companion Allen and Rawlinson recognized the features of
Peter Levine. "This woman, this Mrs. Nelson who owns the place, won't
sell. I'm afraid she may have an idea that there's gold here. And she
suspects me, for some reason."

The other man laughed unpleasantly.

"'Tain't hard for most of us to guess the reason for that, Pete." And
at the sneer Levine gave a grunt.

"You must have your little joke, Jim," he said. "But now let's get down
to business. The woman distrusts me and she has sent for this insolent
cub lawyer--Washburn, his name is. He's been to see me already, the
unwhipped pup," he went on, while in the shadows Allen's hands gripped
themselves into fists, "trying to find out more about my client and John
Josephs. Say, that's a good joke, Jim. Here they are after that
imaginary ranchman, John Josephs, and my client who they think are
crooks, when all the time little Peter Levine is their meat and they
don't know it."

"You didn't let on you wuz the one that wanted the place?" questioned
Jim, who was evidently able to appreciate this joke. "You wuz just the
lawyer, and so nowise interested except jest in the fee?"

"Righto!" chuckled the other. "And a good-sized fee it will be if once I
can get my hands on it."

"Which you ain't--yet," the other reminded him. "Get busy, Pete, and
tell us your scheme. I don't want to be standin' around here all night."
He gave an uneasy glance over his shoulder, and Allen and Rawlinson
shrank still further into the shadows. They were not yet ready to make
their presence known.

"All right," said Peter Levine, speaking hurriedly. "If you'll agree to
my suggestion, you're in for easy money, Jim. All you have to do is to
approach this Mrs. Nelson and make her an offer for the ranch--for
yourself, you understand. She doesn't know you, and she may have become
tired of mooning around here by now, and there's just a chance that
she'll take you--that is, if you handle the cards right. No eagerness,
you understand--just sort of offhand and careless, as if you didn't care
much whether she took you or not."

"Huh!" said the other, with his noncommittal grunt. "Sounds easy, don't
it? But what do I get out of it, ef I pull this deal off, eh?"

"Half of all the gold we find, Jim," said the other, waving his hand
largely. "You'll never regret it if you put this thing through. You'll
be a rich man."

"All right, I'm on," said Jim.

"Then I guess it's about time we got back," returned Peter Levine, and
the two men moved as if to leave that vicinity.

"We don't want them to get away," Allen whispered excitedly to
Rawlinson. "I want to get hold of that paper if possible."

"I reckon that will be easy, Washburn," returned the head cowboy. "I'm
armed, you know, and I'll take my chances against those two rascals any
time. Just follow me."

Without waiting for Allen to reply to this, Andy Rawlinson ran forward
swiftly and silently, and in a few seconds had confronted the rascally
pair. He had drawn his pistol, but he did not raise the weapon.

"Halt, both of you!" he cried, sharply. "Hands up there!"

"Hi! what's the meaning of this?" cried Levine, in astonishment. "Who
are you?"

"It's Rawlinson, the head man here," muttered the man called Jim.

"Right!" answered the cowboy. "And here is a particular friend of yours,
Levine," he added, as Allen stepped closer.

"Washburn!" muttered the rascally lawyer from Gold Run. And then he
added quickly: "Have you been spying on us?"

"If we have, that's our affair," answered Allen coolly. "You'd better
keep those hands up," he went on quickly, as he saw the two rascals
making a move as if to start something.

"They'll keep 'em up all right enough," broke in Rawlinson. "I reckon
you know me," he went on sternly. "And I'll stand for no foolin'."

"We haven't been doing anything wrong," came from Levine, lamely.

"Oh, no! Of course not!" said Allen sarcastically. "Only trying to get
hold of a bonanza for next to nothing!"

"Wait a minute, Washburn," came from the head cowboy. "Just relieve 'em
of their weapons first. Then maybe we'll be able to talk with more
satisfaction."

With Rawlinson confronting them, Levine and his companion did not dare
offer any resistance, and quickly Allen took their weapons from them and
handed the firearms to Rawlinson.

"Now I'll thank you, Levine, for that paper you were examining so
carefully just a few minutes ago," went on the young lawyer.

"This is robbery!" fumed Peter Levine. "I'll have you before the courts
for this."

Allen eyed him steadily.

"Do you represent the law in this place?" he asked. "If so, I am sorry
for the inhabitants. But there is no use in prolonging this discussion,
Levine. I want that paper. Hand it over at once."

The rascally lawyer from Gold Run attempted to argue, but the sight of
Rawlinson's weapon subdued him, and presently he handed over the
crumpled sheet, which Allen seized with much satisfaction. During this
transaction Jim remained sullenly silent.

"Now I guess that's about all," said Allen to the cowboy.

"If that's the case I guess we can bid you skunks good-evening," came
quickly from Rawlinson. "Both of you beat it. And don't ever let me
ketch you around here again."

"What about my gun?" came feebly from Jim.

"I'll send the guns over to Levine's office to-morrow," answered the
head cowboy. "Now clear out, and be quick about it." And a moment later
the two rascals stumbled away through the darkness.

"This is certainly what I call luck," cried Allen excitedly, as he gazed
at the scrap of paper Levine had passed over. "Rawlinson, you have
certainly helped me do a good night's work. If what that scoundrel said
is true, this will mean a fortune for Betty and her mother."

"I'm glad I chanced along, Washburn," answered the head cowboy. "After
this I think I'll set a guard. If it leaks out that there is gold on
this ranch there will be all sorts of fellows beside those skunks trying
to locate claims around here."

"Will you go up to the house with me?"

"No. I'll stick around here a while and see if those fellows come back.
Besides, I want to see if I can get any trace of those strayed-away
calves. You go ahead. You can tell me about it later. You can take their
guns with you if you will."

Half running, half stumbling, in his eagerness, Allen reached the house,
took the steps of the porch three at a time, and burst into the big
homelike kitchen, where he found the family assembled.

"We've got 'em, folks!" he cried, waving the scrap of paper over his
head, while they stared at him as though they thought he had gone mad.
"I've been out hunting and brought home a prize. Come look at it."

He went over to the table beside which Mr. and Mrs. Nelson were sitting
and laid the two captured pistols upon the table. Infected by his
excitement, the girls crowded around, demanding an explanation.

[Illustration: THE GIRLS CROWDED AROUND, DEMANDING AN EXPLANATION.

_The Outdoor Girls in the Saddle._ _Page 163_]

"Pistols!" cried Betty, her eyes wide with dislike of the things. "Where
did you get them, Allen?"

"Oh, just picked them off the trees by the roadside," said Allen airily.
Then, suddenly becoming serious, he laid the scrap of paper beside the
weapons on the table. "There," he said, dramatically, "is the key that
may open your door to a fortune."

"A map," said Mrs. Nelson, her eyes glistening. "Oh, Allen, you've found
out something wonderful. Tell us about it, please."

And so Allen recounted what had taken place during that fruitful half
hour in the shadows of the trees. His audience listened breathlessly.

"Then this thing," said Mr. Nelson, taking the bit of paper which was
crossed and criss-crossed with a number of lines and dotted with numbers
until it seemed more like a jig-saw puzzle than a map, "is supposedly a
map which will point out the probable location of gold."

"Yes, sir," said Allen.

"Then," said Mr. Nelson, feeling the thrill of adventure in his own
blood, "we'll begin to look for this gold to-morrow. That is--" He
paused and looked quizzically about at the group of tense young faces.
"If everybody is willing."

"Oh-h," was all that they could say--just then.




CHAPTER XIX

THE NEW MINE


The next day much excitement filled the ranch house. Betty declared that
she had not slept a wink the night before, worrying for fear her father
had not meant what he said.

But Mr. Nelson had meant what he had said, and there was Mrs. Nelson as
eager as the girls to keep him to his word.

"The ranch is mine, you know," she laughingly reminded the girls. "And
if there are gold mines on it I certainly intend to find them."

It was settled, and Mr. Nelson and Allen set out for town to make
arrangements for the enterprise. The girls wanted to go too, but Mr.
Nelson pointed out that he and Allen could probably do the work more
quickly if they were alone, and it was upon this point and this point
only that the girls consented to let them go.

"But that needn't keep us from the saddle," Mollie decided, as they
watched the two men canter swiftly away. "I don't know about the rest
of you, but I'm just longing for action."

"Ditto," cried Betty, then added with bright eagerness: "Girls, I know
what we can do! Let's go down to the place where Allen found those two
men last night. That's where the mines are, you know, and we might stake
out claims or something."

"Your mother might have something to say to that," said Grace, making a
funny face. "It isn't quite the thing to stake out claims on somebody
else's property."

"Oh well, you needn't be so particular," cried Betty airily. "Come on,
girls, who's with me?"

It seemed they all were, and, fairly dancing with excitement, they made
their way to the corrals where Andy Rawlinson saddled their horses for
them.

The horses seemed to catch some of the girls' excitement, and it was all
that the latter could do to hold the animals in.

"It must be in the air," laughed Grace, as she pulled in Nabob sharply.
"We've all got the gold fever."

"Let's give them their heads," said Mollie suddenly. "I'd like a regular
gallop this morning."

"All right, let's go," sang out Betty, and in another minute they were
off, the horses galloping like mad and the girls laughing and shouting
in utter abandonment to their high spirits.

At this rate it took them only a few minutes to reach the spot where
Allen had had his adventure the night before.

They reined in sharply, and Betty jumped down, throwing the reins over
Nigger's neck and giving him a fond little pat on the flank.

"There, old boy," she said. "Go and eat some grass for yourself while we
do a little prospecting. Girls," she added as they in turn dismounted
and ran up to her, "from Allen's description, it must have been just
about here that he stood." She indicated the bent tree with the great
bowlder behind it that Allen had described to them. "And the two men
must have stood in there among that heavy shrubbery somewhere."

"Then this is where they will begin work," cried Amy, a faint flush
warming her face. "Oh, Betty, it all seems like a fairy story."

"Fairy story, nothing!" exclaimed Mollie. "This is a real,
honest-to-goodness adventure story. My, it's a wonder Allen didn't get
shot up last night," she added thoughtfully. "It must have taken nerve
to stand here, listening to those old scoundrels and not knowing what
minute they might find him out and fire upon him."

"I think Allen is perfectly wonderful, anyway," said Grace, and Betty
thrilled at the tribute. "He never seems to know what it is to be
afraid. And he always gets what he wants, too."

"And to think that 'John Josephs' never existed!" chuckled Betty. "Peter
Levine must have quite a good deal of imagination."

"Well, what's the use of standing here?" said Amy, after a moment of
silent musing. "Let's look around a little bit and see what we can see."

So for a while they thrashed around in the bush, accomplishing very
little besides scaring some rabbits and woodchucks into their holes.
They found the tiny creek Peter Levine had spoken of, and they gazed
with interest at its muddy, sluggish water.

"Who would ever think there was gold in the bottom of that?" whispered
Mollie.

When they finally became convinced that there was nothing more to be
seen they started reluctantly home again.

"Let's go around by the mine and see how Meggy and her dad are coming
on," suggested Betty, and so they changed their course a little to
include the mine.

Meggy was glad to see them as usual but they could tell by the weariness
of her bearing that there was no good news as far as she was concerned
and they had not the heart to tell her their own.

"Can't you come over to the ranch for a little while?" asked Betty,
eager to do some little thing toward cheering the girl. But Meggy shook
her head.

"I can't leave father--even for a little while," she said sadly. "He
ain't feeling well, and I'm afraid if his luck doesn't change pretty
soon I--I--won't have any dad----" she choked and turned away. Betty was
beside her in a moment, her arm about the girl's shoulders.

"We're awfully sorry, honey," she said compassionately. "We didn't know
that your father was feeling bad. Is he--is he really sick?"

"Sick of life, I guess," said Meggy, conquering her emotion and
instantly ashamed of it. "I've heered of people dyin' of a broken heart,
an' that's what dad's doin', I guess. Bad luck can kill you if it keeps
up long enough."

The girls rode home saddened by this brief encounter. It seemed almost
wrong for them to be happy when Dan Higgins was "dyin' of a broken
heart" and Meggy, brave, splendid girl that she was, had almost lost
hope.

"If only everybody in the world could be happy," said Grace plaintively.
"It just spoils all your fun when you know that other people are
miserable."

"The worst of it is," said Betty soberly, "that with all this luck
coming our way we can't pass on a single little bit of it to that poor
girl and her dad. If only they weren't so proud----" The sentence
trailed off into a sigh, and she gazed pensively out over the plain.

"Well, there's no use of crying over it," said Mollie briskly. "We may
find a way of being useful to Meggy yet, and until then, as my mother
says, 'let's be canty with thinking about it.' Oh, look, girls, here
comes Allen. I wonder what kind of news he has."

They galloped gayly to meet him, and Allen thought they made a very
pretty picture as they swept up to him.

"Well," he said as they surrounded him, "everything is settled and they
are to begin work to-morrow morning. Our news has aroused great
excitement in town, and there's a rush to establish claims near that end
of our ranch. Better give your friend, Dan Higgins, a hint, so that he
can get in first. So long. I'm on to the house for the map, and then I'm
going to join Mr. Nelson again in town."

So he dashed off in the direction of the ranch and the girls wheeled and
galloped back in the direction they had come--back toward Dan Higgins'
mine to warn him to stake a new claim before others reached the spot.

They were so excited that it was hard to make their purpose clear at
first, but when the old man and Meggy comprehended what they were trying
to tell them, they were immediately galvanized to action.

"I'll show you the best place," Betty eagerly volunteered.

Mollie offered to stay behind and give the old man her horse, and in a
minute Betty and Dan Higgins were galloping over the plain to that part
of the ranch where the new gold mines were to be. They had not far to
go, and they saw with relief that they were the first on the spot.

Betty pointed out the place where Peter Levine had said there was gold
running wild, and old Dan Higgins staked his claim as near to the place
as he could without actually encroaching upon the ranch itself.

With trembling fingers he printed on two big placards the exact
dimensions of his claim, and, with Betty's help, nailed them to two
trees at the two extreme ends of his new property, and began to dig.

"Thar," he sighed, after a few moments, taking off his hat to mop the
perspiration from his forehead, "I've made another bargain with luck,
an' mebbe this time I'll win."

"I'm sure you will," cried Betty, with conviction. "If there is gold on
our ranch, and we are sure there is, then there is almost certain to be
some on your property also. Oh, Mr. Dan Higgins, I so dearly hope that
there is!" This was so evidently a cry straight from her earnest young
heart that the keen eyes of the hardened old miner filled with tears and
he patted Betty's head with an unsteady hand.

"You're a mighty fine little gal," he said finally. "Ef an old man's
gratitude means anything to you, you sure have got it. I've a sort of
sure feelin' you've changed the luck for Meggy and me."

They were silent on the ride back to the mine, but as they reached the
last stretch of the trail that led down to it the old man shifted in his
saddle and looked at Betty earnestly.

"An' ef Meggy's mother was alive," he said simply, "she would thank you,
too."




CHAPTER XX

THE VIOLINIST AGAIN


As Allen had predicted, there was a general rush on the part of the
miners to establish claims on the property adjoining the ranch, and the
girls congratulated themselves over and over again that they had reached
Dan Higgins with the glad tidings in time for him to secure the best
location.

All day long the girls were in the saddle, hovering about the new gold
diggings, fascinated at the way new mines seemed to spring up over
night.

Next to those on their own property, they were most interested in Dan
Higgins' mine and in their hearts they would really rather have had him
find gold than to find it themselves.

"They need it so much more than we do," Betty said anxiously. "If Dan
Higgins and Meggy have drawn another blank I don't know what they will
do."

In the midst of all this confusion and excitement, Amy received the
program of the benefit concert given at the Hostess House for which she
had sent home some time before. They had almost forgotten the hermit and
it was with a shock of surprise that they remembered they had not seen
him since the new mining operations. Before that they had run across him
quite often attempting to help Meggy and Dan in his rather eccentric
way.

"Guess he must have been scared off by the crowd," said Mollie. "Too
much excitement for the old boy."

The four of them were sitting on the large front porch of the house,
still in their riding habits, while their horses, at the foot of the
steps, stamped their impatience to be off again. Nothing but the arrival
of the mail could have drawn the girls from the fascination of the new
gold diggings. They hardly took time to eat; and as for sleep, well,
they took that in between times!

Now Grace called to Amy, making room on the step beside her.

"Come over here and show us your program," she said, extracting a bit of
candy from some hidden recess somewhere about her person and popping it
into her mouth. "I'm anxious to see what that violinist's name was."

Amy obeyed, and as Grace opened the program Mollie and Betty drew closer
and peeped over her shoulder.

"Concerto--Liszt," read Grace, her finger pointing down the page. "No,
that isn't it. That's for the piano. Hold on, here we are.
Chopin--Nocturne--Paul Loup, violinist. There he is. Now will you please
tell me how that helps us to find out anything about the hermit?" She
paused with her finger still pointing to the name and looked up at them
inquiringly.

"We-el," said Betty thoughtfully, "it doesn't help very much, I must
admit. It doesn't prove that Paul Loup is our Hermit of Gold Run. Only
that funny feeling I have of having seen him before and heard him
play----"

"I tell you what we'll do!" Mollie snapped her fingers decisively. "It's
a long chance and it may not work at all but--are you game to try it?"
She paused and regarded the expectant girls eagerly.

"Maybe," said Betty, noncommittally. "You might tell us the idea first."

"Listen," cried Mollie. "My idea is that if we take the hermit by
surprise, call him by his name of Paul Loup. Why--" She paused, and the
light of inspiration filled her eyes. "I could even speak to him in
French----"

As the girls caught her full meaning they looked at her admiringly.

"I shouldn't wonder if that plan would work," said Betty swiftly. "Why
can't we go now? Dinner won't be ready for a couple of hours."

"Right you are," cried Mollie, taking the four steps at one jump and
springing upon her astonished horse. "Come on, girls, are you with us?"

"We'll have to lead 'em a merry pace," said Betty to Mollie a moment
later as they galloped abreast up the road. "If we don't get them there
in a hurry they're apt to get cold feet and think we're crazy."

"Maybe we are," chuckled Mollie, urging Old Nick on to even greater
speed. "I've had a suspicion that way several times before."

It was Betty's turn to chuckle.

"So have I!" she said, adding with a sigh of resignation: "But oh, it is
so much fun. Look behind, Mollie. Are they still coming?"

"Strong," reported Mollie, with a glance over her shoulder. Then, as
they reached the trail that led through the woods, she reined in a
little, motioning for Betty to take the lead. "You know the trail
better," she said.

Over the rough woodland trail their progress necessarily became slower,
a fact which the girls did not relish at all. It gave them time to
reflect on what a really rash adventure they had embarked, and any but
the Outdoor Girls might have turned back even at this last minute.

However, curiosity, together with some vague hope that they might become
of service to this strange sad fellow, urged them on. If Paul Loup and
the Hermit of Gold Run were really one and the same person, then surely
there was a real mystery which they might in some way help to unravel.

They did not linger any longer on the way than was absolutely necessary,
for the terrible experience they had had with the timber wolves soon
after their arrival had made them suspicious of the forest, and try as
they would they could not suppress an uncomfortable desire to search
every shadow for some sinister, lurking presence.

In vain had the cowboys on the ranch assured them that wolves were very
scarce in this part of the forest, especially in the summer, and that
they had had an unusual and unique experience. As Amy had said, one
experience like that was enough to last a lifetime.

They came in sight of the cabin without mishap, however, and they
tethered their horses a little farther from the house than usual, so
that their stamping and neighing might not frighten the hermit away.

Then they made their way with as little noise as possible along the
narrow path.

"Suppose he isn't at home?" whispered Mollie to Betty.

"Then we're out of luck, that's all," returned Betty cheerfully.

But the hermit was at home. They could see him moving about, and as they
came nearer they smelled an appetizing odor of frying bacon, as though
he were cooking his dinner.

"Hope he asks us to stay to lunch," said Grace, and the girls giggled
nervously.

"We'll be lucky if he doesn't slam the door in our faces," said Amy
pessimistically.

It was Mollie who knocked this time--and it was no timid little rap
either, but a good, hearty rat-at-tat, that brought the occupant of the
cabin to the door in a hurry. He had the frying pan still clutched in
his hand and on his long narrow face was such a look of dread that the
girls felt sorry for him.

"Well," he said, the emotion within him making his voice sound stern and
forbidding, "what is it you wish? It is not raining to-day as it was
that other time." He gazed significantly up at the cloudless sky seen in
little blue patches through the trees, and the girls flushed, partly
from embarrassment and partly from anger. Somehow, they had not been
prepared to have him take this attitude, and they resented it.

For a moment they stood miserably tongue-tied. Even their usually
quick-witted Little Captain seemed suddenly to have been stricken
speechless. They were just about to turn and run when Mollie saved the
day for them.

Pushing forward through the group she confronted the man on the door
step.

"_Vous êtes Paul Loup, n'est-ce pas, monsieur?_" she said in a clear
voice, gazing up at him fearlessly.

While the girls gasped at her temerity a most astounding thing happened.
The man dropped the frying pan and it clattered to the floor, its
contents spilling out greasily. While they looked he seemed to crumple,
shrivel, and his eyes stared at them glassily out of his white mask of a
face.

"_Mon Dieu!_" he cried hoarsely, staggering back into the shack. "You
have found me! But I swear to you I did not kill him. _Mon Dieu_, I
could not kill my brother!"




CHAPTER XXI

A STARTLING TALE


Hardly able to believe that they were actually living this weird thing,
the girls crowded into the shack after the stricken man and found that
he had sunk upon a bench and covered his face with his hands.

Strangely enough, though it had been Mollie who had precipitated this
thing, it was Betty who now took the lead. Softly she went over to the
shrinking man and put a gentle hand on his shoulder.

"You say you did not kill your brother?" she questioned in so calm a
voice that the girls marveled at her. "You are sure you did not?"

"No! no!" cried the man again raising his haggard face, deep-lined with
the marks of suffering, "No--I am not sure. Can you not see? It is that
that is killing me. Yet in my sane moments I know that he was dead. He
lay there, so white, so still, with only that red, red stream of blood
to mar his whiteness. I leaned down, I listened to his heart----" The
man had evidently forgotten the presence of the girls, engulfed as he
was in the horror of the incident he related. Once more he was living
the tragedy, and the girls, tense, strained, horrified, lived it with
him.

"I listened to his heart," the man repeated, his arms stretched out
before him, his long, delicate hands gripped with a fierceness that made
the knuckles go white. "There was no beating. I put my face close to his
mouth to see if there was breath. But he had stopped breathing--forever!

"My heart went cold. I seized him by the shoulders. I called him by his
name--that brother that I had loved! Oh, how I had loved him. I begged
him to come back to me, to open those gray lips that a moment before had
been beautiful with life--to speak to me--and all the time----" his hand
relaxed and pointed to the floor and the girls followed the movement
fascinated--"there kept spreading and spreading on the rug a deep red
stain--my brother's blood! _Mon Dieu!_ And when I staggered to my feet I
found that the horrible stuff had clung to my fingers--they were dark
and sticky--the fingers of a murderer! I went mad then, I think. I
rushed from the house, from the place. One thing only was in my mind. To
get away--to get away from Paris, that accursed city----" He paused,
staring at the floor, and the girls waited, hardly daring to move for
fear they would break the spell.

"The rest is like a bad dream to me," the man continued in a weary
voice. "Ghost-ridden, haunted, I came to this country incognito--under
what you call an assumed name. For a short time I stayed in New
Orleans----"

"But your violin!" Betty interrupted in a voice that amazed her, it
seemed so little and weak. "Surely you were under contract."

The man turned on her what was almost a pitying look from his sunken
eyes.

"I could not play," he said, with a shrug of his shoulders. "To have
gone to my manager would have been like going to the hangman--the
electric chair, what you have in this country. No, mademoiselle, I was a
murderer, a man hunted by his fellowmen. There was but one thing for me
to do--to hide, to dodge about like a rabbit from a pack of baying dogs.
Hide!" he added bitterly. "I could not hide from myself.

"Always when the night grows dark and the wind it makes to howl around
this place I can hear my brother's voice uplifted in anger. We quarreled
over something my uncle had said--a foolish quarrel. He called me liar,
and I--something snapped in my brain, I think, and for a moment
everything went red. There was a wine bottle on the table--we had been
drinking--blindly I struck out with it---- Now, when the darkness comes
and the wildcat calls into the night with a scream like a soul in
torment, I hear again the tinkling of that bottle as it shattered, the
short groan, the falling of a heavy body.

"It is a wonder that I have not gone mad," he said. "Many a time I have
prayed that I might or that I might find courage to end this miserable
life and go to join my brother. But I am a coward, a coward----" His
voice lowered till it was almost inaudible and tears trickled through
the long white fingers. "I have not the courage even to die. There is a
tribunal above that I should have to face, more just, more awful, than
any man-made law. There you have what Paul Loup has become."

"But you must not speak that way," said Betty, whose quick mind had been
forging ahead while the man had been speaking. "It is one thing to kill
a man deliberately, and quite another to kill in hot blood, blindly.
Besides," she added eagerly, "you are not even sure that you did kill
your brother. Did you--have you seen the papers since--since you ran
away?"

"No," said the man. His tone was dead, hopeless. "I was afraid of what I
might find there. He was dead, Mademoiselle," he added wearily. "When I
say that there is a doubt of that it is simply to give myself one little
excuse for continuing to live. He did not move, he did not breathe. Ah,
yes, he was dead, quite dead."

There was silence for a moment while Betty thought rapidly. Amy and
Mollie and Grace stared wide-eyed with the feeling that they were
witnessing some tremendous, swift-moving drama.

"Of course," said the man, breaking the silence abruptly, his somber
eyes upon Betty, "there is but one thing left for me now to do. I shall
surrender to the authorities--a thing which I should have done long ago.
Or," he added grimly, "you might rather go with me now. If you left me I
might attempt to escape--so you will think, Mademoiselle?"

There was a lift at the end of the sentence that made it a question and,
startled, the girls looked at Betty to see what she would say.

The Little Captain herself was startled. Evidently the man thought they
had been tracking him, had used their knowledge to trap him.

"Oh, it isn't as you think!" she cried impulsively. "We never had the
slightest little wish to harm you. And please, please," she added
earnestly, "don't give yourself up to the authorities, or do anything
rash until you hear from me again. You may not believe me--I wouldn't
blame you if you didn't----" she went on shyly, for the man had risen
and was staring at her, "but all we want to do is to help you if we
can----" she broke off confusedly for the look in the man's eyes
silenced her.

"You know I am Paul Loup," he cried hoarsely. "You have heard my story,
my confession from my own lips, and still you say that you wish me no
harm! Who are you? what are you? what do you want of me?" He had
advanced toward them, and in a panic the girls moved back toward the
open door. Only Betty stood fearlessly in his path.

"We are the Outdoor Girls, and we are living just at present on Gold Run
Ranch," she said quietly. "We found out who you were because you were
good enough to play for us at a benefit we gave at the Hostess House at
Camp Liberty some time ago. And we came up here because we thought that
you were in trouble and that we might help you. If we can't help you,
I'm sorry." And with head bravely uplifted Betty turned toward the door.

She had almost reached it when he called to her.

"You are a brave girl," said Paul Loup slowly, his eyes intent on
Betty's pretty face, "How do you know that I--the murderer--will not
kill you also for this knowledge you have of me?"

Betty heard the frightened gasp of the girls behind her, but, strangely
enough, she herself felt no fear.

"You wouldn't do that," she said, her clear gaze holding his burning
one. "You could not wish harm to a friend."

"Is that what you wish me to consider you--a friend?" asked the strange
man, feeling suddenly as though something warm and vital had closed
about his heart.

"If you will," replied Betty, reaching out her hand. "I would like very
much to be."

But Paul Loup, for all he was a murderer and an outcast, was also a
Frenchman. With a quick gesture, ignoring her outstretched hand he
caught her in his arms, held her there for a minute, then, releasing
her, kissed her gently, first on one cheek, then on the other.

"I had forgotten there were kind hearts in the world," he murmured
brokenly, turning from her. "You have restored my faith. _Au revoir_, my
friend."

Someway, somehow, the girls found themselves outside that little cabin,
making their way blindly down the path to where their horses were
tethered. In a daze they mounted and rode off down the trail.

When they came to the open trail they found that Betty was crying,
openly, unashamed. Mollie pushed a handkerchief into her hand, but the
Little Captain did not seem to notice it. She stared straight ahead, her
cheeks burning, the tears rolling unchecked down her face.

"Never mind, honey," said Mollie, trying to steady her voice. "It was
hard for you, I know; but I would give anything I own to have made him
feel that way about me. I don't care if he did commit murder. I'm for
him--strong."

"To be all alone," said Betty as though Mollie had not spoken, "and so
heart-hungry that a little sympathy from a stranger----" A sob choked
the rest of her sentence. But a moment later she faced the girls with a
light of resolve shining in her eyes.

"Girls," she said, "I don't believe Paul Loup is a murderer, and some
way or other I'm going to prove it. A man like that just couldn't commit
murder. I know it!"




CHAPTER XXII

THE PLAN


Certainly the girls had never expected such startling developments from
Mollie's simple little ruse to find out who the mysterious Hermit of
Gold Run was. In the beginning it had been something of a lark, and they
never dreamed that their interest and curiosity would uncover such a
tragedy.

However, they were not at all in sympathy with Betty's conviction that
Paul Loup had not really killed his brother.

"I don't see how you get that way, Betty," Grace argued hotly. "We all
feel as sorry for the hermit as you do, but we have his own word for it
that he really killed his brother."

"He did seem to be pretty sure of it," said Amy, with a quaver in her
voice. "When the wind rose last night and wailed around the house, I got
all creepy thinking of him alone up in that dreary little shack, living
that whole horrible thing over again."

It was the next day, and the girls were in the saddle, as usual. They
had visited the new gold diggings and found everybody excited and
optimistic, though no gold had been uncovered as yet. And now they were
trotting slowly along the open road, their thoughts busy with the
startling happenings of the day before.

"It's a wonder he doesn't go crazy," shuddered Mollie, taking up the
thread where Amy had dropped it. "I know I would. What was it he said
about being 'ghost-ridden?'"

"I don't believe he is ghost-ridden at all, except by his imagination,"
said Betty positively. "I think if he had taken the trouble to look at
the newspapers before he decided that he was a hunted man he might have
saved himself a lot of trouble and unhappiness."

"Goodness, how do you get that way, Betty?" Grace said irritably. "The
man ought to be the best judge of whether he killed anybody or not."

"Well," said the Little Captain stubbornly, "it seems to me it would
have had to be a pretty heavy bottle with a pretty strong arm behind it
to kill a man with one blow. And a scalp wound bleeds horribly, you
know."

The girls looked a little thoughtful, and for the first time since Betty
had advanced her theory they began to think that there might possibly
be something in it after all.

"That's right," said Amy, and then went on to relate an experience she
had had when skylarking with Sarah Stonington.

"She had hold of that heavy rocking chair we have in the library," Amy
said. "She was trying to pull it away from me, and I was hanging on to
it for dear life.

"Then suddenly I let go, and Aunt Sarah--she's pretty heavy, you
know--lost her balance as the chair swung forward, and fell over
backward, striking her head on the sharp edge of the piano."

"Goodness, you must have been scared," commented Mollie.

"'Scared!'" echoed Amy. "Why, I was struck dumb with terror. I thought I
had killed her. She lay there all white and funny, and her head was
bleeding dreadfully----"

"There's your scalp wound for you," Betty pointed out. "Just a little
scratch will make the whole place look like a shambles."

"But what happened to your aunt Sarah, Amy," pursued Mollie
interestedly. "We know she didn't die."

"Well, I should say she didn't!" said Amy roundly. "She was as good as
ever in ten minutes and laughing at me for being so frightened. But we
had to have the rug sent away to get the stain out," she added
significantly.

"Huh," said the girls, and once more became thoughtful.

"But suppose you were right, Betty?" said Mollie, after a while.
"Suppose our poor musician is torturing himself by thinking he has
committed a crime that he hasn't? What could you possibly do about it?"

"I don't just know," Betty admitted truthfully.

"We might ask your father," Grace hazarded, but Betty turned on her,
startled.

"That's just the thing I don't want to do!" she said hurriedly. "Dad is
just the best and most easy-going father in the world, but he has a
terribly stern sense of justice. I'm not sure he wouldn't think we were
making ourselves--oh, what do you call it----"

"Accessories after the fact?" suggested Mollie, helpfully.

"That's it," said Betty. "He might argue that we were committing a crime
ourselves by helping to hide a criminal----"

"Well, maybe we are, at that," said Grace, uncomfortably.

"They can put you in jail for that sort of thing, can't they?" added
Amy, a suggestion which certainly did not add to the cheerfulness of the
atmosphere.

"I don't care," said Betty stoutly. "I'd rather go to jail than deliver
a man to a doubtful justice--especially when he may really be innocent.
Anyway," she added, reasonably: "who is there to know that we went to
Paul Loup's cabin the other day? I'm very sure no one saw us go in or
come out, and if we keep quiet no one will have to know. That's why I
didn't even want to take dad into our confidence."

"But if our musician is, as you think, innocent," Grace insisted, "then
your father could do more for him than we."

"But we don't know that he is innocent. That's only my idea," said
Betty. "And dad would probably think it was a very foolish one. Maybe it
is, for all I know," she added dubiously.

"How about Allen?" said Grace suddenly after another rather long
silence. "He would certainly sympathize with our poor hermit and, being
a lawyer, he would probably be able to think up some way that we might
establish the man's innocence or guilt without giving away his
whereabouts. There, how's that for a brilliant idea?" she finished
proudly.

"I had already thought of that," admitted Betty, while the girls turned
amused eyes upon her. "But I was almost afraid to suggest it."

"Maybe Allen would agree with your father that we, ought to turn him
over to justice," said Mollie, but Betty shook her head vigorously.

"Never! Not Allen!" she declared fervently. "He believes the other
fellow innocent until he is proved guilty."

"So does the law," said Amy wisely.

"Yes, but the law has sent many an innocent man to prison nevertheless,"
retorted Mollie. "We don't always find justice in the courts."

"Hear, hear," cried Grace. "Get a soap box, Mollie."

"Then it is settled that we are to tell Allen, is it?" said Betty
eagerly. "I'm sure he will find some way to help us."

"If we can pry him loose from the mining outfit," laughed Mollie. "He
seems to have gold fever worse than any of them."

But Allen had been busy, during the intervals when he could tear himself
away from the fascination of the mining operations, on some legal
matters.

Mrs. Nelson, and her husband also, had feared that these numerous
relatives of her great uncle, of whose existence she herself had
scarcely been aware, might see fit to contest the old man's will
especially when it became apparent that his property at this time was
far more valuable than it had been at the time of his death.

Allen, after considerable investigation, was able to set their fears at
rest upon this point, however, by asserting that the old gentleman had
made only one will and that he thought it very doubtful under the
circumstances that the relatives would take the case into the courts.
They were not Mr. Barcolm's children and grandchildren, as Lizzie had
supposed, but distant relatives whom at one time and another the old man
had befriended and gathered about him, but who had later quarreled with
their benefactor.

"Anyway," Mrs. Nelson decided happily, "if we really do find some gold I
will give each one of them a share of it, even to the littlest."

On this particular afternoon the girls found Allen, not at the mines as
they supposed they would, but at the ranch house busy with some papers.

When they besought him to come out for a ride, he hesitated at first,
saying that he ought to get his work done before night. But they finally
persuaded him not to let duty interfere with pleasure.

"All right," he surrendered at last. "If you will get one of the boys
to saddle Lightning for me I will be with you in ten minutes."

He kept his promise, and in a short time was listening to the strangest
tale he had ever heard. As he listened his face became more and more
serious.

"But, girls, this thing sounds impossible!" he burst forth, finally.
"Are you telling me that you, alone and unprotected, managed to inveigle
this murderer into confessing his crime to you? Gee, it's--it's
unbelievable! The four of you would be a great help to me in my
profession," he added, with a chuckle.

"I didn't think you would take it as a joke," said Betty, reproachfully.

"It isn't a joke," returned Allen, his face grave again. "It's a mighty
serious business, if you will excuse my saying so. It makes me sick when
I think of the chance you took." He was speaking to all the girls, but
his look of concern was for Betty.

"Oh, we don't want to think about ourselves," said the latter,
impatiently. "We've done a good deal more dangerous things than that in
our lives. We thought--we hoped--you might help us to prove his
innocence----"

"But the man's guilty," said Allen, surprised. "We have that by his own
confession----"

With a glance of despair at the others, Betty interrupted him.

"Listen to me, Allen," she said. "This is what I think----" And she went
on to tell him her idea while he listened, at first with a smile of
faint amusement on his lips which gradually changed to grave admiration
as he realized Betty's unfailing faith in the basic goodness of human
nature.

"I hope you are right, little girl," he said at last, when she had
finished and was looking at him earnestly. "I'd like to believe you were
right----"

"But you can't?" she finished for him, trying to stifle the
disappointment in her heart.

"No, I can't," he answered truthfully. "When a man is so sure of his
crime that he flees his own country, gives up money and fame to escape
the law, you may be pretty sure that his crime was a real one."

"But, Allen, you don't know the man," Betty pleaded, pretty close to
tears in the bitterness of her disappointment. "No one could make the
kind of music he does and be truly wicked. I wish you could have met
him. I think you would have tried a little harder to help him."

"I'm willing to help him, if I can," Allen answered gently, feeling that
he would be almost willing to step into this poor musician's place if
he might have Betty plead for him as she had just done for the other.
"What is it you would like me to do?"

Then suddenly the great idea popped full grown into Betty's head.

"I have it!" she cried. "Why not write to Paul Loup's manager in New
York and ask him for particulars?"

"Capital!" replied Allen approvingly, while the girls looked at their
Little Captain admiringly. "If anybody ought to be able to give us
information, he surely is the one."

"And, Allen," begged Betty, reining her horse close to Allen and laying
a timid hand on his arm, "you won't even whisper a word of what we've
told you--not for your foolish old law, or anything else?"

"Of course not," said Allen, smiling at her. "We have to give the poor
fellow his chance."




CHAPTER XXIII

GREAT DAYS


That very afternoon Allen composed a letter to Paul Loup's concert
manager--advised and censored by the girls, of course--and they all rode
off to town to mail it in time to catch the four o'clock outgoing mail.

"Now," said Mollie, as, this duty well performed, they started back to
the ranch, "I feel better. We've started something, anyway."

"Let's hope that we can finish it," added Grace, dubiously.

They did not expect an answer to this epistle within ten days, and in
the meantime they found plenty to keep them busy around the ranch.

Progress at the mines was swift, and almost any minute now they might
expect to hear the glorious tidings that some one had "struck it rich."

Nothing had been seen of Peter Levine since that memorable night when
the map had been taken from him, and it was rumored that the rascally
lawyer had left town.

"And the longer he keeps away the healthier it will be for him, I
reckon," Allen said, adding with a laugh: "Gee, but it makes me happy
every time I think of how sore that chap may be."

Betty had dimpled sympathetically.

"You have an awfully mean disposition, Allen," she chided him.

Meggy and Dan Higgins were working furiously at their mine, but after a
few days Betty was quick to see that they were not progressing as well
as some of the others. After all Meggy, though unusually strong and
robust for her age, was only a girl and her father was an old man who
had just about worn out his energies in a fruitless search for fortune.

Betty had besought her father to send help to these good friends of
hers, and Mr. Nelson had immediately complied.

There had been some trouble with Dan at first--with Meggy too, for that
matter.

"We can't take nothin' thet we can't pay fer, sir," the old fellow
assured Mr. Nelson positively. But the latter reminded him that he and
Meggy had saved his daughter's life, as well as those of the other
girls, and that this put him, Mr. Nelson, deeply in the others' debt.
In view of this the old fellow finally surrendered. In his heart he was
deeply, fervently thankful for the help of the young, able-bodied man
whom Mr. Nelson provided and for whose services he paid.

"But ef I strike thet thar gold vein, sir," Dan assured Mr. Nelson
earnestly, "I'm goin' to make it up to you, sir, every cent of it."

"All right, we can talk about that later," Mr. Nelson said, and laughed
and walked on to view his own operations, feeling that he had done a
very good day's work.

One morning, as the girls mounted their horses and turned their heads in
the direction of the gold diggings, they heard what seemed to be wild
cheering and shouting in the distance and with one impulse they urged
their horses to a gallop.

"Somebody's found something!" shouted Mollie, as the cheering and
shouting became more distinct. "Oh, girls, I wonder who it is."

"Maybe a mine has caved in, or something," Grace called back,
pessimistically. "You'd better not get too happy, all at once."

"You old wet-blanket!" cried Betty, as she leaned forward and whispered
in Nigger's ear, urging him to greater speed. "That kind of mine doesn't
cave in very often. Oh, Nigger, hurry, old boy! Don't you know we've
got to get there quickly?"

As they approached the noise became tumultuous, and as they topped a
small hill that brought them in full view of the new diggings they saw a
sight that they would never forget as long as they lived.

They gazed on what seemed to be a mob gone wild. Men grasped each other
around the waists, performing some kind of crazy dance that looked like
an Indian cakewalk. Others tossed their hats in the air and shot holes
through them as they fell to the ground. And all were laughing, crying,
shouting, waving arms and head gear in a sort of wild, feverish, primal
jubilation.

The girls caught the thrill of it and they tingled to their finger tips.
Putting spurs to their horses, they galloped down into the thick of it.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE END OF PETER LEVINE


The crowd scattered as the Outdoor Girls came whirling down into its
midst, but in an instant it had closed about them again. They
dismounted, leaving their excited horses to go where they would, and
pushed their way through to the group that seemed to be the center of
all this wild demonstration.

And when they saw Meggy, fairly weeping with joy, and old Dan Higgins,
holding a handful of precious golden nuggets, they nearly went mad
themselves.

They kissed and hugged Meggy till she cried aloud for mercy. They kissed
and hugged old Dan, and he took it as though he had been used to being
made much of by pretty girls all his life.

Twenty years had fallen from the old man's age. No matter that he had
wasted the best part of his life in a vain hunt for gold. His dream had
been realized at last. There was a fortune in his grasp, and he felt
again the thrill that had coursed through his veins when, as a young
man, heart high with aspirations, he had started on his quest.

He was young again! Young! It seemed as though the sight of those golden
nuggets--his own--had renewed the fires of youth.

Nimbly he sprang upon an empty powder keg and addressed his frenzied
audience.

"Friends and fellow gold hunters," he yelled, and there was a roar of
appreciation. "They is a few words I'd like to say afore we go back to
wrestlin' some more gold outen them rocks. An' these is them. Ef I'm a
happy man to-day an' a rich one, then it's all due to these four young
gals here. They set me on the trail o' this new thing when I was purty
near tuckered out. You all knows 'em an' loves 'em. Now give 'em a
cheer. Hearty, now, hearty----"

Then arose such a roar that the Outdoor Girls' hearts swelled near to
bursting and they felt the tears sting their eyes. That moment would be
something to remember all their lives.

The roar gradually subsided and the miners wandered back to their own
operations again, followed by scattered groups of curious onlookers.
They worked with redoubled energy, with redoubled hope. Gold had been
found. More gold would be found. It was a thrilling, glorious race to
see who would be the next to announce good fortune.

Left to themselves, the girls crowded around Meggy, questioning her,
congratulating her, demanding to know how it had all happened and when.

"My--my mouth is so dry I can hardly speak," said Meggy, quivering with
nervous reaction. "I--I can't jest make up my mind that it has happened
yet."

"We know," said Betty, soothingly. "You needn't tell us about it if you
don't want to."

"But I do--I've got to!" cried Meggy tensely. "Why, it seems like a
dream. But I'm so happy, so wildly happy----" A sob caught in her throat
and she paused for a moment, then went on swiftly, the words tumbling
over each other in her eagerness: "It was jest this morning that it
happened, jest a little while ago. You know we have been workin' awful
hard the last few days, an' I was getting worried over dad again. He was
gittin' that thin an' weak an' kind o' discouraged, too. Seemed like
he'd jest made up his mind that there wasn't no luck fer him nowhere's.

"Then----" she leaned forward, her eyes black as coals, her fingers
clasped convulsively in front of her. "Then we uncovered it, that first
little narrow vein o' gold runnin' through the rocks. I thought dad
would go plumb crazy when he seen it. Honest, I was skeered for a
minute, till I recollected thet joy never killed nobody.

"Then I began to be skeered fer myself. I felt so kind o' queer an'
wobbly inside o' me. Then dad came runnin' out to show the other fellers
what he'd found, an' seemed like they went crazy too.

"Then you come an'--an'--I guess thet's 'bout all."

The girls drew a long breath.

"All," repeated Grace, softly. "I should think it was about enough for
one day!"

"An' now," said Meggy, in a small little voice, "poor old dad an' me,
we're rich--rich! Think of it--Meggy an' her dad! Now I can buy a hoss
like--like--Nigger, mebbe----"

"You funny girl," cried Betty, hugging her fondly. "Of course you can
buy a horse--a dozen of them if you want to. But wouldn't you like
anything else? Pretty clothes, a beautiful house to live in----"

"Yes," agreed Meggy, but without any special enthusiasm. "I used to
think when you gals come around lookin' all pretty an' stylish in your
nice clothes thet I would like to dress thet way myself ef I wasn't as
poor as dirt. An' I would like to live in somethin' besides a shack an'
have sheets enough to your beds so's you could change 'em every day ef
you wanted to. Sure, I'd like them things.

"But a hoss----" Her voice lowered almost to a reverential pitch. "Ever
sence I grew to be a long-legged gal, seems like all I've really wanted
was a hoss. I s'pose," she turned dark, rather wistful eyes on the
girls, "it's purty hard for you gals to understand what I'm talkin'
about. You never longed fer a thing so's your heart ached till it seemed
like it was dead inside of you. So you might think I was foolish to take
on so 'bout only a hoss."

"We don't think you're foolish, Meggy," said Betty, gently. "We think
you're wonderful, and you deserve every bit of the splendid luck that
has come to you. And I expect," she finished gayly, "that you will have
the most beautiful horse in all Gold Run."

Meggy's eyes lighted with joy. Then they misted suddenly as she looked
at the girls.

"It's jest like dad said," she murmured. "We wouldn't 'a' had nothin' ef
it hadn't been fer you girls. You don't know how we feel about you,
'cause we jest never could tell you."

The days that followed seemed like a beautiful fairy tale to the happy
girls. Peter Levine had known what he was talking about when he had
asserted that "gold was running wild" about the northern end of the
ranch and its environs.

It was as though the finding of gold in the new Higgins' mine had been
the key that unlocked the door to a steady stream of it.

Every day brought glad tidings of a new find, and, as some of these were
on the ranch, Betty began to realize that the Nelson family was becoming
very wealthy. They had always been well-to-do, for her father had
prospered in his business, that of carpet manufacturer in Deepdale. But
now it seemed that they were to know what it felt like to be really
rich.

The girls realized this, and once Mollie put the new idea into words.

"This is a wonderful thing for you, Betty dear," she said soberly. "You
can have about anything in the world that you want now. I--I--hope you
won't forget your old friends." She said the last laughingly, but Betty
was deeply hurt and showed that she was.

"If--if you ever dare say such a horrid thing to me again, Mollie
Billette," she cried, half way between tears and anger, "I'll never,
never forgive you! You--you--ought to know me better."

And Mollie, heartily ashamed of herself, succeeded in placating the
Little Captain only after having apologized most abjectly.

Then one day something happened that amused them all mightily. They had
all turned out to the gold diggings, Mrs. Nelson, Mr. Nelson, the four
girls, and Allen. Mrs. Nelson and Allen were engaged in the joyful
pursuit of trying to figure out how much her profits would be, when
Betty edged up to Allen and, pulling his sleeve, pointed out a man some
distance from them. The latter was standing alone, and he seemed to be
regarding the operations rather morosely.

"Peter Levine, by all that's holy!" murmured Allen. "Just hold tight for
a minute, folks, and watch me chase him."

With an elaborately casual air, Allen sauntered over to the morose
individual. The man looked up as he approached, and the scowl on his
face deepened.

"Howdy," said Allen, loud enough to cause those near by to turn to look
at him. "How's my old friend Levine this morning?"

"None of your business," snarled the other, with a black look. "Lay off
me, do you hear?"

"Oh, yes, I hear," said Allen, loudly and cheerfully. "I'm quite
exceptionally good at hearing. Shall I tell these friends of ours what
Andy Rawlinson and I happened to hear the other night, beneath these
very trees? Why, Levine, where are you going?" he asked with feigned
surprise, as the other started to take his leave. "Don't you want to
hear----"

"Shut your mouth!" snarled Peter Levine, furiously, then turned and
slunk off, followed by the jeers and catcalls of the crowd.

"You shore hev got his number, boy," said one old timer, admiringly. "He
loves you like the fox loves a trap."

Allen grinned boyishly. "Suits me!" he said cheerfully.




CHAPTER XXV

INNOCENT


"That was good, Allen," said Mr. Nelson appreciatively, as the young
fellow rejoined the group. "You've licked him in fine shape."

"And we want to thank you for the way you have handled things for us,
Allen," added Mrs. Nelson, warmly. "We might have got into all sorts of
trouble if it hadn't been for you."

The young lawyer was tremendously embarrassed by this praise, though
Betty was aglow with it. It was splendid to have her family so fond of
Allen.

The latter noticed her silence, and under cover of the general
conversation commented upon it.

"How feels the millionairess this morning?" he asked lightly, though
Betty felt that there was a deeper meaning hidden behind the words.

"I'm feeling splendid," she answered, her voice vibrating with the joy
of living. "Who wouldn't be--with all this?" and she waved her hand over
the bustling scene.

In spite of the excitement of all these wonderful happenings, the girls,
especially Betty, had thought almost constantly of the poor musician
whom his neighbors called the Hermit of Gold Run.

He never came down to help Dan Higgins and Meggy any more, probably,
Grace said, scared off by the bustle and confusion of the new gold boom.
Meggy had mentioned casually once or twice that she still took food to
the desperate man.

"If he only doesn't give himself up to the authorities before we get
news from the East!" Betty, worried, exclaimed over and over again.

Then one day, along with the other letters in the mail, there arrived an
important looking document from New York addressed to Allen.

The latter was out at the gold diggings at the time, and the girls
fairly lassoed him, bringing him home protesting but helpless.

"I say, what's the row?" he demanded, and for answer Mollie thrust the
important missive into his hand.

"Read!" she commanded dramatically. "And tell us what lies within."

Allen tore the envelope open and read the letter hastily through while
the girls crowded around him and tried to read over his shoulder.

Then he jumped to his feet and waved the paper at them excitedly.

"By Jove!" he cried, "this proves that Betty was right. The man didn't
kill his brother--simply injured him. He was taken to the hospital and
he recovered long since. The manager says he has been trying to locate
Paul Loup for weeks. He is losing a fortune every day----"

But Betty could wait no longer. She snatched the letter from him and
read it through aloud while the girls gaped at her.

"Come on," she cried, reaching for her sailor hat and pushing it down on
her shapely little head. "Don't stand there like wooden Indians. We've
got to take this news to Paul Loup."

Bent on their joyful mission, the girls approached the lonely little
cabin in the woods swiftly. As they came near they heard again that same
hauntingly sweet melody that had so moved them the first time they had
heard it.

Yet now that they understood the pain that prompted the rendering of
that exquisite harmony, it seemed too bitterly sad to be beautiful, and
their hearts ached dully in sympathy with Paul Loup's despair.

Tears were in Betty's eyes, but there was a smile on her lips, as she
pushed open the door of the little shack and stood waiting on the
threshold.

The musician saw her, ended the throbbing melody with a crash of
discord, and gazed at her mutely. In all his tall, gaunt body only his
glowing eyes seemed really alive, but in those eyes there was a welcome
that gave Betty courage.

"Look!" she cried, holding out the paper to him. "This is from your
manager. Read it--and see that you are innocent."

Slowly the man laid down his violin and bow, slowly he took the paper
from Betty's trembling fingers. Like a man in a daze he read it
through--then read it through again.

"I did not kill him--my brother," he murmured aloud. "My brother--that I
love--I did not kill him. He is alive--he is well. _Mon Dieu_, then I am
free! Paul Loup--he is not a murderer--a hunted thing. He is again the
artist--free--_free_----" His voice, which had been gradually rising as
the truth bore in upon him, rose to a jubilant shout and he threw out
his arms passionately as though to encompass them all in his newly found
love of life. "The world----" he said brokenly, "the world is very
beautiful!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Silently the girls rode through the sunshine and shadow-filled forest,
their hearts filled with a happiness so poignant it seemed almost pain.

"What a wonderful, wonderful summer!" breathed Mollie. "I don't believe
we have ever had one like it, girls."

"I wish we didn't have to go home," sighed Amy. "I shall miss my
beautiful Lady so," and she laid a loving hand on the little animal's
arching neck.

"What about me?" wailed Grace. "I know I shall cry myself to sleep,
longing for Nabob. He's one of the best chums I ever had."

But the Little Captain did not hear them. Over and over again, like an
echo, her mind was repeating those words of Paul Loup: "The world is
very beautiful."

"Girls," she murmured dreamily, "everybody is so happy--and I'm so
happy--oh, please, don't wake me up--anybody!"

And so, at the end of a wonderful outing, with life stretching
gloriously before them, we will once more sadly, reluctantly, wave
farewell to the Outdoor Girls.


THE END




THE OUTDOOR GIRLS SERIES

By LAURA LEE HOPE

Author of the "Bobbsey Twin Books" and "Bunny Brown" Series.

       *       *       *       *       *

          12mo. BOUND IN CLOTH.  ILLUSTRATED.  UNIFORM STYLE OF BINDING.

       *       *       *       *       *

These tales take in the various adventures participated in by several
bright, up-to-date girls who love outdoor life. They are clean and
wholesome, free from sensationalism, absorbing from the first chapter to
the last.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS OF DEEPDALE
          Or Camping and Tramping for Fun and Health.

Telling how the girls organized their Camping and Tramping Club, how
they went on a tour, and of various adventures which befell them.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT RAINBOW LAKE
          Or Stirring Cruise of the Motor Boat Gem.

One of the girls becomes the proud possessor of a motor boat and invites
her club members to take a trip down the river to Rainbow Lake, a
beautiful sheet of water lying between the mountains.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A MOTOR CAR
          Or The Haunted Mansion of Shadow Valley.

One of the girls has learned to run a big motor car, and she invites the
club to go on a tour to visit some distant relatives. On the way they
stop at a deserted mansion and make a surprising discovery.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN A WINTER CAMP
          Or Glorious Days on Skates and Ice Boats.

In this story, the scene is shifted to a winter season. The girls have
some jolly times skating and ice boating, and visit a hunters' camp in
the big woods.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN FLORIDA
          Or Wintering in the Sunny South.

The parents of one of the girls have bought an orange grove in Florida,
and her companions are invited to visit the place. They take a trip into
the interior, where several unusual things happen.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS AT OCEAN VIEW
          Or The Box that Was Found in the Sand.

The girls have great fun and solve a mystery while on an outing along
the New England coast.


          THE OUTDOOR GIRLS ON PINE ISLAND
          Or A Cave and What it Contained.

A bright, healthful story, full of good times at a bungalow camp on Pine
Island.

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET & DUNLAP,  PUBLISHERS,  NEW YORK




THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH SERIES

By GERTRUDE W. MORRISON

       *       *       *       *       *

          12mo. BOUND IN CLOTH.  ILLUSTRATED.  UNIFORM STYLE OF BINDING.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here is a series full of the spirit of high school life of to-day. The
girls are real flesh-and-blood characters, and we follow them with
interest in school and out. There are many contested matches on track
and field, and on the water, as well as doings in the classroom and on
the school stage. There is plenty of fun and excitement, all clean, pure
and wholesome.


          THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH
          Or Rivals for all Honors.

A stirring tale of high school life, full of fun, with a touch of
mystery and a strange initiation.


          THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH ON LAKE LUNA
          Or The Crew That Won.

Telling of water sports and fun galore, and of fine times in camp.


          THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH AT BASKETBALL
          Or The Great Gymnasium Mystery.

Here we have a number of thrilling contests at basketball and in
addition, the solving of a mystery which had bothered the high school
authorities for a long while.


          THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH ON THE STAGE
          Or The Play That Took the Prize.

How the girls went in for theatricals and how one of them wrote a play
which afterward was made over for the professional stage and brought in
some much-needed money.


          THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH ON TRACK AND FIELD
          Or The Girl Champions of the School League

This story takes in high school athletics in their most approved and
up-to-date fashion. Full of fun and excitement.


          THE GIRLS OF CENTRAL HIGH IN CAMP
          Or The Old Professor's Secret.

The girls went camping on Acorn Island and had a delightful time at
boating, swimming and picnic parties.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK



       *       *       *       *       *



Transcriber's Notes:

   Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

   Page 122, "draw" changed to "drawer". (dresser drawer)

   Page 153, "get's" changed to "gets". (Winner gets)

   Page 191, "Accessaries" changed to "Accessories" (Accessories
             after the)

   Page 204, "too" changed to "to". (I've got to!)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE OUTDOOR GIRLS IN THE SADDLE***


******* This file should be named 19318-8.txt or 19318-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/3/1/19318



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
