The Project Gutenberg EBook of Laugh and Play, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Laugh and Play
       A Collection of Original stories

Author: Various

Illustrator: E. Stuart Hardy

Release Date: February 11, 2006 [EBook #17750]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAUGH AND PLAY ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Laugh and Play

                  A Collection of Original Stories,


                        with Illustrations by
                           E. Stuart Hardy.



                    London:                  New York:
                 Ernest Nister           E.P. Dutton & Co

                        _Printed in Bavaria._





[Illustration:]

Laugh and Play.

    _Laugh_ and play all the day:
      Don't you think with me
    When I say that's the way
      If you'd happy be?

    Maid and lad, if we had
      Never time for song,
    Always sad, never glad,
      Days would seem so long!

    Tear and sigh make the sky
      Dark and sad and grey;
    Never cry--only try
      Just to laugh and play.

    Faces bright make sunlight
      All the merry day;
    Frowns they fright out of sight--
      So we'll laugh and play.

    _C.B._

[Illustration: A HAPPY DAY.]

[Illustration:]




Laugh and Play

[Illustration:]


"Come and have a game at soldiers, Dulcie."

"I can't, Harold; don't you see I'm busy?"

"Busy writing rubbish! How you can be so silly as to waste your time
like that I can't think. It isn't as if you really _could_ write
poetry, and I call it downright conceited for a girl to pretend she
can. So, do leave off, there's a dear, and come and have a game. I
want to try my new cannon, and you shall have first shot if you will
come."

But Dulcie was offended. A week ago she had written a verse about
Harold's dog, and father had said it was very good and had given her
sixpence for writing it. Since then she had spent most of her spare
time trying to write other verses, but this afternoon she was
beginning to get a little tired of being a poetess and to long for a
good game.

When Harold suggested soldiers, she really wanted to play, for she was
almost as fond of boys' games as her brother was; but she thought it
sounded grand to pretend she was busy. Then when Harold called her
silly and conceited she grew angry and sulked.

"Do come, Dulcie; don't be cross!"

"Go away, you rude boy," replied Dulcie.

Harold tried coaxing for a little while longer, and then he went away
and left his sister alone in the school-room. It was very lonely
there, and before five minutes had passed Dulcie heartily regretted
that she had refused Harold's offer.

"But he _was_ horrid," she said, "and anyway _he_ is miserable too; he
can't bear playing alone."

Harold, however, was anything but miserable, for, on peeping out of
the window, Dulcie saw him in the next-door garden helping the
children there to make a big snow-man. He was laughing and shouting,
and had evidently forgotten all about her.

A lump seemed to have suddenly risen in her throat, and as she crept
back to the table two big tears fell splashing down upon the poem she
had been trying to write and blotted out some of the words; then down
went her head upon the paper, and in another moment she was sobbing
pitifully.

It was almost dark when Harold came running up to the school-room,
and, bursting open the door, cried cheerily: "Such a lark, Dulcie;
just listen. Hullo," he added, "what's the matter?"

In another moment his arm was round his sister's neck and she was
rubbing her tear-stained cheek against his cold rosy one.

[Illustration:]

"O, Harold," she sobbed, "I've been so miserable. I'm sorry I was so
disagreeable."

"Never mind; is _that_ all you're crying about? Well, I was horrid
too: I teased you when you were writing, and I daresay your poetry
_is_ clever."

"No, it isn't," said Dulcie; "it's as stupid as stupid can be, and
I'll never try to write a piece again," and with that she picked up
the offending paper and dropped it into the fire.

Harold gave her a brotherly hug, for he really was glad Dulcie had
come to this decision, for he had found her new accomplishment a
little trying at times.

"But I haven't told you my news yet," he said. "I've been playing with
the Grahams all the afternoon, and Mrs. Graham came out just now and
has invited us to go there to tea and have a good game afterwards, and
Tom told me there was to be a Christmas-tree. So come along and let's
tell nurse, for it's time to get ready."

O, what a good time the children had that evening, and how they did
laugh and play! Dulcie was amongst the merriest there, and when she
and Harold went home that night, laden with toys from the
Christmas-tree, she said: "Wasn't I a silly girl to sit and cry and be
miserable this afternoon, when I might have been so happy?"

_L. L. Weedon._




The Elder Tree

[Illustration:]


There was a fascinating little stream just at the other side of the
low wall that bounded the garden, and this stream had more attractions
for Sydney than anything else about the holiday home.

It was not for its cool murmuring sound that Sydney liked it, nor for
its crystal clearness--though he must have felt the charm of all this
during those hot August days. He had found a beautiful place where he
could put a water-wheel, and he was as busy as he could be planning
and making one. He had his little box of tools with him, and it was
easy to get pieces of wood; and for the rest Sydney's cleverness in
"making things" was well known to his sisters and brother, and held in
great reverence by them. They never "meddled," and so were graciously
allowed to come and admire.

"O, bother!" exclaimed Sydney, "here's this little plague! You can't
come here, Walter," he called out. "Go back to the garden and play
there."

But little Walter had already climbed over the loose stones and was
running towards the stream.

Sydney jumped up from the ground and went to meet him.

"Did you hear, Walter?" said he; "go back and play. I don't want you
here."

"O, _please_, Sydney," said a pleading voice, as a pair of childish
blue eyes were lifted up to the face of the elder boy, "I _do_ want to
see the water-mill! I won't touch it--I promise."

"You won't get the chance," said Sydney roughly. "Just you go back
when you're told. You've got Madge and Johnny to play with."

"But Madge doesn't make water-wheels, and I'm tired of her play, and
Johnny is indoors. Do let me watch you, Sydney!"

But all Sydney's answer was to take the little boy by the shoulders
and march him back to the wall. He felt very angry.

"Now, look here, Walter," he said, "in that elder-bush there lives a
ghost that comes out sometimes. I think you'd better keep away from
it, for you're the sort of chap that would be caught."

[Illustration:]

Sydney, seeing the sudden fear in the child's face as he turned his
eyes towards the elder-tree, thought he had hit on a very happy plan
for keeping Walter away.

"I've given him a fright," said he, as he went back to where his
sisters were sitting by the edge of the stream. "I've told him there's
a ghost in that tree. He won't come past it in a hurry."

Loo laughed, but Lena said: "He'll really believe it, Sydney. He's
such a nervous sort of a child."

"I want him to believe it," said Sydney. "He's such an inquisitive
little chap that he'd have been coming down here to see my wheel when
I wasn't about. I don't know what mother asked him for. He's a perfect
nuisance."

"Mother wants us to be kind to him," said Lena; "you know she said so.
Poor little thing! He hasn't got a mother, and he's always left with
servants now."

"The best place for him," exclaimed Sydney. "Why should he bother us
and spoil our holiday?"

"He's a stupid little thing," said Loo.

Lena was silent. "He's not like other children," she said, after a
minute, "but how can he be? Mother says he has never had any jolly
times or any children to play with."

"O, well," said Sydney carelessly, "he's got Madge and Johnny now, and
that ought to be enough." And then he forgot all about Walter in the
interest of fixing his wheel.

Meanwhile Walter went slowly back again through the garden, his heart
full of bitter disappointment. He did so want to see that wheel! He
had been dreaming about it all night, for he had known that it was to
be fixed and tried the next day. He had been watching for an
opportunity ever since Sydney and his sisters had gone to the stream.
It came when nurse went indoors with Johnny, and Madge got sulky and
buried herself in a picture-book. That was the moment when he stole
away unobserved. If only he could have had one peep! He wouldn't have
touched it, not for the world; he only wanted to look at the wonderful
thing, and to see if he could perhaps make one some day. He would like
to try now, but he was not allowed to have a knife, and he did not
know where to get wood. Then when he went home there would be no
stream and no new sorts of play.

Just then he heard Madge calling him.

"Come here and play, Walter," she said. "I'll be a bear among the
trees and I'll run out and catch you."

"I don't like that game, Madge," said he; "you roar so loud and then I
think it really is a bear."

"You baby!" said she. "Well, Johnny and nurse will play and you can
run away."

No, he could not do that. He would play too, and try to remember all
the time that it was only Madge roaring among the trees and not really
a bear.

The next day it happened that there was a large picnic party, to which
all the elders were invited, including Sydney, Loo, and Lena. So the
three younger children, with nurse and Baby and the other servants,
had it all to themselves. It was rather a dull day, Walter thought. He
was thinking about the wheel and wondering if it was turning merrily
in the stream, or if Sydney had put it away. He would have given
worlds to go and see, but he never got the chance. When the children
went to the kitchen garden it was to walk round with nurse.

[Illustration:]

Johnny was bemoaning that strawberries were over, and Madge was
looking vainly for gooseberries on the trees that had long ago been
stripped. But Walter cast furtive glances at the thick elder-bush by
the wall, and shivered a little inside when he thought of what Sydney
had told him about it.

Directly after that they went indoors to have supper and go to bed. As
they were undressing it was discovered that Madge had lost a coral
necklace she had on. It was a fancy of her mother's that Madge should
always wear this, as it was a present from a dead godmother, and the
question now was where it had been dropped.

"She had it on at the gooseberry-bushes," said Walter, "for I saw it."

Nurse was just then undressing Johnny.

"You can run down the garden and look for it, Master Walter," said
she. "It gets dark so fast I shan't be able to see by the time I've
got you all in bed."

Madge was already in her dressing-gown, and in spite of much entreaty
was not allowed to go.

So away went Walter full of importance, for the moment quite
forgetting where he was going. But scarcely had he got outside the
door when he remembered the dreadful tree, and fear took possession of
him.

How could he go? He would have to pass the elder-bush if he went all
round the path where they had walked with nurse. Dare he do it?

[Illustration:]

But if he went back the others would laugh at him and call him a baby.
He could not stand that. He was not a baby, but a boy who would one
day be a man and do great deeds. So he went on. Trying hard not to
think of the elder-bush, Walter went bravely along, looking for the
necklace. But still he could not help knowing that he was getting
nearer to the dreaded spot. O, if he could but see those pink beads he
would seize them and run!

He saw them at last, when he had nearly reached the tree. With mingled
joy and fear he took a step forward and stopped to pick up the
necklace when suddenly there was a rustling sound among the
elder-branches and a hand reached out to part them, a hand belonging
to a white figure. That was all Walter knew. With a cry of terror he
rushed forward, not looking where he was going. Then he tripped and
fell, and lay quite still. He was still unconscious when, an hour
later, Sydney's mother bent over him anxiously. He had struck his head
on the stones bordering the path, and there was waiting till the
doctor came to know the extent of the injury.

Nurse told how the little boy had gone to look for Madge's necklace,
and cook explained how she had been gathering elder-berries to make
wine and, hearing footsteps, had come out from the thick branches.
Just as she saw Master Walter he gave a scream and ran away as if
frightened. But what could have terrified him she could not think.

[Illustration:]

Sydney looked at his mother's distressed face and at the little figure
lying on the bed. _He_ knew what had made Walter afraid, and he did
not like afterwards to think of what he felt during the half-hour
before the doctor came.

"But I never thought, mother," said he, "that he would be frightened
at _that_."

His mother was too anxious to say much just then, and Sydney's
conscience spoke instead. "You did want to make him afraid," it said,
"knowing he was a small and timid boy." And Sydney knew that this was
the truth.

Walter got better after a time, and his little heart was made glad by
the kindness of all around. Even Sydney came and worked beside him,
explaining all the improvements and extensions of the water-wheel. But
the little boy did not know all that was in Sydney's mind, for it
could not be spoken. But Sydney's unspoken thought was the stirring of
true manliness within him. It was the determination to remember that
those who were not so strong and big as himself needed all the more
his consideration and gentleness. And he did remember that all his
life.

_E. Dawson._

[Illustration: FISHING.]




A Frolic.

[Illustration:]

[Illustration:]

    I knew you had come for a frolic, Wind,
      The minute I heard you rise
    And watched you blow the grey little clouds
      To the fire in the sunset skies.

    I saw you fly with a leap and a bound
      To give the trees a fright.
    What fun when they shivered, and tossed, and shook,
      And the aspen leaves turned white!

    O, how I wish I were you, wild Wind!
      _Then_ I'd have fun enough,
    For nobody ever forbids _your_ games
      Or says they are rude and rough!

    I'd whirl the clouds to the end of the skies,
      And the ships as fast and far;
    And I'd set the whole big world in a dance
      And blow out every star!

    I'd rock the houses and toss the trees.
      How frightened the folks would be!
    But the children and birds would know quite well
      There was nothing to fear from me.

    There would be no punishment-time to dread
      At the end of this delight;
    For they'd only say when the morning came:
      "What a gale we had last night!"

_E. Dawson._




Cousin Charlie's Visit.

[Illustration:]


"I have a surprise for you, dears," said mother, coming into the
nursery one morning, followed by a bright-looking boy about ten years
of age. "Here is your Cousin Charlie come to spend the day with you."

Dolly and May were delighted, and Mother said they might stay out all
the morning. For the first hour they were very happy--there were so
many new things to show Charlie; but he was one of those restless boys
who get tired of everything very quickly.

"What shall we do next?" he kept saying. They tried hunting for eggs
in the barn, but he soon called that "slow."

"Let's go and pick blackberries in the upper field," said little May.

So they started off and had only picked a very little while when
Charlie suddenly asked: "Whose orchard is that just across the next
field?"

"It's Farmer Giles's," said Dolly.

"Let's climb over and get some apples," was his next idea.

Dolly and May opened their eyes very wide. "That would be stealing,"
they cried, both together.

"Nonsense," said Charlie. "That's just like girls--always afraid to do
anything. I mean to get a pocketful, so you can wait till I come
back."

They waited and waited such a long time, but he never came, so they
went slowly home. It was nearly tea-time when nurse came and said:
"Farmer Giles has brought Cousin Charlie back." And a very
miserable-looking boy he was.

When he had filled his pockets and meant to come down, he saw Rover,
the savage farm dog, waiting for him below; so he had to stay in the
tree, and might have had to remain all night, only the farmer happened
to ride by and heard the dog barking.

Dolly and May were very sorry for him, and their mother did not scold
him as she meant to do, because, she said, "the fright had been
punishment enough."

_F. Clifton Bingham._

[Illustration: THE PICNIC PARTY.]




Dan's Picnic.


It was one of Dan's birthdays. He had had a party on the 1st of every
month since the time that he was born, which happened to be New Year's
Day. And if you asked Reggie and Flo they would tell you that Dan
quite looked forward to his monthly parties, and, what is more,
enjoyed them. You see, a whole year is a very long time. Boys and
girls may grow to be old men and women and have lots of birthdays; but
a doggie's life is comparatively short, so the more festivals they can
squeeze into it the better.

Now, on this particular September 1st of which I am going to tell you,
it was arranged that the milkman was to take Reggie and Flo and Dan
home with him in his cart directly he had delivered the morning's
milk, and bring them back again at tea-time. This he did: and how
Reggie and Flo did enjoy themselves, to be sure!

[Illustration:]

The milkman had two little friends staying with him, named Reuben and
Jane. Reuben led the way into the woods carrying a kettle and a box of
tea-things; while Reggie and Jane and little Flo followed with buns
and tarts. Dan was useful too, for he helped to gather sticks with
which to boil the kettle. He played hide-and-seek with the children,
saw a real live rabbit for the first time in his life, and thought it
was a new kind of cat; so in one way he had a very good time, but I am
very sorry to tell you that the children quite forgot that Dan could
not drink tea or eat jam tarts, and, as for buns, they knew he hated
them. So poor Dan got nothing to eat at his own party. And when
good-bye was said, and when the kind milkman dropped the three down on
the steps--just like the milk-cans--Dan raised a feeble little
"bow-wow" to Reggie's mother, and said as plainly as a little doggie
could: "O, missis, missis! It's been _my_ party and I've had nuffin'
to eat. All I got was an empty nut-shell--'bow-wow'--which somebody
called a squirrel--'bow-wow'--dropped into my mouth--'bow-wow'--while
I was looking up a tree--'bow-wow-wow'!"

Reggie's mother must have understood, for she gave Dan a good supper,
and he slept right soundly till morning.

_Mary Boyle._




Bringing home the holly.

[Illustration:]

    With hearts as light as snow-flakes fall,
      With cheeks like sunset glow,
    And ringing shouts of joy and fun,
      Away the children go.

    Away! to where the holly-tree,
      With berries gleaming bright,
    Stands like a shivering giant in
      Its glistening cloak of white.

    There's Roy, to take the sledge in hand
      And pilot through the snow.
    "The girls don't understand," he says.
      (Just like a boy, you know!)

    Then back they bring the loaded sledge,
      With fingers pricked and sore.
    But what care they? They'll go again
      To-morrow for some more.

    For children love the Christmas-time,
      When everything is jolly;
    And all must help to deck the house
      In mistletoe and holly!

    And then comes good St. Nicholas,
      With loads of books and toys.
    Yes, Christmas is the _dearest_ time
      For happy girls and boys.

_Ellyn Hall._

[Illustration: BRINGING HOME THE HOLLY.]




THE DANDELION CHILDREN

[Illustration:]


"What little darlings we are!" said the children one day.

They were all sitting fluffed up into one little downy ball on the top
of a long stem.

"It is very nearly time for us to go into the world," said they. "O,
how wide and how sunny it is, and what fun it will be! Our wings are
all ready to fly, and we are so light and happy! Then the whole world
will be ours, and we can choose our own place in which to take root
and grow.

"I will grow in a lovely garden," said one.

"I mean to be seen, wherever I am," another declared.

"Well, there's plenty of time before us to choose," remarked a third.

But the mother dandelion shook her leaves and said: "Children, don't
boast. Others don't always think as much of us as we do of ourselves!"

"O, but they must," said the little ones; "we are darlings!"

"Very well," said the wind. "Now you may go--puff!" And away flew some
of the seeds, just as they do when you blow the dandelion "clocks."

"Puff! puff!" away went the others--all but one.

"Let me stay here, wind," she begged. "If I can grow as large and as
beautiful as my mother I shall be content." So the wind just loosened
her gently, and down she dropped close to her mother's side.

"You are a wise child," said the field-mouse. "Under this hedge you
will grow in peace. Neither scythe nor spade ever comes here. But you
won't be seen, and you won't see the world like your brothers and
sisters."

Meantime the others went dancing about in fine style. One of them,
high up in the blue air, looked at the little white clouds and fancied
himself seen by just as many eyes as they were. "Why, this is even
better than I thought," said he. "I never fancied I should sail about
the sky!"

After some long sunny days of travel he saw below him a beautiful
garden all shut in with walls, in which roses and fruit-trees grew.

[Illustration:]

"This is the place for me!" he said, and down he went, and perched on
the edge of the great drive in front of all the flower-beds and just
before the windows of the house. "Nothing could suit me better!" said
he. "I shall have plenty of good company, and I have found a very good
place to make my home!" So he folded up his downy wings and quickly
fell asleep.

Another of the winged children went skipping over the fields, stopping
now and then to play with some flower, or just to bask in the sun.
After a time she came to a sunny bank of grass on the side of the
high-road.

"This is the place for me," she said. "Here I will live and grow, so
that all who pass along this road will be certain to think how
beautiful I am!"

And so she settled down among the grass, quite happy.

And a third said to herself: "It is good to be of some use in the
world!" So when one day the breeze took her to the town, she stopped
in a flower-pot full of earth that stood upon the dingy window-sill of
a poor little house. "I shall be valued here," she said, "and the poor
folks will think a lot of me for growing in such a place. After all,
it's a fine thing to make people happy."

So she cuddled down in the flower-pot and went to sleep.

And all the other dandelion-children who had sat on the stem that day
went dancing about, not knowing what they wanted. They played in the
fields and never thought of anything else till one day the rain came
and wet their wings and beat them down among the meadows just where
they happened to be. But it was very comfortable in the deep grass,
and so they just went to sleep too.

When they woke again, they all had roots and little leaves, and deep
in their hearts the buds of flowers. For they had grown up now, and
they were plants. At first they were all very small, but the sunshine
gradually made them bigger and bigger and drew out the flowers folded
in their hearts.

Then the one who had chosen the beautiful garden for his home proudly
opened his first yellow flower and looked round to see what the other
flowers thought of that.

But alas! he did not know how soon his pride was to have a fall. For
the gardener came that way and stopped before him. "Drat these weeds!"
said he. "How came this here?'" Then, whipping out his knife, he
stooped down, rooted up the poor dandelion, and threw it among a heap
of weeds which were waiting to be wheeled away!

The one who had chosen the roadside bank fared no better, for scarcely
had she opened her yellow flowers for everyone to see when a donkey
came along. "Here's a juicy mouthful!" said he, and he stopped and ate
her up--flowers, leaves, and all!

The flower-pot on the window-sill which the third dandelion-child had
made her home was taken inside one day, just when her flowers were
ready to open.

[Illustration:]

"I must throw away this nasty weed," said a voice, "before I plant my
seeds." Then some little round, black, ugly seeds were laid down
carefully, while the dandelion was rooted up and flung away into a
back yard down below.

This is a sad story, you see, but it is perfectly true.

The others who had skipped about the meadows grew among long grass
now, which nearly choked them, and completely hid them from the sun.
And when June came and the hay was cut, they too were cut and crushed
before they had had any flowers at all.

But away in a corner, by a hedge--hidden from all eyes and sheltered
from cold winds--the dandelion-child who had not wanted to go into the
world grew stronger and more beautiful every day. She knew nothing
about fine gardens or admiring eyes--and she cared nothing. All she
knew was that the sun looked down on her with all his brightness, and
that the great blue sky into which she was always gazing was wide
enough and fair enough for her.

E.D.




Conceit Bowled Out!

[Illustration:]

    He was a clever cricketer,
      And very proud of that;
    Conceitedly one afternoon
      He took his cricket bat.
    But when he at the wicket saw
      His sister with her curls,
    He turned his nose up so, and said:
      "I never play with girls!

    "They're molly-coddles all," he cried;
      "They always spoil a match;
    They cannot field or bowl a bit--
      They cannot even catch!
    However, just this once I'll play!"
      O, pride had such a fall:
    You should have heard them shout--a girl
    Had bowled him out first ball!

C.B.




Laugh at It!

    When you hear the merry rain
    Patter at the window-pane,
    Think 'twill soon be fine again;
        So laugh at it!

    If you chance to tumble down,
    Though you bump your little crown,
    Never cry or pout or frown,
        Just laugh at it!

    When the sum is hard to do,
    Rub it out and try anew;
    When you get the answer true
        You'll laugh at it!

C.B.

[Illustration:]




The Dancing Academy


    This is the way, on a rainy day,
      We teach our dolls to dance--
    The doll in blue, and the Scotchman true,
      And Lady Belle from France.
    It's heel and toe and it's to and fro,
      They all can do it well;
    But the best of all our pupils small
      Is darling Lady Belle!

    They're very good, but they're only wood,
      So they have to be shown
    The step to take and the bow to make--
      They cannot dance alone!
    Quadrille, gavotte, and I don't know what,
      They soon will clever be!
    So, dolls who sigh to be dancers, try
      Our Dolls' Academy!

C.B.

[Illustration:]

[Illustration: A JOLLY RIDE.]




A Visit to the Dale Farm

[Illustration:]


When Dorothy's and Oliver's father and mother had arranged to go
abroad for six weeks, the question arose: "What shall we do with the
children?" They had many aunts and uncles who would willingly take
care of them, but their mother wanted them to be in the country; so,
in the end, it was decided to send them with their nurse to stay at a
farm, the mistress of which had once been a nurse to their mother, and
who was sure to take good care of them.

There was a great deal of excitement and bustle, but at last all was
ready, and the day came for them to say good-bye for a short time to
their home. Their ponies had already been sent on, and the terrier
Patch was to go with them.

Their mother was going with them, and their father saw them off at the
station.

When they arrived at the Dale Farm there was a warm welcome for them.
Their mother and her old nurse had a lot to talk about, and then they
went into the quaint farm-parlour for tea, and how they all enjoyed
the honey and cream and hot scones!

After tea they had to say good-bye to their mother, for she had to be
driven back to the station.

The following morning the children were wakened by the crowing of the
cocks and the cackling of the hens and other noises unfamiliar to
them. After breakfast, they went on a tour of inspection round the
farm places. They also went to greet their ponies, who seemed quite
rejoiced to hear their voices in this strange land. Then they went to
see Mrs. Farmer feed her poultry; and what a noise there was among the
turkeys, and geese, and ducks, and hens!--all so hungry for breakfast,
and all pushing round without the slightest regard for good manners.
After them there were the calves to feed. Six long-legged shaky little
things--they wondered they could ever grow into anything to be afraid
of. Before they had half finished looking round nurse called them to
get ready for their ride.

Everything was different from what it was at home, for they were to
take their rides without a groom, and across the common, a big place
covered with short crisp grass, with occasional clumps of rushes and
thistles; and here they could canter, or gallop, or race without fear
of harm.

People and animals seemed to do as they liked on the common. Donkeys
browsed sleepily, and when the children came near lifted their heads
as if to say: "Who are these strangers? They're not donkeys, so what
do they want on our ground?"

Then there were a lot of geese there. Patch thought he would have a
bit of fun with the geese one day, so he set off to chase them. There
was a great fluster and spreading of wings, and they waddled off a few
yards; then they turned suddenly and faced him, stretching out their
long necks and hissing, at which Patch turned tail and troubled them
no more.

The village children on their way to and from school would linger on
the common to chase butterflies or run races. Then the boys found it a
capital place for playing at soldiers and leap-frog, and other things.

As it was June the farm people were busy in the hay, so of course
Dorothy and Oliver helped. They raked and tossed and gathered it into
heaps, and then they grew dreadfully hungry, so they sat under the
hedge and ate _bread and cheese_, which they found was quite the
correct lunch for haymakers. Patch sat with them and was having his
share, when he suddenly began sniffing and snorting and scratching
round a haycock. They thought there must be a rat about, but when they
moved the hay they found a poor little creature with a brown plush
coat and _no eyes_! Nurse told them it was a mole, so they put it in a
box lined with cotton-wool and gave it lettuce to eat, but it only
lived four days. I don't think it would like the most luxurious nest
as well as a little hole in the ground.

It would take a long time to tell you about all the children saw and
did during their visit to the Dale Farm: how they rode on the hay,
then came jogging back in the empty cart for more; how they drove with
the farmer in his spring-cart, which was not so very springy; how they
learned to milk, and quite got over their fear of cows. Altogether
they had such a delightful time that they hope they may go again next
year.

When the letter came to say the ship had arrived bringing back their
father and mother they were of course delighted, but they were quite
sorry to have to say good-bye to all their farm friends, animals as
well as people.

So the children went back to their city home, and when their father
and mother heard all their accounts of the good time they had had, and
saw their tanned and rosy cheeks, they said: "O, you must go again
next year."

_Ellyn Hall._

[Illustration: A GOOD KICK.]




The Worst Pupil


    When Betty kept a school one day,
      Her sister was so good;
    The dollies every one behaved
      As well-taught dollies should;

    But Tom was such a noisy boy
      She had to get the cane;
    The very sight gave him a fright
      And made him good again!

C.B.

[Illustration:]




The Tea Party


    Little Miss Betty has had a tea-party,
    Everyone came with an appetite hearty;
    Animals, dollies, and toys were invited;
    Bobby was good and our Baby delighted.
    Of cake, bread-and-butter, and milk they had plenty--
    The cups were so tiny that Bobby drank twenty;
    And when it was over they ran and asked mother
    If they might to-morrow have just such another!--C.B.

[Illustration:]




A Scratch Team.

[Illustration:]

[Illustration:]


"That's a wide!" said Tom, as the ball went rolling by about a yard
from the stump. "Throw it up, Maggie. Now, Hugh, try again!"

It was a very young and inexperienced team that Tom Gardner was
instructing. Tom was staying with his Aunt Gertrude, and had been
complaining to her that he had no one whom he could play cricket with.

"Why don't you play with the children?" asked his aunt at last.

"Play with the kids?" gasped Tom. "Why, auntie, they are all girls
except Hugh, and he not even in knickerbockers! And they don't know
how!"

"Well, can't you teach them?" his aunt asked. Tom looked at her with
some surprise. He was very fond of her and would do much to please
her, but this seemed rather unreasonable.

"I--I have only a bat," he murmured? "there aren't any stumps!"

"O, I'll soon make you some stumps," said the lady briskly. "Come out
into the garden and I'll soon get them."

She was as good as her word. In a few minutes she had found three
sticks, pointed the ends with her pocket-knife, and driven them in
with the gardener's mallet on the lower lawn. A flower-pot was placed
on the centre stick. Then she produced a ball from her pocket.

"Now," she said, "you have everything you will want, and I leave you
to teach your scratch team."

Tom laughed. The phrase "your scratch team" pleased him. His aunt's
energy had infected him, and he began to marshal his forces.

"Now, look here, girls," he said; "Maggie, you're wicket-keeper, and
Fan and Kitty must field, and Hugh shall bowl."

But Hugh proved such an indifferent bowler that even the girls began
to clamour.

"Let me twy, Cousin Tom," cried Maggie; "I can frow better than Hugh!"

"You frow!" laughed Tom; "why, you can't speak properly yet!"

"Let me twy," said Maggie; "I don't bowl with my tongue!"

[Illustration: A SCRATCH TEAM.]

[Illustration:]

So Maggie tried, and the game began to get exciting.

Maggie couldn't say her "r's," but she could certainly throw a ball
very straight, and Tom had to play his best.

He began to hit the ball about the lawn, so that the little fielders
grew hot and out of breath. At last one vigorous toss absolutely hit
the wicket and sent the stumps and the flower-pot sprawling.

"I have knocked him out," cried Maggie, jumping about in her glee. "I
am going to bat the ball now!"

But at that moment a voice was heard calling: "Come in to tea,
children!"

"It can't be tea-time yet, surely!" said Tom, quite astonished at the
quick flight of time.

So the scratch team had not played so badly after all, and during
Tom's stay with his aunt they had many a game together and always
thoroughly enjoyed it.

_M.A. Hoyer._




Roddy's Victory

[Illustration:]

[Illustration:]


It was Saturday--a summer Saturday; the sun shone down upon the meads
and pastures round Clover Farm so radiantly that every face felt bound
to smile brightly in return. Every face but one, and that belonged to
Roddy Lester, the eldest of the farmer's four.

"What ails my boy this fine sunshiny morning?" called out mother from
the cool, sweet dimness of the dairy, where she was at work.

Roddy did not answer. He was standing in the ivy-encircled doorway of
the dairy, his hands deep in his pockets, his feet shuffling to and
fro, and on his face a dark, angry cloud.

"Come, Roddy, tell mother the trouble. Is it anything to do with
school? Is there a punishment preparation to be done this morning?"

"No; there isn't!" Roddy roused himself at such a suspicion. "Why,
mother, I told you I was moved up yesterday; don't you remember? But
I'll come inside and tell you all about it."

"No! Tell me from outside all about it."

"Well, then, mother, I don't _want_ to take the children to the meads.
I want to amuse myself. And it's not fair. Saturday's a holiday, and
it's my right to have it!" sullenly said Roddy.

"Your right! Perhaps so, dear! But sometimes it is our privilege to
yield our rights!" quietly said mother, taking her eyes for a second
off the yellowing cream to glance at the boy's gloomy face. "Who told
you to take the children to the meads--father?" she asked.

"Yes, it was. He said I was to take them to the cowslip meads, and not
to stir from there until he came back from market."

"And what is it you want to do instead?"

"I want to go with my net down to Butterfly Corner. There will be
heaps of butterflies out this sunny day. And the other boys at school
are all collecting: they have more than I have, all of them. I have
only a tortoiseshell and a brimstone. O, it's a regular shame of
father!"

"Hush, dear, hush! Nothing that your kind, good father says or does
can be called a shame. But I believe I can guess why he gave those
orders. He knew that this is an over-busy day for me, and also that I
have one of my bad headaches." Certainly mother's face gleamed out
white from the dairy shadows. "And as this is market-day at Hamley
Town he and old Michael would be away until dinner-time. So, you see,
sonny, he has left _you_ in charge. You are in father's place this
morning to guard the farm and us all, particularly the tinies. Don't
you see what an honour it is to be trusted thus?"

Something stirred in Roddy's heart at his mother's words. The best
part of him suddenly came uppermost. He walked quietly away, followed
by Fuzzy sniffing at his heels. And, somehow, the boy felt an inch
taller as he looked round the farm. After all, what were the
butterflies compared with the tinies left in his charge? "Hip, hip,
hooray!" Roddy straightened himself and cheered. He had won a
victory--over himself.

[Illustration:]

"Hi, Nettie! Hi, Dumps! Come along! And where's Baby? We're going to
the meads, and I'll make you a fine cowslip ball to shoot the rooks
with!" he shouted, and Fuzzy barked madly round as the tinies flocked
out.

When they got there, what with the sun and the wind, the making of the
huge cowslip ball and the little ones' joy over it, Roddy's face
cleared up and was as sunshiny as the weather itself. There's nothing
like giving up your own will for making the heart sing.

By-and-by, when dinner-time came, so did father. As the dog-cart drove
along the high-road, Roddy and Nettie puzzled over its appearance.

"It's got a new wheel at the back, Roddy!"

But Roddy's eyes widened into a fixed stare, and his face grew very
red.

"Well, boy, here you are at your post. Now I'll tell you why I wanted
you to stay at home this morning. It was for this surprise. Look, my
lad! For weeks back I've been in treaty for this bicycle for you.
To-day I was able to close with the bargain, and it's yours!"

For a few seconds Roddy could not see: his eyes were dimmed. The good,
kind father had been planning out his boy's pleasure! "O, father!" he
gasped; then, "O, mother!"

"Such a beauty!" delightedly said mother.

"It's a good one; I don't know the name," father was beginning.

"I do!" put in mother. "It is the 'Victory'--Roddy's Victory!"

_M.B. Manwell._




Was It a Dream?

[Illustration:]


Rita grew quite tired of gathering wildflowers while her brother Frank
sat by the water busy with his fishing-rod.

"He _must_ be tired of it by this time! He has been fishing for two
hours!" she said, and, swinging her bunch of flowers, she walked to
where her brother was sitting.

"_Do_ leave off fishing for a while, Frank!" she pleaded, leaning
against the tree beside him. "There is such a funny-looking animal
running about over there in the grass. Come and look!"

Frank laughed.

"I know your funny-looking animals, Rita!" he said.

"Aren't you really tired of sitting quite still?" went on Rita
wonderingly.

"I don't think about it," answered her brother. "I want to catch the
fish, and to do that I must sit still."

Rita knew she must be contented to wait, so she walked a little way
from him and threw herself down upon the bank.

As she lay looking into the water she suddenly felt herself grow very
sleepy. A little while after, the water began to get so clear that she
could see right through it. It grew more and more so until it became
just like glass. Rita could see the very bottom of the pond and the
fish swimming quickly backwards and forwards.

Then she heard some very funny little voices coming up from the water.
This made her look closer, and she soon discovered a small group of
fishes who seemed to be speaking very eagerly together. She saw they
were gathered round Frank's line, on the end of which hung a tempting
piece of bait.

"I tell you, my son," Rita heard the largest fish say to one of the
smaller ones, "that is a trap. I have seen hundreds of poor fishes try
to swallow that worm, and they have been pulled up out of the water
and I have never seen them any more!"

"But, mother!" cried the smaller fish, "if I only had just one bite!
Look what a beauty it is! I am sure there can be nothing to harm me!"

"Inside that worm," continued, the big fish, "there is a hook which
will catch into your gills, and you will not be able to get away. Then
the man at the top will pull you up and up, and you will be killed and
eaten by him!"

Still the little fish looked longingly at the bait. Rita wanted to
call out and tell him what his mother said was quite true; but somehow
her voice refused to come.

The other fishes who were gathered round listening did not say
anything, but Rita saw that some of the smaller ones looked at the
worm just as longingly as the little one who had spoken.

For a few minutes there was silence in the water; then all at once, at
a moment when it thought its mother was looking the other way, the
little fish made a dart forward and tried to swallow the bait. The
next moment it was wriggling about in a most pitiable manner and
giving faint little cries for help. Its mother swam towards it in
great distress.

"Come and help!" she called, in a trembling voice.

All the other fishes surrounded the line, and some caught hold of the
little fish's tail and held on.

Just as Rita was getting very excited indeed she gave a great start
and jumped up from the bank.

"What was that?" she exclaimed aloud.

"Why, I've got a splendid catch. It must be a monster! The line is so
heavy I can hardly pull it in!"

It was Frank's voice. Rita suddenly remembered where she was and that
she must have fallen asleep. She walked slowly to Frank, thinking
about her strange dream.

She had only stood by him a minute when--splash!--out flew the line
from the water and over went Frank on his back.

It was so funny that Rita could not help laughing heartily--especially
as Frank was not at all hurt.

"It's all very well for you to laugh!" he said, when he had got up
again; "but that was the best catch I've ever had, and the wretched
fish must have got off the hook!"

Rita grew very thoughtful. Could her dream have been true? It really
did seem strange. Anyway, although she felt sorry for Frank, she could
not help feeling very pleased that the poor little fish had got free!

_Edith Robarts._




Merry Folk.

[Illustration:]


    Merry folk tiny, merry folk tall,
    Happy as can be, here they are all,
    Spending the holidays 'midst the flowers,
    Laughing away the joyous hours!

    Merry folk sunny, merry folk sweet,
    Pleasant to look at, happy to meet,
    Nothing but smiling, never a sigh,
    They are so glad to be here, that's why!

    Merry girls dancing under the trees,
    With their curls floating out on the breeze,
    Merry boys playing all the day through,
    Here you will find them waiting for you.

[Illustration:]

    Why are they merry? I'll tell you why:
    They know you will see them by-and-by;
    They know that you all are going to look
    At them in this merry picture-book.

[Illustration: TOBOGGANING.]




Auntie's Tea-Tray.

[Illustration:]


"Auntie dear, will you buy Molly and me a toboggan? There's such a
lovely slide on Heath Hill, and Toddy Graham and the Earles have
toboggans, and we want one too."

Auntie looked up from her sewing and shook her head. "No, my dears, I
can't. Run out and play with your hoops instead," she said, and then
she went on with her work.

Charlie _was_ angry. "I'm ever so much bigger than Toddy Graham," he
said indignantly, "and his mother lets him have a toboggan. It's a
shame! But never mind, Molly; we'll go all the same. I've got an idea.
You go to the hill and I'll come presently."

Molly trotted away, and in a minute or two Charlie came running
towards her, carrying his auntie's best tea-tray. "I had an awful
bother to get it," he said. "Jane saw me with the old one and took it
away; but I remembered this one was upstairs in auntie's room, so I
fetched it without anyone seeing me."

"But what's the good of a tea-tray?" asked Molly.

"Toboggan, you silly; come along," Charlie answered shortly; and in
another minute the two children were spinning away down the hill.

The first journey was most successful, but on the second. Charlie
forgot that a tea-tray requires careful management and good steering,
and half-way down the hill he came into collision with Toddy Graham.

Over went the tray, smash came Toddy's toboggan right on the top of
it, and all three' children were shot out into the snow. Toddy and
Charlie picked themselves up, but Molly lay without moving.

"She's dead, Toddy Graham. O, what shall I do?" wailed poor frightened
Charlie.

"You'd better fetch your aunt," suggested practical Toddy; and Charlie
rushed off as fast as his fat legs could carry him.

When auntie arrived upon the scene, she found her small niece sitting
up, howling vigorously, and rubbing a very big bump on her forehead.
There was no great harm done--at least, as far as the children were
concerned, but the best tea-tray was battered and scratched beyond
recognition.

"Really, auntie did behave like a brick," said Charlie, and when they
opened their money-boxes and, putting all their pennies and sixpences
together, bought her a new tea-tray, she declared it was ever so much
better than the one they had spoilt.

And what do you think happened when Christmas Day came? Why, auntie
gave them the jolliest toboggan you ever saw, and the children found
out that she had meant to do so all along, and that was why she had
refused to give them one when they first asked for it. Wasn't she a
nice aunt?

_L.L. Weedon._

[Illustration:]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Laugh and Play, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAUGH AND PLAY ***

***** This file should be named 17750.txt or 17750.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/7/5/17750/

Produced by Mark C. Orton, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
