Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Grumpy Weasel, by Arthur Scott Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Tale of Grumpy Weasel
       Sleepy-Time Tales

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Illustrator: Harry L. Smith

Release Date: March 20, 2008 [EBook #24881]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF GRUMPY WEASEL ***




Produced by Joe Longo, S. Drawehn and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  THE TALE OF
  GRUMPY WEASEL




  SLEEPY-TIME TALES
  (Trademark Registered)

  BY
  ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

  AUTHOR OF
  TUCK-ME-IN TALES
  (Trademark Registered)

  The Tale of Cuffy Bear
  The Tale of Frisky Squirrel
  The Tale of Tommy Fox
  The Tale of Fatty Coon
  The Tale of Billy Woodchuck
  The Tale of Jimmy Rabbit
  The Tale of Peter Mink
  The Tale of Sandy Chipmunk
  The Tale of Brownie Beaver
  The Tale of Paddy Muskrat
  The Tale of Ferdinand Frog
  The Tale of Dickie Deer Mouse
  The Tale of Timothy Turtle
  The Tale of Major Monkey
  The Tale of Benny Badger




[Illustration: Grumpy Weasel and Jimmy Rabbit Run a Race. _Frontispiece_
(_Page 46_)]




  SLEEPY-TIME TALES
  (Trademark Registered)

  THE TALE OF
  GRUMPY
  WEASEL

  BY
  ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

  Author of
  "TUCK-ME-IN TALES"
  (Trademark Registered)

  ILLUSTRATED BY
  HARRY L. SMITH

  NEW YORK

  GROSSET & DUNLAP
  PUBLISHERS

  Made in the United States of America


  COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY
  GROSSET & DUNLAP




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                             PAGE

      I  A SLIM RASCAL                   1

     II  AT THE OLD STONE WALL           5

    III  MASTER ROBIN'S LESSON           9

     IV  HUNTING A HOLE                 13

      V  SOLOMON OWL INTERRUPTS         18

     VI  MR. MEADOW MOUSE ESCAPES       23

    VII  PADDY MUSKRAT'S BLUNDER        28

   VIII  THE DARE                       33

     IX  SAVING HIS FEET                38

      X  HA! AND HA, HA!                42

     XI  A LONG RACE                    46

    XII  WINNING BY A TRICK             51

   XIII  SILLY MRS. HEN                 56

    XIV  GRUMPY VANISHES                60

     XV  THE GREAT MYSTERY              64

    XVI  GUARDING THE CORNCRIB          69

   XVII  GRUMPY'S MISTAKE               73

  XVIII  POP! GOES THE WEASEL           78

    XIX  HIDING FROM HENRY HAWK         83

     XX  A FREE RIDE                    88

    XXI  A NEW SUIT                     93

   XXII  GRUMPY'S THREAT                98

  XXIII  A BOLD STRANGER               103

   XXIV  FUR AND FEATHERS              107

    XXV  PETER MINK'S PROMISE          112

   XXVI  HOW GRUMPY HELPED             116




THE TALE OF GRUMPY WEASEL




I

A SLIM RASCAL


Old Mr. Crow often remarked that if Grumpy Weasel really wanted to be of
some use in the world he would spend his time at the sawmill filling
knot holes in boards.

"He's so slender," Mr. Crow would say, "that he can push himself into a
knot hole no bigger round than Farmer Green's thumb."

Naturally it did not please old Mr. Crow when Solomon Owl went out of
his way one day to tell him that he was sadly mistaken. For after
hearing some gossip repeat Mr. Crow's opinion Solomon Owl--the wise old
bird--had given several long hoots and hurried off, though it was broad
daylight, to set Mr. Crow right.

"The trouble--" Solomon explained when he had found Mr. Crow on the edge
of the woods--"the trouble with your plan to have Grumpy Weasel work in
the sawmill is that he wouldn't keep a knot hole filled longer than a
jiffy. It's true that he can fit a very small hole. But if you'd ever
watched him closely you'd know that he's in a hole and out the other
side so fast you can scarcely see what happens. He's entirely too active
to fill the bill."

Old Mr. Crow made a queer noise in his throat, which showed that Solomon
Owl had made him angry.

"I never said anything about Grumpy Weasel's filling any bills," Mr.
Crow spluttered. "Knot holes were what I had in mind. I've no doubt,
though, that you'd like Grumpy Weasel to fill your own bill."

Now, if Solomon Owl had not tried more than once to catch Grumpy Weasel
perhaps Mr. Crow's retort wouldn't have made him feel so uncomfortable.
And muttering that he wished when people spoke of his beak they wouldn't
call it a bill, and that Mr. Crow was too stupid to talk to, Solomon
blundered away into the woods.

It was true, of course, that Grumpy Weasel was about the quickest of all
the furred folk in Pleasant Valley. Why, you might be looking at him as
he stopped for a moment on a stone wall; and while you looked he would
vanish before your eyes. It was just as if he had melted away in an
instant, so quickly could he dart into a crevice between the stones.

It was surprising, too, that he could whisk himself out of sight so
fast, for his body was absurdly long. But if he was long in one way he
was short in another. Yes! Grumpy Weasel had the shortest temper of all
the field- and forest-folk throughout Pleasant Valley. Even
peppery Peter Mink was not so short-tempered as he.

So terrible tempered was Grumpy Weasel that whenever the news flashed
through the woods that he was out hunting, all the small people kept
quite still, because they were afraid. And even some of the bigger
ones--a good deal bigger than Grumpy Weasel himself--felt uneasy.

So you can see whether or not Grumpy Weasel was welcome.




II

AT THE OLD STONE WALL


Little Mr. Chippy suddenly set up a great twitter. Anybody could see
that he was frightened. And one of Jolly Robin's sons, perched in an
apple tree near the stone wall where Mr. Chippy lived in a wild
grapevine, wondered what could be the matter.

Presently, as he looked beneath him, he saw a long, slim shape dart from
a chink of the old wall, and as quickly disappear.

"Huh!" said young Master Robin. "Foolish people who build their homes on
walls must expect snakes for visitors." And feeling quite wise and grown
up, he turned his back on Mr. Chippy, as if it really made no
difference to him if Mr. Chippy did have a dangerous caller.

Meanwhile others of the bird neighbors began to echo Mr. Chippy's
warning notes. And young Master Robin thought everybody was silly to
make such a fuss over the misfortunes of a humble person like Mr.
Chippy.

"If they don't look out they'll scare all the angleworms back into their
holes," he grumbled--a remark which shows that he knew little about the
ways of the world. And when Rusty Wren swerved near him and called to
him to look out for Mr. Chippy's visitor--that he was "a bad one"--young
Master Robin actually puffed himself up with rage.

"He seems to think I'm in danger of falling out of this tree," he
sneered aloud. "He doesn't know that I can handle myself in a tree as
well as he can." As he spoke, Master Robin all but tumbled off his
perch. But he caught himself just in time, then looked around hastily to
see if anybody had noticed his awkwardness.

All this time poor Mr. Chippy's cries continued. There was really no
reason for his alarm. For his wife was away from home, with all their
children. But Mr. Chippy kept flying back and forth in a great flutter.
He too called to young Master Robin that he'd better go home.

Still that knowing youngster paid no heed to his elder's advice.

"If snakes climb trees I've never seen them do it," he scoffed.

"Hi, there! Haven't you seen----" Mr. Chippy started to say. But before
he could finish his question Master Robin interrupted him rudely.

"Certainly I saw him," he cried. "I saw him come out of the wall and go
in again."

"He'll get you if you don't go away!" Mr. Chippy shrieked.

"Let him try!" Master Robin scoffed. He was sorry that Mr. Chippy did
not hear him. But that distracted little person had already hurried off
to warn somebody else.

It was no time at all before Rusty Wren's wife gave a piercing scream.

"That fat Robin boy--he'll be caught!" she wailed.

Now, it made Master Robin very angry to be spoken of in such a way as
that.

"Fat!" he burst out in a loud tone as he stared in Mrs. Wren's
direction. "Who's fat?"

"You are!" said a strange, grumpy voice right behind him--or so it
seemed to young Master Robin.




III

MASTER ROBIN'S LESSON


When young Master Robin heard the strange voice that sounded so grumpy
and so near him he was terribly frightened. He forgot that he thought
himself grown up, and very wise, and quite able to go about alone. He
didn't even look to see who was speaking, but fell backwards off the
limb of the apple tree.

It was lucky for him, too, that he fell just when he did. For a long
brownish person, white underneath, took Master Robin's place on the limb
so promptly that you could hardly have said he jumped into it from
somewhere else. He seemed to have popped out of the tree somewhat as a
freshly popped kernel of corn bursts forth. A moment ago it was not
there! You were watching, but did not see it grow big.

Well, all at once there was silence in the orchard. Everybody was
holding his breath, waiting to see what happened to young Master Robin.
Though he had lost his balance and tumbled backward he righted himself
quite like an old-timer and flew off across the orchard.

"I didn't know snakes could climb trees," he stammered to Mr. Chippy,
who had followed him.

"Snakes!" Mr. Chippy piped. "That wasn't a snake! That was Grumpy
Weasel.... And it's a wonder you ever escaped," he added. "I must learn
that backward somersault. It's a good thing to know."

[Illustration: Master Robin Escapes From Grumpy Weasel. (_Page 9_)]

You can see that Mr. Chippy was a very humble person. But Mr. Jolly
Robin's eldest son was quite proud. Already he began to feel that he had
been very skilful in escaping. But of course it was only an accident
that he got away.

For once in his life Grumpy Weasel had been careless. It had looked so
easy--catching that clumsy young robin! He had spoken to Master Robin,
not dreaming that he could save himself. To make matters worse, Grumpy
had found Mr. Chippy's nest empty. And Grumpy Weasel was the sort of
person that liked to find a bird at home when he called. It always made
him more ill-natured than usual to make a call for nothing. And now he
had let a stupid young Robin escape him. So it is not surprising that
his big black eyes snapped nor that he said something in a fierce voice
that sounded like "Chip, chip, chip," but meant something a good deal
worse.

And to add to Grumpy Weasel's rage, somebody had laughed hoarsely--somebody
that sat in a tall elm across the road.

If he could have caught Mr. Crow there is no doubt that Grumpy would
have made that black scamp sorry that he laughed. But old Mr. Crow was
too wary to let anybody surprise him. "Haw, haw!" he laughed again. And
Grumpy Weasel actually couldn't bear to hear him. Some of the onlookers
claimed afterward that they saw Grumpy Weasel start down the tree. And
that was as much as they could say. No one knew how he managed to slip
out of sight. And the field people say that he was never seen again in
that exact spot.




IV

HUNTING A HOLE


Usually Grumpy Weasel did not stray far from a certain corner of Farmer
Green's wood lot. He preferred to hunt where he knew the lay of the
land. And since he liked especially to hunt along old stone walls, he
picked out a long stretch of old tumble-down wall that reached through
the woods towards Blue Mountain.

He picked it out as his very own hunting ground and never asked
permission of Farmer Green, either.

Now, near the lower end of this wall--the end toward the pasture--a fat
person known as Mr. Meadow Mouse sometimes wandered. But he never
visited that spot without first inquiring whether Grumpy Weasel had been
there the day before. Mr. Meadow Mouse had learned somehow that Grumpy
usually moved on each day to a different part of his hunting ground. He
was surprised, therefore, to meet Grumpy Weasel face to face one time,
when he felt sure that that surly rogue must be a good safe distance
away.

Mr. Meadow Mouse cast a quick glance around. But he could see no place
to hide. So there was nothing for him to do but to put on a bold front.
He bowed pleasantly enough, though he was trembling a little, and
remarked that it was a fine day and that he hoped Grumpy was feeling
happy--all of which was quite true.

Grumpy Weasel glowered at Mr. Meadow Mouse, for that was his way of
replying to a kindly greeting.

"You've not come here to hunt, I hope," he growled. "I'll have you know
that this is my private hunting ground and I allow no poaching."

Mr. Meadow Mouse hastened to explain that he was merely out for a
stroll.

"I never hunt," he declared. "Of course, if I happen to see a tiny seed
I may stop to eat it. But that's all."

"You'd better be careful what you say!" Grumpy Weasel snapped. "Unless
I'm mistaken, you were hunting something the moment you saw me. You were
hunting a hole."

Mr. Meadow Mouse gasped slightly. He hardly knew what to say.

"Be very careful where you go around here!" Grumpy Weasel warned him.
"The holes in this stone wall are all mine. I shouldn't want you to use
a single one of them without my permission."

Mr. Meadow Mouse assured him that he wouldn't dream of trespassing.

"And these holes among the roots of the trees--they are mine too,"
Grumpy Weasel snarled.

"Oh, certainly! Certainly!" Mr. Meadow Mouse cried. He was so quick to
agree that for once Grumpy Weasel couldn't think of anything more to
find fault about.

"I'll let you crawl into a few of the smaller holes in the stone wall,
if you'll be careful not to hurt them," he offered grudgingly.

Mr. Meadow Mouse made haste to thank him.

He said, however, that he thought he would wait till some other time.

"There's no time like the present," Grumpy Weasel grumbled. "To tell
the truth, I want to see if you can squeeze through as small a hole as I
can."




V

SOLOMON OWL INTERRUPTS


Plump little Mr. Meadow Mouse wished he had stayed away from Grumpy
Weasel's hunting ground. He would have scampered off, had he not known
that Grumpy could overtake him before he had made three leaps. So he saw
no way out of his trouble, though he could think of nothing less
agreeable than trying to slip through a small hole with Grumpy Weasel
close at hand, watching him narrowly.

Then all at once Mr. Meadow Mouse had an idea. "You go first!" he said
politely. "Go through any hole you choose and then I'll try my luck."

But Grumpy Weasel was too crafty to do that.

"You'd try your luck at running away," he snarled. "You are the one to
go first; and we'll have no words about it."

Well, Mr. Meadow Mouse began to shake more than ever.

"Don't you think," he quavered, "that we'd better wait a few days until
I'm a bit smaller? I'm afraid I've been overeating lately and I might
get stuck in a hole. And of course that would be awkward."

"Ha, ha!" Grumpy Weasel actually laughed. But it was not what any one
could call a hearty, wholesome, cheerful sort of laugh. On the contrary,
it sounded very cruel and gloating.

"Hoo, hoo!" Another laugh--this one weird and hollow--boomed out from
the hemlock tree just above Mr. Meadow Mouse's head.

He jumped, in spite of himself--did Mr. Meadow Mouse. And so, too, did
Grumpy Weasel. Both of them leaped for the old stone wall. And each
flashed into a crevice between the stones, though Grumpy Weasel was ever
so much the quicker of the two. They knew Solomon Owl's voice too well
to mistake his odd laughter.

"What's your hurry, gentlemen?" Solomon called to them.

Mild Mr. Meadow Mouse made no reply. But from Grumpy Weasel's hiding
place an angry hiss told Solomon Owl that one of them, at least, had
heard his question.

"Come out!" said Solomon Owl. "Don't be shy! I've dined already."

Well, that made the two in the wall feel somewhat bolder. And soon they
ventured to peep out and gaze at Solomon, to see whether he looked like
a person who had just enjoyed a good meal.

"You're not as hollow as you sound, I hope," Grumpy Weasel remarked with
some suspicion in his tone.

As for Mr. Meadow Mouse, he wouldn't dream of making so rude a remark.

"It's a fine evening and I hope you're feeling happy," he piped.

"Oh, very! Very!" said Solomon Owl solemnly.

Mr. Meadow Mouse was a trusting sort of chap. He was all ready to leave
his cranny. But Grumpy Weasel was not yet satisfied.

"Which one of us are you answering?" he demanded of Solomon.

"Him!" said Solomon.

"Did you say, 'Ahem?'" Grumpy Weasel wanted to know.

"No, no!" Solomon assured him. "I said, 'him.' I was answering your
friend."

Grumpy Weasel made a wry face, as if he did not care to have anybody
speak of Mr. Meadow Mouse as a friend of his. And he did not quit the
stone wall until he had seen Mr. Meadow Mouse venture forth in safety.

"Just by accident I overheard your remarks a few minutes ago," Mr. Owl
explained. "I'd like to watch this hole-crawling contest. And I'll stay
here and be the umpire--and see that there's fair play."




VI

MR. MEADOW MOUSE ESCAPES


Grumpy Weasel did not like Solomon Owl's offer to be umpire of the
hole-crawling contest between Mr. Meadow Mouse and himself. He hissed a
few times and glared at Solomon Owl, up in the hemlock tree.

Solomon Owl did not appear to mind that, but calmly outstared Grumpy
Weasel without once blinking. "Are you both ready?" he asked presently.

"Yes, thank you!" Mr. Meadow Mouse answered. And Grumpy Weasel gave a
sort of shrug, as if to say that he supposed he was.

"First you may try that hole between those mossy stones," Mr. Owl
announced, with a tilt of his head toward the wall.

"Certainly!" cried Mr. Meadow Mouse.

"You go first and I'll follow," Grumpy Weasel told him.

And Mr. Meadow Mouse didn't dare disobey. He whisked through the hole
spryly and was back again in no time.

Then Grumpy took his turn. He was certainly quicker than Mr. Meadow
Mouse. Even the umpire, Solomon Owl, had to admit that.

"But of course that's not the point," Solomon observed. "It's the one
that gets stuck in a hole that loses the contest."

Well, after Grumpy and Mr. Meadow Mouse had slipped through several
holes, each one smaller than the one before, Mr. Meadow Mouse said that
he thought it was only polite to let Grumpy go first. Secretly Mr.
Meadow Mouse was afraid of what might happen if he should have the
misfortune to get wedged in a hole, with Grumpy Weasel ready to follow
him. He had had some trouble getting through the last one and he knew
that he could never squeeze through one that was much smaller.

Grumpy Weasel lost his temper at once.

"I'll do as I please on my stone wall!" he snapped. And he was angrier
than ever when Solomon Own said to him, "It's your turn!" Probably no
other of the woods people--unless it was one of the Hawk family--could
have made Grumpy Weasel obey. And now he insisted that if he "went
first" he ought to be allowed to choose whatever hole he pleased.

Both Solomon Owl and Mr. Meadow Mouse agreed. So Grumpy Weasel popped
through a hole of his own choosing, and he did not reappear, though he
called to Mr. Meadow Mouse to "come on."

Mr. Meadow Mouse hung back.

"You'll have to excuse me," he stammered.

"What's the matter?" boomed Solomon Owl. "Do you want to lose the
contest?"

"No!" said Mr. Meadow Mouse. "But Grumpy Weasel is still inside that
hole. There's no other way out."

"How do you know?" Solomon Owl asked him.

"Oh, I've been here before, often," Mr. Meadow Mouse replied.

"Are you sure?" Mr. Owl inquired.

"I'll go on the other side of the wall and look," Mr. Meadow Mouse
offered. And thereupon he skipped over the wall.

Solomon Owl waited patiently. And so did Grumpy Weasel. But Mr. Meadow
Mouse never came back. Once out of sight he scampered away. And he never
trespassed on Grumpy Weasel's hunting ground again.




VII

PADDY MUSKRAT'S BLUNDER


Sometimes Grumpy Weasel found the hunting poor along the stretch of
stone wall that he called his own--though of course it really belonged
to Farmer Green. And though he disliked to wander much in strange
neighborhoods, once in a while he visited other parts of Pleasant
Valley.

It was on such an excursion to the bank of the mill pond that he caught
sight, one day, of Paddy Muskrat--or to be more exact, that Paddy
Muskrat caught sight of him.

Now it was seldom that anybody spoke to Grumpy Weasel. On the contrary,
most of the forest-folk dodged out of sight whenever they saw him, and
said nothing. So he wheeled like a flash and started to run when
somebody called, "Hullo, stranger!"

One quick backward glance at a small wet head in the water told Grumpy
that he had nothing to fear.

"Hullo, yourself!" he retorted "And you'd better not call me 'stranger,'
because I'm no stranger than you are."

Well, Paddy Muskrat--for it was he who had spied Grumpy Weasel on the
bank of the pond--saw at once that whoever the slender and elegant
person might be, he had the worst of manners. Though Paddy had lived in
the mill pond a long time, he had never met any one that looked exactly
like the newcomer. To be sure, there was Peter Mink, who was
long-bodied and short-tempered, as the stranger appeared to be. But
when Paddy inquired whether the visitor wasn't a distant connection of
the Mink family (as indeed he was!), Grumpy Weasel said, "What! Do you
mean to insult me by asking whether I'm related to such a ragged,
ruffianly crowd?"

Somehow Paddy Muskrat rather liked that answer, for Peter Mink and all
his family were fine swimmers and most unwelcome in the mill pond.

And perhaps--who knew?--perhaps the spic-and-span chap on the bank, with
the sleek coat and black-tipped tail, was one of the kind that didn't
like to get his feet wet.

Then Paddy Muskrat asked the stranger a silly question. He was not the
wisest person, anyhow, in Pleasant Valley, as his wife often reminded
him. "You're not a distant relation of Tommy Fox, are you?" he
inquired.

Grumpy Weasel actually almost smiled.

"Now, how did you happen to guess that?" he asked.

"Because you've got such a sharp nose," Paddy Muskrat replied. And he
was quite pleased with himself, for he thought that he wasn't so stupid
as some people thought.

"Any other reason?" Grumpy Weasel inquired, stepping to the edge of the
overhanging bank.

"You don't like to get your feet wet," Paddy Muskrat said. And feeling
safe as anything, he swam nearer the spot where the stranger was
crouching.

Paddy saw, almost too late, that he had made a bad blunder. For without
the slightest warning Grumpy Weasel leaped at him. And had not Paddy
been a wonderful swimmer and able to dive like a flash, he would never
have dashed, panting, into his house a few moments later.

"What on earth is the matter?" his wife asked him.

"I've been having a swimming race with a stranger," Paddy explained. "I
don't know his name. But I do know that he'd just as soon get his feet
wet as I would."

"Well, why not?" Mrs. Muskrat inquired. "That only shows he's sensible."

"Does it show I'm sensible, too?" Paddy asked her.

"Certainly not!" said Mrs. Muskrat.




VIII

THE DARE


If Grumpy Weasel had been a faster runner the forest people wouldn't
have been so surprised when he dared Jimmy Rabbit to race him. Everybody
knew that Jimmy was swift-footed--especially since he once beat old Mr.
Turtle (but that is another story).

When Mr. Crow, who was a great bearer of news, told Jimmy Rabbit one day
that Grumpy Weasel wanted a race with him, Jimmy Rabbit seemed more than
willing to oblige. "Where, when, and how far does Grumpy want to run
against me?" he asked.

Mr. Crow said that he didn't know, but that he would make it his
business to find out. So off he hurried to find Grumpy Weasel, for if
there was anything Mr. Crow liked it was busying himself with other
people's affairs.

He did not have what you could call a pleasant talk with Grumpy Weasel.
Once when Mr. Crow alighted too near the ground Grumpy jumped at him.
And several times he called Mr. Crow a nest-robber and an egg-thief,
though goodness knows Grumpy Weasel himself was as bad as the worst when
it came to robbing birds' nests.

Although he felt as if he were about to burst with rage old Mr. Crow
pretended to laugh. He had been having a rather dull time, waiting for
Farmer Green to plant his corn, and he thought that a lively race might
put him in better spirits.

[Illustration: Grumpy Nearly Catches Paddy Muskrat. (_Page 31_)]

"Where do you want to race against Jimmy Rabbit?" Mr. Crow asked.

"We'll start from this wall," said Grumpy sulkily, "because it's always
better to start from where you are than where you aren't."

Mr. Crow said that that seemed reasonable.

"When do you want to race?" he added.

"The sooner we start the quicker we'll finish," Grumpy Weasel snapped.

"Quite true, quite true!" Mr. Crow agreed. "And now may I inquire how
long a race you want to run?"

"No longer than I have to!" Grumpy growled. "Not more than a day or two,
I hope!"

Mr. Crow snickered slightly. "I see you don't understand my question,"
he observed. "Are you going to run a mile, or only a few rods?"

"How do I know?" Grumpy cried, as if he had no patience with his
questioner. "How could anybody tell? I'll let Jimmy Rabbit start twenty
jumps ahead of me and we'll run till I catch him."

Well, Mr. Crow laughed right out loud when he heard that. And he was
about to tell Grumpy that he would have to run till the end of his days
if he raced Jimmy Rabbit in any such fashion as that. But he saw all at
once that such a race would be a great joke. And he said to himself with
a chuckle that the laugh would be on Grumpy Weasel. For Jimmy Rabbit was
so swift a runner that nobody who knew anything at all would ever
consent to give him a start--much less propose such a thing.

"Very well!" said Mr. Crow with a smirk, "I'll report to Jimmy Rabbit.
I'll tell him where, when and how you want to race, and there's no
doubt that your plan will please him."

"I hope it won't!" Grumpy Weasel snarled. "I've never pleased anybody
yet; and I don't mean to."

And that goes to show what an ill-natured scamp he was.




IX

SAVING HIS FEET


Old Mr. Crow and Jimmy Rabbit had a good laugh over Grumpy Weasel's plan
for a race with Jimmy. They thought it a great joke.

"He needn't give me a start," Jimmy said. "I can beat Grumpy easily."

"Never mind that!" Mr. Crow advised. "You might as well let him have his
way. He'll look all the more foolish, trying to catch up with you."

So Jimmy Rabbit agreed to run the race as Grumpy Weasel wished, saying
that he was ready to start at once.

But Mr. Crow told him he had better wait till the next day. "That will
give me time to tell everybody," he explained, "and then there'll be a
big turnout to see you win--and to jeer at Grumpy Weasel for losing."
And one could tell from Mr. Crow's remark that he liked Jimmy Rabbit and
that he despised Grumpy Weasel.

The next day proved to be a fine one for the race. It wasn't too hot nor
too cold; and early in the morning the field- and forest-people began
gathering at Grumpy Weasel's hunting ground, where the stone wall
touched the clearing.

About the only persons that objected to the time set for the race were
Benjamin Bat and Solomon Owl. Benjamin said that he could never keep
awake to watch it; and Solomon complained that he couldn't see well in
the daytime. But all the rest of the company were in the best of
spirits, giggling slyly whenever they looked at Grumpy Weasel, who
seemed to pay scant heed to his neighbors, though you may be sure his
roving black eyes took in everything that was going on. He seemed more
restless than ever as he waited for Jimmy Rabbit to arrive, walking to
and fro on his front legs in a most peculiar fashion, while he kept his
hind feet firmly planted on the ground in one spot. Of course he could
never have moved about in this manner had his body not been so long and
slender.

Noticing Grumpy's strange actions, old Mr. Crow looked worried and asked
him what was the matter. "I hope your hind feet aren't troubling you,
just as the race is about to begin," he said.

Grumpy Weasel hissed at the old gentleman before he replied: "Don't
worry! You'll soon see that my hind feet can travel as fast as my front
ones--when I want to use them."

"Ah!" Mr. Crow exclaimed knowingly. "He's saving his hind feet for the
race."

When Jimmy Rabbit reached the gathering place, coming up in a long lope,
Mr. Crow hurried to meet him.

"I advise you to save your hind feet," he whispered. "Grumpy Weasel is
saving his."

Jimmy Rabbit told Mr. Crow, with a smile, that he had saved his hind
feet all his life--and his front ones, too.

"I've brought them along to-day," he said, "to help me win this race."




X

HA! AND HA, HA!


A great outcry rang through the woods the moment Jimmy Rabbit set out to
race Grumpy Weasel and beat him. Shouts of "Good luck!" and "Run hard!"
and "Hurrah for James Rabbit!" followed Jimmy. But old Mr. Crow
squawked, "You don't need to hurry!" He thought that the race was
already as good as won, for Grumpy Weasel had insisted on giving Jimmy
Rabbit a start of twenty jumps.

Meanwhile Grumpy Weasel glowered. But he could not glower at Jimmy's
friends, because he had to watch Jimmy himself in order to count the
first twenty jumps he took. When Grumpy had counted nineteen and a half
away he started. And old Mr. Crow, as he sat staring at the race,
declared that Grumpy Weasel hadn't a chance to win.

The company seemed ready to take Mr. Crow's word for it--that is, all
except Grumpy Weasel's cousin, Peter Mink. He spoke up and said that as
for him, he would wait and see what happened. He didn't believe old Mr.
Crow knew what he was talking about.

Mr. Crow grew almost a purplish black with rage.

"We'll all wait," he said stiffly. "We'll all wait. And when the race is
over you will apologize to me."

Peter Mink merely grinned. He had no respect for his elders. And now he
didn't appear to mind in the least when the entire company let him
severely alone.

Mr. Crow shot a triumphant look at him about an hour later, when Jimmy
Rabbit came bounding into sight, with no one following him. "You may as
well stop now," Mr. Crow told Jimmy. "You've as good as won the race
already."

Jimmy Rabbit said that he thought so, too, but he supposed he'd better
keep running a while longer, till Grumpy Weasel gave up. So off he
hopped again.

Everybody except Peter Mink laughed heartily when Grumpy Weasel came
springing up the slope a little while later.

"You may as well stop now. You've as good as lost already," Mr. Crow
greeted him.

"Whose race is this--yours or mine?" Grumpy Weasel hissed. And off he
hurried, without pausing to hear Mr. Crow's answer.

"We'll wait a while longer," Mr. Crow told the company, "for the end is
so near we may as well see it."

"Whose end?" Peter Mink asked him.

"I mean the end of the race, of course!" Mr. Crow squalled.

"Oh! I thought you meant the end of Jimmy Rabbit," Peter Mink replied.

"Impossible! Impossible!" was all Mr. Crow said to that. But he began to
fidget--which was a sign that he was worried. And when Jimmy Rabbit
appeared again Mr. Crow was not quite so cocksure when he asked if the
race wasn't over.

"It would be," Jimmy Rabbit answered, "but the trouble is, Grumpy Weasel
won't stop running!"

"Ha!" said Mr. Crow hoarsely. But Peter Mink said, "Ha, ha!" And there
is a great difference between those two remarks, as we shall see.




XI

A LONG RACE


The famous race between Grumpy Weasel and Jimmy Rabbit went on and on.
Jimmy turned and twisted this way and that, up and down and back and
forth through Pleasant Valley. He could still run faster than Grumpy
Weasel, it is true. But he was growing tired. Now and then Jimmy stopped
to rest. And he kept hoping that Grumpy Weasel had become so weary that
he had given up the chase.

But Grumpy Weasel never stopped once. And whenever Jimmy Rabbit spied
him coming along his trail Jimmy would spring up with a sigh and rush
off again.

He began to understand that such a race was no joke. He certainly didn't
want to lose the race. And he certainly didn't want Grumpy Weasel to
come up with him. He had always kept at a good safe distance from that
ill-natured fellow. And Jimmy felt most uneasy now at the thought of
Grumpy's catching him.

"He must be very hungry, after running so far," Jimmy Rabbit said to
himself anxiously. "If he's as hungry as I am he wouldn't be a pleasant
person to meet." And that thought made Jimmy run all the faster, for a
time. But he soon found that he had to stop more often to rest. And to
his great alarm Grumpy Weasel kept drawing nearer all the time.

At last Jimmy Rabbit became so worried that he swept around by the stone
wall again and stopped to whisper to old Mr. Crow.

"He's still chasing me. And I can't run forever. What shall I do?" Jimmy
asked the old gentleman.

"I'll think the matter over and let you know to-morrow," Mr. Crow
muttered hoarsely. To tell the truth, he was alarmed himself. And he had
no idea what Jimmy Rabbit could do to save himself from Grumpy Weasel.

While they talked, Grumpy's cousin, Peter Mink, watched them slyly.

"Who do you think is going to win the race?" he jeered.

Mr. Crow did not even turn his head. He felt very uncomfortable. But he
tried to look unconcerned.

"Run along!" he said to Jimmy. "To-morrow I'll tell you what to do."

"To-morrow--" Jimmy Rabbit panted--"to-morrow will be too late."

Then all at once Mr. Crow had an idea. And he whispered something in
one of Jimmy Rabbit's long ears that made the poor fellow take heart.

"All right!" Jimmy cried. "I'll see you again--sometime!" And away he
ran, just as Grumpy Weasel came racing along the stone wall, looking as
fresh as a daisy.

"You'd better stop and rest a while!" Mr. Crow croaked. "If you get too
tired you'll never win."

"Rest!" Grumpy exploded. "I don't need to rest! I never felt better in
my life, except that I'm pretty hungry. But I'm bound to win this race."
As he spoke of feeling hungry he cast a longing glance at Jimmy Rabbit,
who was just dodging out of sight behind a distant tree.

"Wait here a bit, anyhow!" Mr. Crow urged him. "Since you're sure to
win--as you say--there can be no hurry." And Peter Mink too begged his
cousin Grumpy to stop just a minute. And he laughed, "Ha, ha!" whenever
he looked at Mr. Crow.

And strange to say, Mr. Crow said, "Ha, ha!" too.

[Illustration: Grumpy Calls on Mrs. Hen. (_Page 58_)]




XII

WINNING BY A TRICK


Grumpy Weasel wouldn't stop long with his cousin, Peter Mink, and old
Mr. Crow and all the rest.

He was in a hurry to overtake Jimmy Rabbit. And after quarreling
fiercely with the whole company--except his cousin--he sprang up with a
wicked glitter in his black eyes and left without another word.

"That fixed him," said Mr. Crow knowingly.

"What did?" Peter Mink demanded.

"That rest!" Mr. Crow replied. "It gave Jimmy Rabbit just time enough
to go where he's going." And that was all he would say.

Not until Grumpy Weasel returned some time later did any one know what
Mr. Crow meant.

Grumpy Weasel was in a terrible temper when he came slowly back.
Everybody could tell, without asking, that the race was ended.

"Where did you catch him?" Peter Mink asked his cousin.

Grumpy Weasel said in a few ill-chosen words that he hadn't caught Jimmy
Rabbit at all, and that somebody had played a trick on him. He looked
directly at Mr. Crow as he spoke.

"It wasn't Johnny Green, was it?" Mr. Crow inquired solemnly as he moved
carefully to a higher limb.

Grumpy Weasel could tell, then, without a doubt, that it was Mr. Crow
that had made him lose the race. Grumpy had followed hot on Jimmy
Rabbit's tracks. And to his surprise they led straight toward the farm
buildings. But Grumpy kept on and never stopped until he reached the
farmyard fence where he crouched and watched Jimmy disappear--of all
places!--right in the woodshed, where Johnny Green was picking up an
armful of wood.

Of course Grumpy Weasel wouldn't think of entering such a dangerous
place. And when he heard a shout and saw Johnny Green come out with
Jimmy Rabbit in his arms he knew that Jimmy Rabbit had won the race,
even if he had lost his freedom.

"It was that old black rascal, Mr. Crow, that put that notion into Jimmy
Rabbit's head," Grumpy said savagely to himself as he turned and made
for the woods. "They were talking together a little while ago."

And all the way back to the stone wall he kept thinking what he would do
to Mr. Crow if he could ever get hold of him. So you can see that he
must have looked very dangerous when he reached his hunting ground; and
you can understand why Mr. Crow took pains to change his seat.

"I may have lost the race--through a trick," Grumpy hissed as he glared
at Mr. Crow. "But one thing is certain: That young Jimmy Rabbit will
trouble us no more. He's Johnny Green's prisoner."

"Nonsense!" cried Mr. Crow. "He'll escape some fine day."

"Nonsense! He won't!" Grumpy Weasel disputed. And he never begged Mr.
Crow's pardon. And neither did Peter Mink apologize to the old
gentleman, as Mr. Crow had said he would. So in one way Mr. Crow was
wrong. But in another way he was right. For it wasn't a week before
Jimmy Rabbit appeared in the woods again, as spry as ever.




XIII

SILLY MRS. HEN


Strange to say, Grumpy Weasel was trying to be pleasant. Of course he
didn't really know how, for he always practiced being surly and rude. It
must be confessed, too, that he had succeeded in making himself heartily
disliked by everybody that knew him.

There were a few, however, who had yet to learn of Grumpy Weasel's bad
traits. Among these was a foolish, fat hen who lived in Farmer Green's
henhouse. And now Grumpy Weasel was doing his best to make a good
impression on her.

It is no wonder, perhaps, that this lady was unaware of her caller's
real nature. For Grumpy was careful, as a rule, to visit the farmyard
only after dark. And being a person of quiet habits Mrs. Hen was always
abed and asleep at that time.

Grumpy found it a bit difficult to chat with Mrs. Hen because old dog
Spot was sprawled on the farmhouse steps; and naturally Grumpy felt like
keeping one eye on him. But the other he turned, as well as he could, on
Mrs. Hen, who was in the henyard looking for worms. Just outside the
wire fence Grumpy Weasel crouched and told Mrs. Hen how well she was
looking.

His pretty speeches pleased Mrs. Hen so much that she actually let a fat
angleworm get away from her because she hadn't her mind on what she was
doing. She noticed meanwhile that one of her neighbors was making
frantic motions, as if she had something important to say. So Mrs. Hen
sauntered across the henyard to find out what it was.

"Don't you know whom you're talking to?" the neighbor demanded in a loud
whisper. "That's Grumpy Weasel--the worst rascal in all these parts."

Somehow that sent a pleasant flutter of excitement through Mrs. Hen. At
the same time she couldn't quite believe the news, because her caller
had said such very pleasant things.

"Don't worry!" she told her neighbor. "I'm old enough to look out for
myself."

"I should say so!" her neighbor cried. "You're three years old if you're
a day!"

"I'm not!" Mrs. Hen retorted. "I'm only two and a half." Her feathers
were all ruffled up and she went straight back and told Grumpy Weasel
what her neighbor had said about him.

"You don't believe that, I hope," Grumpy ventured.

Mrs. Hen clucked and tried to look wise. And at last she confided to
Grumpy that her neighbor was a jealous creature and sure to speak ill of
a stranger who came to call on anybody but herself.

Well, Grumpy Weasel told Mrs. Hen that he knew, when he first set eyes
on her, that she was a sensible little body.

"You've a snug home here," he went on. "I can tell you that I'd like
such a place to crawl into on a chilly, wet night." And though it was a
warm, fine summer's day he shivered and shook, so Mrs. Hen could see.

And silly Mrs. Hen couldn't help feeling sorry for him.




XIV

GRUMPY VANISHES


Grumpy Weasel was quick to see that fat Mrs. Hen swallowed every word he
said as greedily as if it had been an angleworm. "Yes! You have a fine
house here," he said. "But of course you're crowded," he added gloomily,
to show Mrs. Hen that he knew she had no place for him.

"Oh! Not at all!" Mrs. Hen assured him.

"And the door's always shut tight at night," he added, "on account of
that prowling Tommy Fox."

"Yes! We have to be careful," said Mrs. Hen.

"And there's Peter Mink, too," Grumpy went on. "Don't leave an opening
big enough for him! He can get through a small hole, too--any that's big
enough for his head."

At that Mrs. Hen looked startled, as if she had just remembered
something that made her feel uneasy.

"He couldn't get through a rat hole, could he?" she inquired nervously.

"Why--there isn't one here, is there?" Grumpy asked.

"There is an old one," she admitted. "It hasn't been used in my time."

"If I could see it I'd know at once whether Pete could crawl through
it," Grumpy Weasel said, talking to himself--or so it seemed to Mrs.
Hen.

"I'll show it to you gladly!" she cried. "Do come right in and look at
our rat hole, Mr. Weasel!"

As she spoke, Mrs. Hen started for the henhouse. And after her crept
Grumpy Weasel, hoping that nobody else would see him. So far as he could
tell, the hens were all out of doors, scratching in the dirt. But
suddenly Mrs. Hen's jealous neighbor began to set up a great squawking,
calling upon Mrs. Hen to be careful, for she was in great danger.

Fat Mrs. Hen turned about with a vexed look upon her handsome but
somewhat stupid face.

"Walk right in!" she said to Grumpy. "I must stop and settle with her.
She has gone too far." And leaving Grumpy to find the rat hole without
her help, Mrs. Hen fluttered across the henyard with her head thrust
forward, to give her meddlesome neighbor a number of hard pecks and so
teach her to mind her own affairs.

With a low chuckle Grumpy Weasel slipped inside the henhouse, where he
found himself quite alone. It took him but a few moments to discover in
one corner of the building the old rat hole of which Mrs. Hen had
spoken.

And then he went to the door and looked out, for Mrs. Hen and her
neighbor were making a terrific racket. He saw the end of the squabble.
And soon Mrs. Hen came running back, with her feathers sadly rumpled,
and her comb awry.

"I settled with her," she gasped. "And now tell me about the rat hole.
Could Peter Mink get through it?"

"No, he couldn't!" Grumpy Weasel said. Then he dodged strangely back
into the henhouse. And though Mrs. Hen hopped in after him she couldn't
find him anywhere.

She couldn't understand it.




XV

THE GREAT MYSTERY


The story soon spread all around the farmyard, how fat Mrs. Hen had been
seen talking with no less a rascal than Grumpy Weasel.

Everybody told her that it was a dangerous thing to do and that it was a
wonder she had escaped, until Mrs. Hen began to feel that she was quite
the most important person in the neighborhood. Even old dog Spot asked
her some questions one day--some of which she could answer, and some of
which she could not.

For one thing, she couldn't (or wouldn't) tell what way Grumpy left the
farmyard. "He just jumped back and was gone before I knew it," she said.

"That's what they all say," said Spot. "He's so quick you never can see
him go."

Now, Mrs. Hen ought to have explained that Grumpy Weasel disappeared
from inside the henhouse. But she was not a person of much sense. By
that time she began to think that perhaps Grumpy Weasel was as bad as
the neighbors had said. And she was afraid that her relations might find
fault with her if they learned that she had invited Grumpy to enter
their house. Silly Mrs. Hen decided that she wouldn't tell what she had
done. But she never tired of talking about what she called "the great
mystery"--meaning "Where did Grumpy Weasel go?"

It was simple enough. To escape meeting old dog Spot, Grumpy Weasel had
crawled into the old rat hole. It suited him quite well to do that, for
more than one reason. Not only did he avoid trouble, but he found the
other end of the rat hole. Silly Mrs. Hen had done exactly as he had
hoped. She had shown him a way to get into the henhouse at night in
spite of locks and bolts and doors. And Grumpy Weasel went off to the
woods well pleased with himself.

"Perhaps, after all, it pays to be pleasant," he said--just as if that
was a reason! But he stopped short all at once. "There's that stupid
Mrs. Hen," he cried aloud. "She was pleasant; but it won't pay her, in
the end!" So he decided on the spot that he would keep on being surly.
It would be much easier for him, anyhow.

That very night Grumpy Weasel stole back to the henhouse. And he was
just about to creep up to the old rat hole, pausing first to take a
searching look all around, when he saw a motionless figure sitting on a
low-hanging limb of a tree near-by. It was Solomon Owl. And Grumpy could
see that he was staring at the rat hole as if he were waiting for
somebody.

Grumpy Weasel knew at once that that rat hole was no safe place for him.
Very gingerly he drew back into a deep shadow. And as he pondered
silently he saw a huge rat step out of the hole. Solomon Owl swooped
down and grabbed the fellow before he knew what was happening.

Well, Grumpy Weasel saw that all his trouble had gone for nothing. Silly
Mrs. Hen hadn't known what she was talking about. If Solomon Owl was in
the habit of watching that hole Grumpy certainly didn't mean to go near
it.

Of course he was angry. But Mrs. Hen never learned what he said about
her. No matter what remarks her neighbors made, she always insisted
afterward that Grumpy Weasel was one of the most pleasant and polite
gentlemen she had ever met.




XVI

GUARDING THE CORNCRIB


Grumpy Weasel never seemed to have anything but bad luck whenever he
went near the farmyard. Perhaps that was the reason why he kept going
back there, for he was nothing if not determined. Anyhow, he had found
the hunting poor along his stone wall in the woods. And there was so
much "game," as he called it, about the farm buildings that he thought
it was silly to leave it for such scamps as Peter Mink and Tommy Fox and
Fatty Coon.

So he took to loitering near Farmer Green's corncrib. And he was not at
all pleased to find Fatty Coon there one evening. He wouldn't have
spoken to Fatty at all had not that plump young chap hurled a cutting
remark directly at him: "There are no chickens in this building. This is
a corncrib."

"Don't you suppose I know that?" Grumpy retorted. "I've come here to
guard the corn from mice and squirrels."

"There's no need of your doing that," Fatty Coon told him. "Have you
never noticed those tin pans, upside down, on top of the posts on which
the corncrib rests? How could a mouse or a squirrel ever climb past one
of those?"

"There are ways," Grumpy Weasel said wisely.

"I doubt it," Fatty replied. "I don't believe the trick can be done."

Then, not to oblige Fatty, but to show him he was mistaken, Grumpy
climbed a tree near-by, dropped from one of its branches to the roof of
the corncrib, and quickly found a crack in the side of the building
through which he slipped with no trouble at all.

Suddenly there was a great scurrying and scrambling inside. And soon
Fatty Coon saw Frisky Squirrel and several of his friends--not to
mention three frightened mice--come tumbling out and tear off in every
direction.

Presently Grumpy Weasel stuck his head through a crack between two
boards.

"Did you catch the robbers?" he called to Fatty Coon.

"They were too spry for me," Fatty told him. He wouldn't have stopped
one anyhow, for Grumpy Weasel.

"Which way did they go, old Slow Poke?" Grumpy cried as he jumped down
in great haste.

"Everywhere!" Fatty told him.

"Can't you be a little more exact? You don't think--do you?--that I can
run more than one way at a time?"

"Why don't you run round and round in a circle?" Fatty suggested. "In
that way you might catch at least half those youngsters--and perhaps all
of them."

"That's the first real idea you ever had in your life!" Grumpy
exclaimed--which was as near to thanking a person as he was ever known
to come.




XVII

GRUMPY'S MISTAKE


As soon as Grumpy Weasel left to chase the squirrels and mice that he
had frightened away from the corncrib Fatty Coon hurried into the
building through a hole in the floor which nobody knew but himself.

Though he was a great eater Fatty was also a fast one. And now he bolted
a huge meal of corn in only a few minutes. Then, smiling broadly, he
left the corncrib by his private doorway and squatted down to await
Grumpy's return.

In a little while Grumpy appeared.

"I hoped I'd see you again," Fatty Coon told him. "Did you have any
luck?"

"No!" Grumpy Weasel snapped. "I was mistaken about your idea. It was a
very poor one. For I've been running in a circle (as you suggested) till
I'm dizzy; and I haven't seen the least sign of a mouse nor a squirrel."

Fatty Coon told him to cheer up.

"I've another idea for you," he said.

"Keep it! Keep it!" Grumpy Weasel hissed. "Your last idea only made me
tired; and I haven't a capture to my credit to-night."

"That's because you ran too fast," Fatty explained glibly. "Now, if
you'll be careful to run slowly, and do just as I tell you, I can
promise that there'll be a capture, without fail."

[Illustration: Grumpy Weasel Visits the Corncrib. (_Page 70_)]

Grumpy had had such bad luck in his hunting about the farmyard that he
decided to listen, anyhow. He told himself that he wouldn't take
Fatty's advice unless it was much better than he expected.

"Well--go on!" he grunted.

"Do you see that little house near the woodshed?" Fatty Coon asked him.
"It has a low doorway that's always open, and no windows at all."

"Yes!" said Grumpy Weasel harshly. "Of course I see it. I'm not blind."

"Do you know who lives there?"

"I always supposed that it belonged to Johnnie Green," said Grumpy. "His
father is big and lives in the big house, and Johnnie is little and
lives in the little house."

Fatty Coon laughed merrily.

"You don't know as much as I thought you did!" he cried. It may be that
Fatty had set out to make Grumpy angry. Anyhow, Grumpy's eyes burned in
the darkness like two coals of fire.

"I'm right about that little house," he wrangled.

"Nonsense!" Fatty Coon exclaimed. And that made Grumpy angrier than
ever.

"You learned that word of old Mr. Crow!" he grumbled. "It's his favorite
expression; and I can't endure it."

"You don't need to stay here and listen to it," Fatty Coon said. "If you
dared to you could run over to Johnnie Green's house (as you call it);
and if you found that you were right about it I promise you I'd never
say 'Nonsense' again."

If Grumpy Weasel hadn't been so angry perhaps he wouldn't have been so
eager to prove himself right. While Fatty watched him he bounded across
the farmyard and stopped at the doorway of the tiny house. And then he
bounded back again, a great deal faster, with old dog Spot yelping
behind him.

Fatty Coon did not wait for anything more. He made for the woods at top
speed, grinning as he went.

The next day he pretended to be surprised to meet Grumpy.

"You must have forgotten my advice," he said. "I promised you that there
would be a capture if you ran slowly. But it's plain that you ran too
fast, or you wouldn't be here."

"Nonsense!" Grumpy Weasel shouted, flying into a passion at once. And he
often wondered, afterward, what Fatty Coon found to laugh at.




XVIII

POP! GOES THE WEASEL


There were many things that did not please Grumpy Weasel--things that
almost any one else would have liked. For instance, there was music. The
Pleasant Valley Singing Society, to which most of the bird people
belonged, did not number Grumpy Weasel among its admirers. He never
cared to hear a bird sing--not even Jolly Robin's cousin the Hermit, who
was one of the most beautiful singers in the woods. And as for Buddy
Brown Thrasher, whom most people thought a brilliant performer, Grumpy
Weasel always groaned whenever he heard him singing in the topmost
branches of a tree.

A bird-song--according to Grumpy Weasel--was of use in only one way: it
told you where the bird was. And that was a help, of course, if you were
trying to catch him.

Nor did the musical Frog family's nightly concerts have much charm for
Grumpy, though he did admit that some of their songs were not so bad as
others.

"I can stand it now and then," he said, "to hear a good, glum croaking,
provided there are plenty of discords."

Naturally, knowing how he felt, Grumpy Weasel's neighbors never invited
him to listen to their concerts. On the contrary they usually asked him
please to go away, if he happened to come along. Certainly nobody could
sing his best, with such a listener.

As a rule Grumpy Weasel was glad to go on about his business, though to
be sure he hated to oblige anybody. But one day he stopped and scolded
at the top of his voice when he came upon the Woodchuck brothers
whistling in the pasture.

Their whistles quavered a bit when they noticed who was present. And
they moved a little nearer their front door, in order to dodge out of
sight if need be. Although Grumpy Weasel might follow them, there was a
back door they could rush out of. And since they knew their way about
their underground halls better than he did they did not worry greatly.

"We're sorry--" said the biggest brother, who was called Billy
Woodchuck--"we're sorry you don't like our music. And we'd like to know
what's the matter with it; for we always strive to please."

"It's not so much the way you whistle," Grumpy snarled, "though your
whistling is bad enough, it's so cheerful. What I find fault with
especially is the tune. It's insulting to me. And you can't deny it."

Well, the Woodchuck brothers looked at one another in a puzzled fashion.

"Never again let me hear you whistling, 'Pop! Goes the Weasel,'" Grumpy
warned them. That was the name of the Woodchuck brothers' favorite air,
and the one they could whistle best. And any one could see that they
were quite upset.

"Why don't you like that tune?" Billy Woodchuck asked Grumpy Weasel
politely.

"It's that word 'pop,'" Grumpy said. "It reminds me of a pop-gun. And a
pop-gun reminds me of a real gun. And that's something I don't want to
think about."

Well, the Woodchuck brothers looked at one another again. But this time
they smiled.

"You've misunderstood," Billy Woodchuck told Grumpy Weasel. "This is a
different kind of _pop_. It means that when you enter a hole you _pop_
into it in a jiffy, without taking all day to do it."

For a wonder Grumpy Weasel was almost pleased.

"That's true!" he cried. "I couldn't be slow if I wanted to be!" And he
actually asked the Woodchuck brothers to whistle "Pop! Goes the Weasel"
once more.

But Grumpy Weasel never thought of thanking them.




XIX

HIDING FROM HENRY HAWK


In the spring Grumpy Weasel was always glad to see the birds coming back
from the South. But it must not be supposed that it was because he liked
to hear them sing (for he didn't!).

Nor should any one make the mistake of thinking that Grumpy Weasel loved
the birds. The only reason why he welcomed them was because he liked to
hunt them, and rob their nests.

But there were two birds that Grumpy didn't care to have in Pleasant
Valley. He often wished that Solomon Owl and Henry Hawk would leave the
neighborhood and never return. That was because they liked to hunt him.

Especially did Grumpy Weasel dislike Henry Hawk, who had an unpleasant
habit of sitting motionless on a limb in the top of some great tree.
From that high perch he swept the whole valley with his keen, cruel
eyes, because (as he said) he "liked to see what was going on."

If Henry Hawk saw anything anywhere that interested him he lost no time
in reaching that place. It might be a bird, or a meadow mouse, or maybe
a plump chicken. And he was always hoping to catch a glimpse of Grumpy
Weasel.

One day early in the fall Mr. Hawk saw what he had been looking for so
long. Near the old cider mill, up the road from Farmer Green's house, he
spied a long, slender, brownish shape moving swiftly among a pile of
barrels outside the building. He knew at once that it was Grumpy
Weasel; and though he was a long way off Mr. Hawk could see that Grumpy
was very busy looking for something--so busy, Mr. Hawk hoped, that
Grumpy wouldn't notice anything else.

Henry Hawk had wonderful eyesight. As he came hurtling down out of the
sky he could see that Grumpy was playing hide-and-seek with a mouse.

"It's a shame to break up the game," Mr. Hawk chuckled to himself.

And just then something made Grumpy Weasel look up. It must have been
Henry Hawk's shadow flickering over a barrel. There was no other sign
that could have warned Grumpy.

He put the meadow mouse out of his mind without a bit of trouble and
made a sidewise spring for the first hole on which his eyes lighted.

Grumpy was through it in a twinkling. Henry Hawk made a frantic grab
with his talons at the black tip of Grumpy's tail, just as it whisked
out of sight. But he was too late.

It did not soothe Henry Hawk's feelings to find that the meadow mouse
had vanished at the same time. Henry would have liked to play
hide-and-seek with him himself.

Mr. Hawk knew well enough where Grumpy was hiding. That slim fellow had
sought safety in an empty jug, which was lying on its side near the pile
of barrels. It made a fine fort for Grumpy Weasel. The enemy couldn't
break through it. And there was only one loophole, which was far too
small to do Henry Hawk the least good.

Henry saw at once that he might as well go away. So he went off
grumbling.

"This," he said, "is what comes of disorderly habits. Farmer Green ought
not to have left that jug lying there. If he hadn't, I might have been
able to do him a good turn."




XX

A FREE RIDE


Inside the jug, where he had hidden to escape Henry Hawk, Grumpy Weasel
yawned widely and licked his chops. He was having a dull time, waiting
until he was sure that Henry Hawk had given up the chase and gone away.

In a little while Grumpy believed he could venture out in safety. But
suddenly, to his great disgust, a wagon came clattering in from the road
and pulled up right beside the pile of empty barrels near him.

It was Farmer Brown, driving his old horse Ebenezer. And of course
Grumpy Weasel didn't care to show himself just then, especially with
old dog Spot nosing around. He had already heard Spot give several sharp
yelps.

"That old dog knows I'm here somewhere but he can't tell exactly where,"
Grumpy said to himself. "He can yelp his head off, for all I care."

And then Spot began to whine, and run in and out among the barrels,
until he all but tripped Farmer Green, who was loading the barrels into
the wagon.

"Let him whine!" said Grumpy Weasel softly. "His yelping and whining
don't scare me. He can't get inside this jug of mine. And I certainly
shan't leave it so long as he stays here."

Meanwhile he could hear Farmer Green talking to old Spot, telling him
not to be silly.

"From the way you're acting anybody might think there was a bear around
here," he told Spot.

Old dog Spot explained to Farmer Green in no uncertain fashion that it
was no bear--but a weasel--that he was looking for. His nose told him
that. And there was no mistake about it. But somehow Farmer Green
couldn't understand a word he said. So after putting the last barrel on
the load Farmer Green climbed up himself and started to drive off.

But old dog Spot wouldn't budge an inch. He hovered about the jug where
Grumpy Weasel was hiding and made such a fuss that Farmer Green looked
back at him.

"Well! well!" he exclaimed. And he stopped the horse Ebenezer and jumped
down and walked back again.

"I declare I'd have forgotten to take this jug if you hadn't reminded me
of it," he told Spot. And thereupon he picked up the jug and set it in
the back of the wagon.

This time Spot followed. This time he was in the wagon before Farmer
Green was. And all the way down the road, until they reached the
farmyard, he acted (or so Farmer Green told him!) like a simpleton.

The whole affair made Grumpy Weasel terribly angry. He thought it was an
outrage for Farmer Green to kidnap him like that. And he was so enraged
that he would have taken a bite out of anything handy. But there wasn't
a thing in the jug except himself.

At last the strange party drew up in front of the barn and stopped.
Farmer Green led Ebenezer into his stall. And then he took the jug, with
Grumpy Weasel still inside in, and in spite of Spot's protests set it
high up on a shelf in the barn.

It was easy for Grumpy, after that, to crawl out of the jug. He scurried
along the shelf, climbed up the wall, and glided through a crack in the
ceiling, to hide himself in the haymow above.

"Old Spot didn't get me this time!" he said gleefully. "Not by a jugful,
he didn't!"




XXI

A NEW SUIT


Throughout Pleasant Valley the very name of Grumpy Weasel was a bugaboo.
Those of his size, and many a good deal bigger than he, learned early to
avoid him.

One of the first things Sandy Chipmunk's mother did was to teach him to
beware of Grumpy. And twice during his first summer Sandy caught a
glimpse of Grumpy as he flashed past like a brown streak, with a gleam
of white showing underneath.

It was lucky for Sandy that on both occasions Grumpy was intent on
chasing somebody or other. And each time that Sandy told his mother
what he had seen, Mrs. Chipmunk said that she hoped it would never
happen again.

"I'm glad that you know what he looks like, anyhow," she added.

"Oh, I'll know him if I see him!" Sandy cried.

"Don't stop for a second look!" his mother warned him.

"I won't!" he promised. "I won't even stop to say, 'How do you do!'"

"I should hope not!" Mrs. Chipmunk said severely.

So Sandy Chipmunk went through his first summer on the watch for a long,
slender, brownish shape. But he never saw Grumpy Weasel again. And
winter found the Chipmunk family all unharmed, and very comfortable in
their cozy house below frost line.

On mild days Sandy liked to visit the world above and find a rock bare
of snow, where he could enjoy the sunshine.

It was on one of those outings that he caught sight of a stranger headed
for the stone wall near-by. At first Sandy missed seeing him, against
the snow. But when he reached the wind-swept wall Sandy couldn't help
noticing him. He was a slim gentleman and--except for his black-tipped
tail--was dressed all in white.

After spending the winter underground Sandy Chipmunk was glad to talk
with the first person he saw. So he called to the stranger that it was a
fine day, wasn't it?

The other wheeled about so quickly that Sandy couldn't help laughing.

"Don't be nervous!" Sandy cried. "I won't hurt you!"

But the stranger didn't answer. Once he opened his mouth. And Sandy
Chipmunk had a queer feeling then that he had met the fellow before.
That mouth had plenty of white, needle-like teeth. It had a cruel look,
too.

Then the stranger jumped straight toward Sandy Chipmunk. And in that
instant Sandy knew who he was. No one could leap like that except Grumpy
Weasel!

Sandy turned and ran madly for shelter. Luckily he had the advantage of
Grumpy in one way. He had a bare ledge to run on, while Grumpy Weasel
had to flounder for some distance through a snow-choked hollow.

So Sandy escaped. And it was lucky that Grumpy didn't find the door to
the Chipmunk family's burrow. If he had he would have gone right in
himself.

Mrs. Chipmunk blamed herself for Sandy's adventure. She had never
remembered to tell her son that every fall Grumpy Weasel changed his
summer dress for the one in which Sandy had just seen him.




XXII

GRUMPY'S THREAT


Meeting Grumpy Weasel in the woods one day, Tommy Fox stopped to have a
chat with him. He always liked to chat with Grumpy, it was so easy to
get him angry, and such fun to see him fly into a passion.

"You're looking very elegant in your winter suit," Tommy Fox remarked.
"White is becoming to you--there's no doubt of that. And that black tip
on the end of your tail is just what's needed to complete your costume.
It matches your eyes nicely.... You must have a good tailor."

[Illustration: Sandy Chipmunk Runs From Grumpy Weasel. (_Page 96_)]

People were apt to be wary of Tommy Fox when fine words dripped from his
mouth like that. It usually meant that he was bent on some mischief. And
now Grumpy Weasel looked at him suspiciously.

"If you admire my clothes so much why don't you get some like them?" he
demanded.

Tommy Fox shook his head mournfully.

"I'd like to," he said, "but I'm too humble a person to dress like a
king, in ermine. My family have always worn red. The neighbors wouldn't
know me in anything else. Or if they did they'd say I was putting on
airs."

"If you want to know what I think, I'll tell you that red's entirely too
good for you," Grumpy Weasel sneered.

Tommy Fox smiled somewhat sourly. Grumpy Weasel's remark did not please
him. But he managed to say nothing disagreeable.

"I suppose," he went on, "you've met the newcomer in our valley who
dresses as you do, in white and black?"

"What's that you say?" Grumpy Weasel barked. "Who's gone and copied my
cold-weather clothes? If I meet him I'll make it hot for him."

"Perhaps I shouldn't have mentioned the matter," Tommy Fox said softly.
"I don't like to displease you. And I don't want to get a stranger into
trouble either, just as he has come to spend the winter amongst us.

"And besides," Tommy added, "it would be a shame for you to quarrel with
the stranger because he happens to choose your favorite colors. That
only goes to show that your tastes are alike."

"That's exactly what I object to!" Grumpy Weasel complained, getting
much excited. "If his tastes are the same as mine he'll want to come and
hunt along my stone wall. And there'll be trouble if he does that! The
fur will fly!"

Tommy Fox turned his head away, for he simply had to enjoy a grin and he
didn't want Grumpy Weasel to see it.

"I'm sorry I spoke about the stranger," he said glibly, as soon as he
could keep his face straight. "But I thought the news would please you."

"It would certainly please me to meet him," Grumpy Weasel declared
fiercely. "And it would please me much more than it would him, I can
tell you."

"It wouldn't be treating a newcomer well to let him wander through the
woods when you feel as you do about him. I ought to warn him to leave
Pleasant Valley before it's too late," Tommy said.

"It would be treating him better to give him a good lesson before he
goes," Grumpy Weasel said. "You needn't say a word to him about my
wanting to meet him. Let the fur fly first! And then he'll flee.

"That's my way of getting rid of strangers!"




XXIII

A BOLD STRANGER


Tommy Fox had carefully kept from Grumpy Weasel the name of the stranger
who was dressed like Grumpy, in white and black. It happened that he
wore feathers--this newcomer. And that was one reason why Tommy Fox had
had to grin when Grumpy threatened to "make the fur fly" when he met the
unknown.

Another reason why Tommy had laughed at Grumpy's blustering was that the
stranger was quite able to take care of himself in a fight. He belonged
to the Snowy Owl family, being bigger, even, than Solomon Owl. And what
with his hooked beak and his strong talons he was a dangerous fellow to
meet. Although Grumpy Weasel could easily handle a rabbit or a wild duck
a dozen times his own size, because they were unarmed, he would have had
no chance at all with Mr. Snowy Owl.

All this made Tommy Fox chuckle and grin, as he left Grumpy and loped
off towards Cedar Swamp, where Mr. Snowy Owl was spending the winter.
Unlike Solomon Owl, and his cousin Simon Screecher, Mr. Snowy Owl did
not turn night into day. So Tommy Fox found him wide awake and ready for
a fight or a frolic, whichever might come his way.

He was a handsome bird--this newcomer--in his showy white suit, spotted
with black. And he gave Tommy Fox a bold, hard look, acting for all the
world as if he had spent his whole life in Pleasant Valley, instead of
merely two short weeks.

Now, Mr. Snowy Owl knew a good deal about such rascals as Tommy Fox. So
he said at once, "What's on your mind, young man? You've come here on
mischief and you needn't deny it."

Well, Tommy Fox saw that he couldn't deceive Mr. Owl very much. So he
grinned at him and told him about the talk he had just had with Grumpy
Weasel.

"He's so eager to meet you it would be too bad to disappoint him," Tommy
observed. "He wants the fur to fly, you know."

Although he had no ears (at least, so far as could be seen) Mr. Snowy
Owl had listened closely to Tommy Fox's story. And he must have heard
plainly enough, for he said quickly that he would call on Grumpy Weasel
that very day. "I'll start right now," he said, "and I'll reach Grumpy
Weasel's hunting ground before you're out of the swamp."

"I wish you'd wait a bit, till I can get there myself," Tommy Fox told
him.

Mr. Snowy Owl agreed to that. And after lingering until he thought Tommy
must have had time to run and find Grumpy Weasel he rose above the tops
of the cedars and sailed off to join them himself.

"I'm glad I came here to spend the winter," he muttered. "Everybody's
been very pleasant so far. And after people hear how I've settled with
this Weasel person the folks in Pleasant Valley will be pretty polite to
me, or I'll know the reason why."




XXIV

FUR AND FEATHERS


To find Grumpy Weasel, Tommy Fox went straight back to the place where
he had left him. It was easy, then, to follow his queer tracks. Grumpy's
legs were so short that they did not lift his lean body clear of the
deep snow, except when he jumped very high; so his trail looked somewhat
like that of a snake with legs.

As soon as Tommy overtook him he asked Grumpy if he had seen the
stranger yet, who was dressed all in white and black, like him.

"No, I haven't. But I'm on the lookout for him all the time," said
Grumpy.

"Where are you looking?" Tommy inquired.

"Oh! Everywhere!" Grumpy replied. "Behind the trees and in the bushes
and back of the stone wall!"

"Have you seen any new tracks?" Tommy persisted.

"Not one!" Grumpy admitted. And then he thought he caught the flicker of
a smile on Tommy Fox's narrow face. "If there is no such person--if
you've been deceiving me----" he began angrily.

"I promise you that there _is_ such a stranger in the neighborhood!"
Tommy cried. "And if you don't meet him to-day I'll be as disappointed
as you."

"It seems to me," Grumpy Weasel snapped, "you're altogether too anxious
over this business. Everybody knows you're tricky. And I begin to think
you're trying to get me into trouble."

It was wonderful, the way Tommy Fox could keep his temper. No matter
what people said to him he could still smile if it would help him to
have his way. And now he kept up a never-ending chatter, without saying
anything in particular.

The snow was deep enough to have covered such hiding places as Grumpy
Weasel liked. The stone wall, indeed, offered about the only crannies;
and that was some distance away. Tommy Fox had noticed that. And that
was why he was trying to keep Grumpy Weasel where he was. For Tommy
expected Mr. Snowy Owl at any moment.

"You are talking foolishness," Grumpy told Tommy Fox at last. "I don't
care to waste my time listening to you." And he turned away.

"One moment, please!" Tommy begged, for the sly rascal had just caught
a glimpse of Mr. Snowy Owl hovering above the trees.

"What do you want now?" Grumpy Weasel scolded, as he paused close by the
old hemlock where Solomon Owl sometimes sat and abused him.

"I want to see the fur fly," Tommy Fox answered wickedly.

For a moment Grumpy Weasel couldn't think what he meant. But suddenly he
saw a large whitish shape dropping upon him out of the sky. He knew
then, in a flash, that Tommy Fox had deceived him.

A moment more and it was all over. At least, it seemed so to Tommy Fox.
Whatever had happened had taken place so quickly that he couldn't see it
clearly. But there was Mr. Snowy Owl, sitting on a limb of the hemlock,
where he had perched after staying half a second's time on the ground.

And Grumpy Weasel was no longer to be seen, anywhere.

"Did--did you swallow him?" Tommy Fox stammered.

Mr. Snowy Owl looked puzzled.

"I don't know," he replied. "Perhaps I did! If I didn't I don't know
where he is."

Tommy Fox couldn't help looking disappointed. "I'm sorry about one
thing," he said. "It was all done so quickly I didn't see the fur fly!"

Then there was a faint sound above them. And looking up, Tommy and Mr.
Owl saw Grumpy Weasel's head sticking out of a small hole high up in the
tree-trunk.

As they watched him Grumpy Weasel seemed to be saying something to them.
They couldn't hear what it was. But no doubt it was nothing pleasant.




XXV

PETER MINK'S PROMISE


It happened, on a bleak winter's day, that Grumpy Weasel was strolling
along the bank of Broad Brook when all at once he heard a squall.
Instantly he whirled around. There was something about the cry that
sounded familiar. And while he searched the stream up and down with his
sharp eyes he grew angrier every moment.

"Unless I'm mistaken that's my good-for-nothing cousin, Peter Mink,"
Grumpy muttered. "I'll teach him not to squall at me--the rascal!"

He did not have to look long before he caught sight of his cousin.
Peter Mink was crouched under the overhanging bank, not far from the
edge of the frozen surface of the brook. And he squalled again when he
saw that Grumpy had discovered him.

"Stop that!" Grumpy Weasel bellowed. He was not greatly afraid of Peter
Mink, though his cousin was much bigger than he. "I'll have you know
that I don't allow people to bawl at me, even if we are distantly
related."

"I wasn't bawling at you," Peter Mink answered. And he was strangely
polite, for him. "I was calling for help. Can't you see that my foot is
caught in a trap?"

At that Grumpy jumped down upon the ice and took a good look at Peter
Mink. He saw, then, that Peter spoke the truth. "This trap hurts my
foot, I can tell you," Peter Mink whined.

"Maybe it will teach you not to screech at people," Grumpy told him.

"You're going to help me, aren't you?" Peter Mink asked his cousin
anxiously.

"That trap belongs to Farmer Green's hired man," Grumpy informed Peter
Mink. "I saw him when he set it there. Perhaps you would like to have me
send word to him that you're using it."

"Oh! Don't do that!" Peter begged piteously.

"Well, then--suppose I get old dog Spot to come and see what he can do!
He'd have you out of that trap in no time!"

But that suggestion didn't suit Peter Mink any better.

"For goodness' sake, can't you think of something else?" he wailed.

His voice rose higher and higher as he spoke. And Grumpy Weasel showed
his sharp teeth as he warned Peter Mink again not to squall at him, for
he wouldn't stand it.

At last Peter saw that Grumpy did not intend to help him at all. So it
occurred to him that perhaps he could hire his cousin to free him from
the trap. "I'd do anything for you if you could help me out of this
fix," he said finally.

"Will you drive Mr. Snowy Owl away from Pleasant Valley?" Grumpy cried.

"Certainly!" said Peter Mink with great promptness, as if that were the
easiest matter in the world.

That answer surprised Grumpy Weasel. He had no idea that Peter Mink
could do any such thing. And he said as much, too.

"You understand," Peter explained, "it may take me some time to get rid
of him. It's mid-winter now. But I can promise you that I'll have him
out of the valley by April Fool's Day!"




XXVI

HOW GRUMPY HELPED


Grumpy Weasel wondered how Peter Mink was going to get Mr. Snowy Owl out
of Pleasant Valley. He had never dreamed that Peter could do it. But as
he thought the matter over he remembered that Peter was a good deal
bigger than himself.

"If I were Peter Mink's size I would give Mr. Snowy Owl the worst
punishing he ever had!" Grumpy exclaimed under his breath. "So maybe
Peter can do as he claims, after all."

"Very well!" Grumpy Weasel told Peter Mink. "This is a bargain. I'll
help you out of the trap. And you'll rid Pleasant Valley of Mr. Snowy
Owl by April Fool's Day."

"Agreed!" Peter Mink cried. "And now, how are you going to set me free?"

"I'm going to bite your leg off," Grumpy Weasel said cheerfully.

"Oh, no! You're not going to do that!" Peter Mink howled. "I don't want
you to do that!"

"I made a bargain with you," Grumpy Weasel reminded him, "and I intend
to carry out my part of it."

"Stop a moment," Peter Mink cried. For Grumpy Weasel, with his back
arched like a cat's, and his white whiskers twitching, had already taken
a step towards him. "If you bite off my leg I'd never be able to get rid
of Mr. Snowy Owl."

That brought Grumpy Weasel up short. He thought deeply for a moment;
and then he exclaimed: "I have it! You must bite off your own leg!"

But Peter Mink proved a hard one to please.

"You don't understand!" he said. "If I lose a leg I know I never could
get Mr. Snowy Owl out of the valley."

At that Grumpy Weasel lost his temper completely. With a cry of rage he
sprang at his cousin, Peter Mink, prisoner though he was. And Grumpy
would have buried his white teeth in him except for just one thing. As
he leaped forward Peter Mink leaped backward. And in that moment Peter
freed himself. He had been caught only by the merest tip of a toe,
anyhow. And now he crouched with his back against the bank of the brook,
facing Grumpy Weasel with mouth wide open. His meekness had dropped off
him like an old coat. And Grumpy Weasel knew better than to get within
his reach. In fact he turned polite himself, all at once.

"There!" he said. "I got you out of the trap, as I had planned to all
the time. I knew that if I could make you jump you'd pull your foot
loose."

Well, Peter Mink hardly believed that. But he thought there was no use
of saying so.

He was glad enough to escape Farmer Green's hired man's trap without
having a dispute over the way it happened.

"I hope you'll keep your promise," Grumpy told Peter Mink. "If Mr. Snowy
Owl doesn't leave these parts by April Fool's Day I won't like it very
well. You know you agreed to get him away from here by that time."

"Oh! He'll be gone by then," said Peter Mink lightly. "He always leaves
at the end of the winter, because he spends his summers in the Far
North."

When he heard that, Grumpy Weasel was angry as anything.

"Then Mr. Owl is likely to be back here next fall," he said quickly.

"I dare say," Peter Mink admitted carelessly.

Grumpy Weasel backed cautiously away before he said another word. But
when he had whisked into a great willow that leaned over Broad Brook he
told his cousin what he thought about him.

As for Peter Mink--he was nursing his injured paw (in his mouth!) and he
said never a word.




THE END




  Little Jack Rabbit Books
  (Trademark Registered)

  By DAVID CORY

  Author of "Little Journeys to Happyland"

  * * *

  Colored Wrappers With Text Illustrations.

  * * *

  A new and unique series about the furred and feathered
  little people of the wood and meadow.

  Children will eagerly follow the doings of little Jack
  Rabbit, and the clever way in which he escapes from his
  three enemies, Danny Fox, Mr. Wicked Wolf and
  Hungry Hawk will delight the youngsters.

      LITTLE JACK RABBIT'S ADVENTURES
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND DANNY FOX
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND CHIPPY CHIPMUNK
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE BIG BROWN BEAR
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE JOHN HARE
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND PROFESSOR CROW
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND OLD MAN WEASEL
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND MR. WICKED WOLF
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND HUNGRY HAWK
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE POLICEMAN DOG
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND MISS MOUSIE
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE LUCKY
      LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE YELLOW DOG TRAMP

  GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




  [Decoration]

  JOLLY BOOKS FOR
  LITTLE FOLK


  _Parents of boys and girls from three to eight years of age are
  assured by the names of such famous authors of children's
  books as Arthur Scott Bailey, Lillian Elizabeth Roy and
  David Cory that these little books will prove both entertaining
  and instructional. They are all bound in cloth with
  colored endpapers, black and white illustrations and colored
  wrappers._

  * * *

  TUCK-ME-IN TALES--_by Arthur Scott Bailey_

      These delightful stories in which well known birds and insects
      are the characters are based upon actual natural history facts, and
      while the youngster eagerly listens to them, a moral foundation of
      deeper importance is being laid. The complete list of titles in this
      series is on inside front flap of this wrapper.

  THE LITTLE WASHINGTON BOOKS--_by Lillian Elizabeth Roy_

      In these little stories two families of young cousins, all
      descendants of George Washington, conceive the clever idea of
      carrying out in their play the dramatic events of Washington's life.
      Every boy and girl will receive a true and unforgettable picture of
      the great career of the Father of His Country through the play acting
      of these ingenious youngsters. See flap of this wrapper for complete
      list.

  LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPYLAND--_by David Cory_

      Children will recognize in these amusing adventures characters
      they know and love. Mr. Cory is the author of the famous "Little
      Jack Rabbit" stories and is one of the best known authors of
      children's books of our times. See flap of this wrapper for complete
      list of titles.

  GROSSET & DUNLAP _Publishers_ NEW YORK


  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Transcriber's Note: The following corrections were made:           |
  | Table of Contents: XXIX to XXIV                                    |
  | p. 38: "Never mind that!' to "Never mind that!"                    |
  | p. 46: missing period added (... given up the chase.)              |
  | p. 102: "And then'll he'll flee." to "And then he'll flee."        |
  | Ads (back of book): concieve to conceive (...of George Washington, |
  | conceive...)                                                       |
  | Three color plates in this e-book were missing/not included in the |
  | book from which it was transcribed. These illustrations (Grumpy    |
  | Weasel and Jimmy Rabbit Run a Race, Grumpy Weasel Visits the       |
  | Corncrib, and Sandy Chipmunk Runs from Grumpy Weasel) have been    |
  | taken from the Internet Archive's copy of the book.                |
  | The IA version itself lacks two of the illustrations found in this |
  | copy: Grumpy Nearly Catches Paddy Muskrat and Grumpy Calls on      |
  | Mrs. Hen.                                                          |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+





End of Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Grumpy Weasel, by Arthur Scott Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF GRUMPY WEASEL ***

***** This file should be named 24881.txt or 24881.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/8/24881/

Produced by Joe Longo, S. Drawehn and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
