The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tale of Tommy Fox, by Arthur Scott Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Tale of Tommy Fox

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Posting Date: January 26, 2013 [EBook #5955]
Release Date: June, 2004
First Posted: September 29, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF TOMMY FOX ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.











[Illustration: "Run Along, Tommy Fox," the Squirrel Said]

SLEEPY-TIME TALES


THE TALE OF TOMMY FOX

BY

ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY


ILLUSTRATED BY

HARRY L. SMITH




Copyright, 1915, by
A. S. BAILEY




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I TOMMY ENJOYS HIMSELF
   II JOHNNIE GREEN GOES HUNTING
  III TOMMY FOX LEARNS TO HUNT
   IV MOTHER GROUSE'S CHILDREN
    V TOMMY FOX IS HUNGRY
   VI MR. GRAY SQUIRREL'S MISTAKE
  VII TOMMY CHASES MR. WOODCHUCK
 VIII SOMETHING MAKES TOMMY VERY PROUD
   IX TOMMY FOX IN TROUBLE
    X MRS. FOX OUTWITS DOG SPOT
   XI TOMMY GROWS TOO CARELESS
  XII OLD MR. CROW IS PLEASED
 XIII JOHNNIE GREEN AND HIS NEW PET
  XIV TOMMY FOX MAKES A STRANGE FRIEND
   XV JOHNNIE GREEN FEELS SAD
  XVI TOMMY BECOMES BOASTFUL
 XVII PAYING A CALL ON A FRIEND
XVIII THE WORLD TURNS WHITE
  XIX TOMMY FOX LEARNS A NEW TRICK
   XX THE DRUMMER OF THE WOODS
  XXI THE BIGGEST SURPRISE OF ALL




ILLUSTRATIONS


"RUN ALONG, TOMMY FOX," THE SQUIRREL SAID...... Frontispiece

A CLOUD OF FEATHERS FLOATED DOWN FROM THE LIMB

MR. WOODCHUCK WHISKED DOWN OUT OF SIGHT

TOMMY DASHED FOR THE LITTLE DOOR

TOMMY THOUGHT IT WAS HIS MOTHER'S VOICE

MRS. FOX AND TOMMY STARTED TO RUN



I

TOMMY ENJOYS HIMSELF


Tommy Fox was having a delightful time. If you could have come upon
him in the woods you would have been astonished at his antics. He
leaped high off the ground, and struck out with his paws. He opened
his mouth and thrust his nose out and then clapped his jaws shut
again, with a snap. Tommy burrowed his sharp face into the dead leaves
at his feet and tossed his head into the air. And then he jumped up
and barked just like a puppy.

If you could have hid behind a tree and watched Tommy Fox you would
have said that he was playing with something. But you never could have
told what it was, because you couldn't have seen it. And you may have
three guesses now, before I tell you what it was that Tommy Fox was
playing with. ... It was a feather! Yes--Tommy had found a downy,
brownish feather in the woods, which old Mother Grouse had dropped in
one of her flights. And Tommy was having great sport with it, tossing
it up in the air, and slapping and snapping at it, as it drifted
slowly down to the ground again.

He grew quite excited, did Tommy Fox. For he just couldn't help making
believe that it was old Mother Grouse herself--and not merely one of
her smallest feathers that he had found. And he leaped and bounded and
jumped and tumbled about and made a great fuss over nothing but that
little, soft, brownish feather.

There was something about that feather that made Tommy's nose twitch
and wrinkle and tremble. Tommy sniffed and sniffed at the bit of down,
for he liked the smell of it. It made him feel very hungry. And at
last he felt so hungry that he decided he would go home and see if his
mother had brought him something to eat. So he started homewards.

I must explain that Tommy lived with his mother and that their house
was right in the middle of one of Farmer Green's fields, not far from
the foot of Blue Mountain. When Tommy was quite small his mother had
chosen that place for her house, which was really a den that she had
dug in the ground. By having her house in the center of the field she
knew that no one could creep up and catch Tommy when he was playing
outside in the sunshine. Now Tommy was older, and had begun to roam
about in the woods and meadows alone. But Mrs. Fox liked her home in
the field, and so she continued to live there.

Tommy was so hungry, now, and in such a hurry to reach home, that you
might think that he would have gone straight toward his mother's
house. But he didn't. He trotted along a little way, and suddenly gave
a sidewise leap which carried him several feet away from the straight
path he had been following. Again he trotted ahead for a short
distance. And then he wheeled around and ran in a circle. And after he
had made the circle he jumped to one side once more, and ran along on
an old tree which had fallen upon the ground. He was not playing.
No!--Tommy Fox was just trying to obey his mother. Ever since he had
been big enough to wander off by himself she had told him that he must
never go anywhere without making jumps and circles. "It takes longer,"
she said; "but it is better to do that way, because it makes it hard
for a dog to follow you. If you ran straight ahead, Farmer Green's dog
could go smelling along in your footsteps, and if he didn't actually
catch you he could follow you right home and then we would have to
move, to say the least."

Tommy was so afraid of dogs that he almost never forgot to do just as
his mother told him. He was half-way home and passing through a clump
of evergreens, when he suddenly stopped. The wind was blowing in his
face, and brought to his nostrils a smell that made him tremble. It
was not a frightened sort of tremble, but a delicious, joyful shiver
that Tommy felt. For he smelled something that reminded him at once of
that feather with which he had been playing. And Tommy stood as still
as a statue and his sharp eyes looked all around. At first he could
see nothing. But in a minute or two he noticed something on the
ground, beneath one of the evergreen trees. He had looked at it
carefully several times; and each time he had decided that it was only
an old tree-root. But now he saw that he had been mistaken.

Yes! It was old Mother Grouse herself!




II

JOHNNIE GREEN GOES HUNTING


When Tommy Fox discovered old Mother Grouse crouched beneath the
evergreen tree he grew hungrier than ever. And he decided that he
would catch Mrs. Grouse and eat her on the spot.

Tommy had never caught a grouse. But his mother had brought home some
of old Mother Grouse's relations for him to eat; and Tommy knew of
nothing that tasted any better.

He thought that old Mother Grouse must be sleeping, she was so still.
And he did not mean to wake her if he could help it--at least, not
until he had caught her. So Tommy flattened himself out on his stomach
and began to creep towards her, very slowly and very carefully. He
didn't make the slightest noise. And soon he had stolen so close to
old Mother Grouse that he was just about to spring up and rush upon
her. Then all at once there was the most terrible noise. It was almost
as loud as thunder, and it seemed to Tommy that the ground was rising
right up in front of him. He was so startled that he fell over
backward. And his heart thumped and pounded against his ribs.

The next moment Tommy Fox felt very sheepish, for he realized that the
noise was nothing but the beating of old Mother Grouse's wings against
the air. And instead of the ground rising, it was old Mother Grouse
herself who had jumped up and sailed away. She hadn't been asleep. She
had seen him all the time.

[Illustration: A Cloud of Feathers Floated Down From the Limb]

And she had just waited until she saw that Tommy was trying to catch
her before she flew off.

Old Mother Grouse didn't fly far. She perched in a tree just a little
way off and sat there and looked down at Tommy Fox and chuckled to
herself. She knew that she was perfectly safe. And though Tommy Fox
trotted up to the tree where she sat and stared longingly up at her
she wasn't the least bit worried. For she knew quite well that Tommy
couldn't climb a tree.

Tommy felt very peevish. He was _so_ hungry! And he couldn't help
thinking how good old Mother Grouse would have tasted. He couldn't
reach her now. But still he didn't go along toward home. He simply
couldn't keep his greedy eyes off fat old Mother Grouse! And he
squatted down beside a bush and stared at her.

Old Mother Grouse didn't mind that. She just stared back at Tommy Fox;
and she didn't say a word to him, which somehow made Tommy still more
peevish.

How long Tommy would have stayed there it would be hard to tell. But
in a little while something happened that sent him home on the run. If
Mrs. Grouse and Tommy had been looking out as sharply as they
generally did, Farmer Green's boy never could have crept up so close
to them. But they were so busy staring at each other that they never
saw Farmer Green's boy at all.

Now, Johnnie Green had his gun with him, for he was hunting grouse. He
did not see Tommy Fox at all, because Tommy was hidden behind the
bush. But Johnnie Green saw old Mother Grouse; and almost as soon as
he saw her he fired.

The old shot-gun made a tremendous roar. The woods rang and echoed
with the noise. And Tommy Fox saw a cloud of feathers float down from
the limb where old Mother Grouse had been sitting. But old Mother
Grouse herself flew away. The shot had knocked out some of her
tail-feathers, but hadn't hurt her at all.

It all happened very quickly. And Tommy Fox felt himself leaping high
in the air. He was so frightened that he had jumped almost out of his
skin. And he ran and ran, and ran faster than he had ever run before
in all his rather short life.

Johnnie Green saw him run. But his gun wasn't loaded now, and he
couldn't shoot. And he didn't have his dog with him, either. It was
lucky for Tommy Fox that there was no dog there. For Tommy was so
scared that he forgot all about jumping sideways, and running in
circles, as his mother had taught him. He just ran straight for his
home in the middle of the big field; and when he got there he scurried
through the door and scampered inside; and he never came out again all
that day.




III

TOMMY FOX LEARNS TO HUNT


Tommy Fox was hunting crickets in the field near his mother's house.
Being a young fox, not much more than half-grown, Tommy knew very
little of hunting. In fact, crickets were about the only thing he
could hunt and _catch_. Of course, any one can _hunt_. The hard part
of it is to _catch_ what you are hunting.

Tommy was glad that he knew how to capture crickets, for he was very
fond of them. To be sure, it took a great many crickets to satisfy his
hunger. But they were good when he wanted a light lunch; and there was
fun, too, in hunting them.

This is the way Tommy Fox caught crickets. He would stand very still
in the tall grass and watch sharply. Wherever he saw the grass moving,
Tommy would pounce upon that spot, bringing his two front paws down
tight against the ground. And in the bunch of grass that lay beneath
his paws Tommy almost always found a fat cricket.

There was just one drawback about that kind of hunting. He could catch
crickets only upon still days, when there was no wind; because when
the wind blew, the grass waved everywhere, and Tommy couldn't tell
whether it was crickets or whether it was wind that made the grass
move.

Well, upon this very day when Tommy Fox was amusing himself, and
swallowing crickets as fast as he could grab them, his mother came out
of her house and watched him for a little while. Tommy was feeling
quite proud of his skill.

"I can hunt--can't I, Mother?" he exclaimed. "Watch me! I get them
almost every time!" he boasted.

Mrs. Fox did not answer. She was thinking deeply. She knew that there
were a great many things she must teach her son, because he was
growing up; and some day he would be leaving home to go out into the
world and take care of himself. And Mrs. Fox knew that Tommy would
have to learn to catch bigger things than crickets in order to keep
from starving.

Pretty soon Mrs. Fox started across the field. She was gone rather a
long time. But she came back at last, carrying something that squirmed
and twisted and wriggled. Whatever it was that Mrs. Fox was bringing
home, it was furry, and quite big and heavy. When Tommy saw it he
stopped hunting crickets at once. He knew what his mother had. It was
a woodchuck!

"Hurrah!" he shouted. "I'm hungry! May I eat all of him I want?" You
might think that he had swallowed so many crickets that he wouldn't
want anything more to eat just then. But to tell the truth, it was
very seldom that Tommy Fox wasn't hungry as a bear.

"Not so fast!" Mrs. Fox said. "I'm going to teach you to hunt. And
you're to begin with this woodchuck. Now I'm going to let him go, and
you must catch him." So Mrs. Fox let the woodchuck slip away; and off
he scampered, with Tommy after him. Mrs. Fox followed close behind.
And soon she saw Tommy give a great spring and land right on top of
the woodchuck.

Tommy was greatly excited. But he was hungry, too, "May I eat him
now?" he asked.

"No! Let him go again," his mother commanded. "And see if you can
catch him more quickly next time."

Tommy obeyed. And though he overtook the woodchuck sooner, he was not
so careful to avoid the 'chuck's sharp teeth, and he got a savage nip
right on his nose.

Tommy was surprised. He was so surprised that he dropped the
woodchuck. And you may believe that Mr. Woodchuck lost no time. He
scurried away as fast as his legs would carry him.

Tommy began to whimper. His nose hurt; and he thought he had lost his
dinner, too.

But Mrs. Fox bounded after Mr. Woodchuck and brought him back again.
She made Tommy stop crying. And he had to begin his lesson all over
again.

When Mrs. Fox thought that Tommy had learned enough for that day they
both sat down and made a meal of that unfortunate Mr. Woodchuck. And
Tommy felt that he had already become a mighty hunter. He hadn't the
least doubt that he could go into the woods and catch almost anything
he saw.

We shall see later whether Tommy Fox knew as much as he thought he
did.




IV

MOTHER GROUSE'S CHILDREN


The very next day after his first lesson in hunting, when his mother
had brought home the live woodchuck, Tommy Fox went off into the woods
alone. He had made up his mind that he would surprise his mother by
bringing home some nice tidbit for dinner--a rabbit, perhaps, or maybe
a squirrel. He wasn't quite sure _what_ it would be, because you know
when hunting you have to take what you find--if you can catch it.

Tommy Fox hadn't been long in the woods before he had even better luck
than he had expected. He was creeping through a thicket, making no
noise at all, when what should he see but that sly old Mother Grouse,
with all her eleven children! They were very young, were old Mother
Grouse's children; and they hadn't yet learned to fly. And there they
were, all on the ground, with the proud old lady in their midst.

Tommy Fox was so pleased that he almost laughed out loud. He tried to
keep still; but he couldn't help snickering a little. And old Mother
Grouse heard him. She started to fly. But instead of tearing off out
of danger, she lighted on the ground quite near Tommy.

"How stupid of her!" he thought. "I'll just catch the old lady first,
and then get the youngsters afterward. _They_ can't fly away."

So Tommy made a leap for old Mother Grouse. He just missed her.

She rose in the nick of time and slipped away from him. But she didn't
fly far. So Tommy followed. And he stole up very slyly; and once more,
when he was quite near the old lady, he sprang at her.

It was really very annoying. For again old Mother Grouse just escaped.
Again she flew a little further away, lighted on the ground, and
seemed to forget that Tommy Fox was so near.

That same thing happened as many as a dozen times. And the twelfth
time that Mrs. Grouse rose before one of Tommy's rushes she didn't
come down again. She lighted in a tree. And since it appeared to Tommy
that she had no intention of leaving her safe perch, he gave up in
disgust. He was very angry because he hadn't caught old Mother Grouse.
But there was her family! He would get _them_--the whole eleven of
them! And he turned back toward the place where he had first come upon
them.

Now, sly old Mother Grouse had played a trick on Tommy Fox. If he had
just left her alone he could have caught every one of her children.
But she had tempted him to follow her. And every time she rose from
the ground and flew a short distance, she led Tommy further away from
her little ones.

Tommy had some trouble in finding the exact spot where he had stumbled
upon Mrs. Grouse and her children. But he found it again, at last. And
little good it did him; for not a trace of those eleven young grouse
could he discover. They had all disappeared--every single one of them!
_They_ knew what to do when their mother led Tommy Fox away. Each of
them found a safe hiding-place. Some of them burrowed beneath the
fallen leaves; some of them hid behind old stumps; some of them crept
into a hollow log. And try as he would, Tommy Fox was unable to find
so much as one downy feather.

He was so disappointed--and so ashamed--that he went home and stayed
there. But he had learned something. Yes! Tommy Fox knew that if he
ever met old Mother Grouse and her family again he would catch her
children first. Afterward he would try to capture the sly old lady
herself. But he didn't believe, just then, that he would ever be able
to catch her. You see, Tommy realized that he wasn't quite so clever
as he had thought.




V

TOMMY FOX IS HUNGRY


Tommy Fox kept a sharp look-out to see what he could capture to eat.
But he could discover nothing at all. To be sure, there were birds in
the trees, and birds' nests too, and Tommy was very fond of birds'
eggs. But he couldn't climb trees. The birds were out of his reach;
and so were the squirrels. He saw plenty of red squirrels, and gray
squirrels, and little striped chipmunks. They looked down from the
branches and chattered and scolded at him. They were perfectly safe,
and they knew it.

Tommy Fox sat down to think. As I have said, he was hungry. And there
is nothing that sharpens a fox's wits like hunger. He looked very
innocent, as he rested under a big chestnut tree, and gazed up at a
gray squirrel which was perched on a limb over his head.

"Run along, Tommy Fox," the squirrel said to him.--"There's no use of
your staying here. I shan't come down until you're gone."

Tommy didn't say anything. He just whined a few times, and held his
paw against his stomach. And he gave one or two groans.

The gray squirrel came a little further down the tree and looked at
Tommy again. He wondered if Tommy was ill. And then, when Tommy
stretched himself out on the ground and lay quite still the gray
squirrel was sure that Tommy Fox had eaten something that hurt him.

"What is it?" the squirrel inquired.

Tommy looked up and murmured something. The squirrel couldn't hear
what he said, but he thought he caught the word _poison_. And he
decided that Tommy had probably devoured a poisoned chicken-head which
Farmer Green had thrown out for him.

I am afraid that the squirrel didn't feel very sorry. He didn't like
Tommy Fox, for Tommy was always trying to catch him. But if he wasn't
sorry, he was curious. And he sat up on a low branch and looked at
Tommy for a long time.

Tommy Fox never moved again. His eyes were shut; his beautiful red
tail, with its white tip, lay limp on the ground; and his legs stuck
out as stiff as pokers.

Mr. Gray Squirrel felt sure that Tommy was very ill. He called and
called to Tommy. But he got no reply. And at last he decided that
Tommy must be dead. So he slipped down the tree to the ground, to get
a better look.

At first Mr. Gray Squirrel stayed close to the tree, so that he could
scamper up again in case he was mistaken. But Tommy Fox never moved an
eyelash. And at last Mr. Gray Squirrel grew quite bold. He edged
closer to Tommy. He had never been so near a fox before, and he was
curious to see what he looked like. He stole up beside Tommy and was
just about to call to his friends in the next tree-top to come down,
when he received the surprise of his life.

As Mr. Gray Squirrel watched, he thought he saw one of Tommy Fox's
eyelids quiver. And a great fear seized him. Had he been mistaken? Was
Tommy Fox playing dead?




VI

MR. GRAY SQUIRREL'S MISTAKE


Mr. Gray Squirrel certainly was mistaken, when he thought that Tommy
Fox was dead and came down out of the chestnut tree to look at him.
Tommy wasn't even ill. You remember that he was very hungry? And that
he had not been able to find anything to eat? Tommy could not climb
the tree, where Mr. Gray Squirrel sat. So the only thing left for him
to do was to make Mr. Gray Squirrel come down where _he_ was.

That was what Tommy Fox was thinking about, when he sat there on his
haunches and looked up so innocently at Mr. Gray Squirrel. As Tommy
sat there a bright idea came to him. So he held his paw to his stomach
and pretended to be ill. And as soon as he saw that Mr. Gray Squirrel
thought he was ill, Tommy fell over on his side and made believe he
was dead.

Though his eyes were shut tight, Tommy's ears were so sharp that he
could tell when Mr. Gray Squirrel came down the tree. And he could
hear him slowly picking his way nearer and nearer. Tommy's nose was
sharp, too, and he could smell Mr. Gray Squirrel. He smelled so good
that Tommy couldn't help opening one eye the least bit, just to see
him. That was when Mr. Gray Squirrel noticed that his eyelid quivered.
And Tommy saw at once that Mr. Gray Squirrel had caught that flicker
of his eyelid, and that he was frightened. Tommy knew then that he
must act quickly.

He jumped up like a flash. But quick as he was, Mr. Gray Squirrel was
even quicker. He reached the tree just ahead of Tommy Fox; and though
Tommy leaped high up the trunk, he was too late. Mr. Gray Squirrel
scrambled up the tree so fast that his big, bushy tail just whisked
across Tommy's face. And in another second he was safe in the
tree-top, chattering and scolding, and calling Tommy names.

Tommy Fox felt very foolish. He realized that if he had jumped up
without first opening his eye he would not have given Mr. Gray
Squirrel any warning; and then he would have caught the plump old
fellow. But it was too late now. Another time he would know better.
And he sneaked off, to try the same trick on one of Mr. Gray
Squirrel's friends.

It was no use. Mr. Squirrel followed him, jumping from one tree-top to
another, and made a great noise, calling after him, and jeering at
him, and telling all his friends about the mean trick Tommy had tried
to play on him.

And to Tommy's great disgust, an old crow high up in a tall tree heard
the story, and haw-hawed loudly, he was so amused. He made such a
racket that all the forest-people heard him; and Tommy knew that there
was no sense in trying to catch a squirrel around there _that_ day. He
went down into the meadow and began hunting crickets. And though he
didn't have as good a lunch as he wanted, probably he ate all that was
good for him.




VII

TOMMY CHASES MR. WOODCHUCK


Tommy Fox went up into Farmer Green's back-pasture, which, lay even
nearer Blue Mountain than the field where Tommy and his mother lived.
He skulked along among the rocky hummocks, and the old stumps which
dotted the pasture thickly. His ears and his eyes and his nose were
all alert to discover any small animal that might be
stirring--especially his nose; for Tommy could smell things when
they were a long way off.

Tommy's mother had explained to him that he must always hunt with the
wind blowing in his face; because then the breeze brought to him the
scent of any animal that might be in front of him, whether it happened
to be an animal that Tommy was hunting, or some animal that was
hunting _him_. In that way Tommy would be able to know what was ahead
of him, even if he couldn't see it.

[Illustration: Mr. Woodchuck Whisked Down Out of Sight]

But if he were careless, and trotted along with the wind blowing
_behind him_--ah! that was quite different. The other forest-people
would all know he was coming, for then _they_ would be able to get
Tommy's scent. And some day, if he were so foolish as to go about with
the wind at his back, some day he might stumble right onto a wildcat,
or a dog, or a man, or some other terrible creature.

Well--Tommy remembered all these things that his mother had told him.
The wind blew fresh in his face. And to his delight all at once he
smelled a woodchuck. There was no mistaking that savoury smell. It
affected Tommy very pleasantly--much as you are affected by catching a
whiff of hot peanuts, or pop-corn, or candy cooking on the stove.

Tommy stole along very carefully. And as he peered around a stump he
saw, not ten jumps ahead of him, a fine, fat woodchuck. Tommy crept up
a little closer; and then he sprang for Mr. Woodchuck with a rush.

Pudgy Mr. Woodchuck saw Tommy just in time. He turned tail and ran for
his life; and he was so spry, though he was quite a fat, elderly
gentleman, that he reached his hole and whisked down out of sight just
as Tommy was about to seize him.

Tommy was disappointed. But he was determined to get that woodchuck,
and he began to dig away at Mr. Woodchuck's hole. You see, Mr.
Woodchuck was smaller than Tommy Fox, and since the underground tunnel
that led to his home was only big enough to admit _him_, Tommy was
obliged to make it larger. Though Mr. Woodchuck's hole was under a
shady oak tree, Tommy found digging to be somewhat warm work, so he
took off his neat, red coat and hung it carefully upon a bush.

He worked very hard, for he was eager to find Mr. Woodchuck. In fact,
the further Tommy dug into the ground the more excited he grew. And he
had just decided that he had almost reached the end of the tunnel, and
that a little more digging would bring him inside of Mr. Woodchuck's
house, when he met with an unexpected check.

To Tommy's dismay, Mr. Woodchuck's tunnel led between two roots of the
big oak, and Tommy could not squeeze between them. He reached his paws
through the narrow opening and crowded his nose in as far as it would
go. But that was all he could do. He did not doubt that somewhere in
beyond, in the darkness, Mr. Woodchuck was having a good laugh because
Tommy had done all that work for nothing.

I am sorry to say that Tommy Fox lost his temper. He called after Mr.
Woodchuck. Yes--he shouted some rather bad names after him. But of
course that didn't do a bit of good. And Tommy Fox put on his coat and
went home to think about what he could do. He didn't care to ask his
mother's advice, because he didn't want her to know that Mr. Woodchuck
had got away from him. But he hoped to find some way in which he could
catch the old gentleman.




VIII

SOMETHING MAKES TOMMY VERY PROUD


Tommy Fox could think of nothing but Mr. Woodchuck. He thought there
could be no use in going back to the hole beneath the big oak in the
pasture until the next day, because Mr. Woodchuck would probably be
afraid that Tommy was waiting for him to come out. Yes--Tommy decided
that Mr. Woodchuck would stay in his house down among the roots of the
big tree and not show himself again until he felt quite sure that his
enemy had grown tired of watching and had given up the idea of
catching him.

But Tommy guessed that by another day old Mr. Woodchuck would be so
hungry that he would have to go out of doors again to get something to
eat. And Tommy Fox could hardly wait for the night to pass. But
another day came at last; and it found Tommy up and hurrying to Farmer
Green's back-pasture, where Mr. Woodchuck lived. It was just growing
light; and there was a heavy dew upon the grass, which Tommy didn't
like at all, because he just hated to get his feet wet.

Tommy did not go near Mr. Woodchuck's hole. Although he was just a
young fox, he was too wise to do that. He knew that if he went nosing
around Mr. Woodchuck's dooryard the old gentleman would smell his
tracks as soon as he poked his head out. So Tommy was careful to keep
away from the hole where he had dug so hard the day before. He sneaked
around until he had passed Mr. Woodchuck's house; and then he crept up
behind the big oak close by. And there he waited.

Tommy kept smiling. He was _so_ pleased, because his plan was working
out very well. The wind blew towards him, and Tommy saw that Mr.
Woodchuck wouldn't be able to smell him when the old fellow came up
into the open air.

For a long time Tommy waited there. He kept very still. And he stayed
hidden behind the tree, with only one eye peeping round the tree-trunk,
so that he could watch for Mr. Woodchuck. He was very patient--was
Tommy. You have to be patient, you know, when you are hunting. He
crouched behind the tree for at least an hour, and never once took his
eye off that hole. And at last he saw Mr. Woodchuck's nose come
popping out.

If Tommy hadn't been watching very closely he wouldn't have seen it at
all; for Mr. Woodchuck just stuck his head up for a second, took one
quick look all around, and jumped back again. He hadn't seen anything
to frighten him. But he thought it best to be very careful.

Tommy waited. And pretty soon that small nose came sticking out again.
This time it stayed longer. And to Tommy's great delight, in another
minute he saw Mr. Woodchuck climb up and take a good look all about.

Tommy Fox hardly breathed. He didn't see how the old gentleman could
help spying him. But he didn't. And then Mr. Woodchuck started off
across the pasture, to find something for breakfast. He was very
hungry, for he hadn't had any supper the night before.

Tommy Fox waited until Mr. Woodchuck had gone just a few steps away
from his doorway. And then Tommy stole after him. This time Tommy was
between Mr. Woodchuck and his house. And Mr. Woodchuck couldn't
escape.

It was all over in a second. And Tommy Fox felt very proud of himself
when he reached home and showed his mother what he had brought.

"I can hunt--can't I, Mother?" he said. "To-morrow I'm going up on the
mountain and catch a bear."

"Don't be silly," Mrs. Fox said. "You know you couldn't catch a bear."
But she was much pleased, in spite of what she said. For she saw that
Tommy was really beginning to learn something.




IX

TOMMY FOX IN TROUBLE


A few days after Tommy Fox caught old Mr. Woodchuck, something
happened that set him thinking. Perhaps I should say _"a few nights"_
instead of _"days."_ For one night his mother came home with a fat hen
slung across her shoulders. She had been down to Farmer Green's
hen-house, right in the middle of the night, when Farmer Green and his
family were asleep; and she had snatched one of the sleeping hens off
the roost and stolen away with it without waking anybody.

Only a very wise old fox could do that. "You mustn't go near Farmer
Green's hen-house," Mrs. Fox said to Tommy, as they picked the bones
of the fat hen together. "You are not old enough to get one of Farmer
Green's hens."

You notice that Mrs. Fox didn't speak of _"stealing"_ a hen. She
called it "getting" one. For foxes believe that it is only fair to
take a farmer's hen now and then, in return for killing field-mice and
woodchucks, which eat the farmer's grain. But the farmer never stops
to think of that. He only thinks of the hens that he loses.

Tommy Fox never said a word while his mother was talking to him. He
was very busy, eating. But that was not the only reason why he kept
still. He heard his mother's warning, but he thought she was silly. He
really believed that he was quite old enough and quite big enough and
quite wise enough to go down to Farmer Green's and get a hen himself.
After catching old Mr. Woodchuck Tommy felt that he was able to do
about everything his mother could do. And he made up his mind right
then and there that he would show her. He would pay a visit to the
hen-house that very night.

Tommy Fox could not wait for night to come. In fact, he could wait
only until the close of day--he was in such a hurry to capture a hen.
The sun had scarcely sunk out of sight in the west and the sky was
still red, when he crept slyly up to Farmer Green's hen-house.

Tommy had heard that Farmer Green went to bed very early, after
working hard in the fields each day. And since he saw nobody stirring
about the place he thought that everyone was asleep.

The hens were asleep. There was no doubt of that. Peeping inside their
little house, Tommy could see them roosting in rows. And he lost no
time in squeezing through one of the small doors. He felt a bit timid,
once he was inside. And for a moment he almost wished that he hadn't
come. But he was determined to take a hen home with him; so he reached
up and grabbed the very first hen he came to, on the lowest perch of
all.

It was a big, old, white hen that Tommy Fox seized. She awoke the
moment he touched her, and began to squall. And to Tommy's alarm, all
the rest of the hens heard her and began to cackle loudly. The noise
was deafening. And Tommy made a dash for the little door, with old
Mrs. White Hen in his mouth. She was flapping her wings and kicking as
hard as she could. And Tommy was dismayed to find that he could not
get her through the narrow door. Every time he tried to push through,
one of Mrs. White Hen's legs, or a wing, or her head, struck against
the edge of the doorway.

Then a dog barked. And Tommy heard something running around the
chicken-house. He just knew that it was a man. And he dropped the old
hen in a hurry and slipped through the door.

He was just in time. He heard a man shout, "After him, Spot!" And
giving one frightened glance over his shoulder, Tommy saw that Farmer
Green's dog was close behind him.




X

MRS. FOX OUTWITS DOG SPOT


Poor Tommy Fox! How he wished that he had obeyed his mother, and kept
away from Farmer Green's hen-house! Now Farmer Green's dog Spot was
chasing him. Tommy could hear him baying joyfully as he followed. But
you may be sure that Tommy was not joyful. He was terribly frightened.
He could think of nothing to do except to run, run, run! as fast as he
could go. He was headed straight for home, and he only hoped that he
would get there before the dog Spot caught him.

Now, Tommy was doing just about the worst thing he could do. He never
once jumped sideways, or ran around in a circle. And though he might
have waded a little way in the shallow brook in the meadow, where Spot
would have lost his trail, Tommy used the bridge to get across the
stream; so the dog Spot had no trouble at all in following him. And
Spot kept drawing nearer and nearer.

It happened that Mrs. Fox heard the baying of the dog. And she knew
what Spot was saying. He was crying--"I've almost got him! I've almost
got him!"

A shiver passed over Mrs. Fox; for she thought at once of Tommy. He
was not at home, and she wondered if by any chance he was in trouble.
She hurried through the field to see who it was that Spot was chasing.
And sure enough! pretty soon Mrs. Fox saw Tommy come tearing through
the field, panting hard, with his tongue hanging out, and a most
frightened look upon his face.

[Illustration: Tommy Dashed for the Little Door]

Mrs. Fox hastened to meet him. The dog Spot was then on the other side
of a low hill, and running along with his nose to the ground.

"Jump!" Mrs. Fox said to Tommy, as soon as he joined her.

Tommy remembered, then, what his mother had always told him. So he
gave a long leap to one side.

"Now make a big circle, and jump again. Then go home!" That was all
Mrs. Fox had time to say. She stopped just long enough to see Tommy
dash off; and then she started right in the opposite direction.

The dog Spot saw her and gave a yelp of delight. He did not know what
had been happening. He only thought that now he was going to catch the
fox, which was the stupidest fox he had ever chased, running as it
did, straight away, with never a leap or a circle, or any other sort
of trick to fool him. Little did Spot guess that old Mrs. Fox had not
the slightest idea of being caught. She had been followed by Spot
himself many times; and she knew exactly how to escape him. She just
lingered for a few moments, to make sure that Tommy was safe, and that
Spot was chasing _her_. And then how she did run! In no time at all
she left Spot far behind.

Now, Mrs. Fox knew that there was a ploughed field nearby, and that
was just what she wanted. She scampered towards it at great speed and
went straight across it. And when she had reached the other side of
the ploughed ground she sat down for a short breathing spell.

You see, Mrs. Fox was very wise indeed. She knew that in dry weather,
such as there was then, a ploughed field takes no scent at all. She
knew that when Spot reached that loose dirt Spot could not smell her
footsteps. And so she just sat there on her haunches, and caught her
breath again.

A grim smile crossed Mrs. Fox's face as she heard Spot barking away in
the distance. It was a very different bark from what she had heard
when he was chasing Tommy. This time Spot was saying, "Oh, dear! oh,
dear! I've lost him!" over and over again.

When Mrs. Fox reached home she found Tommy safe inside their house. He
was crying, because he was afraid he would never see his mother again.
And after his mother found out how Spot had happened to chase him,
Tommy cried some more--but for an entirely different reason.

Who can guess what the reason was?




XI

TOMMY GROWS TOO CARELESS


By the time summer was nearly over, Tommy Fox was much bigger than he
had been in the spring. So many things had happened, and he had
learned so much, that he began to be quite bold. And he had grown so
saucy that his mother often had to scold him. Tommy had fallen into
the bad habit of going about calling all the forest-people names; and
in that way he had gained for himself the ill-will of all the
creatures who lived near the foot of Blue Mountain. It interfered with
his hunting, because whenever he started out to get something to eat,
as soon as they saw him the forest-people told one another that he was
coming. Old Mr. Crow especially was the worst of all. He was forever
calling "Stop, thief!" after Tommy Fox; and then he would haw-haw in a
manner that was frightfully annoying. In fact, he made matters so
unpleasant that after a time Tommy began to roam far down the valley,
along Swift River, where he tried to catch fish. The fish, at least,
couldn't call him names, and there was some satisfaction in that fact,
even if he hadn't much luck as a fisherman.

And just for excitement Tommy began to worry Farmer Green's Spot. He
delighted in barking at Spot. And Spot would always stop what he was
doing and rush pell-mell after Tommy Fox.

Then Tommy would skip away with a laugh. First he always ran for the
river, and jumped from one stone to another, and waded where the water
was shallow.

Then he would dash off through the meadows, leaving so crooked a trail
behind him that when Spot at last found the place where Tommy had left
the river, he never could follow him very far.

But one day Tommy stumbled upon Spot quite by accident. There was no
wind at all that day, to bring any scent to Tommy's sharp nose. And he
suddenly found that Spot was right in front of him, between him and
the river.

Tommy Fox turned and ran. He laughed, too; because he felt quite sure
that he could outwit old Spot. And he leaped and twisted and turned
about, and made so many circles, that he felt sure Spot couldn't
follow him.

Yes--Tommy felt so safe that he stopped running and was trotting
slowly along through the field in which he lived. He was almost home,
when he heard a noise behind him. He looked around and to his great
surprise there was Spot almost upon him.

There was no time to lose. There was only one thing Tommy could do.
The door of his mother's house was only a short distance off and Tommy
made for it. Luckily, he managed to reach it. Once inside, he could
hear the dog Spot barking in the opening. But he knew that Spot was
too big to follow him.

Although Tommy was very glad to be safe at home, he was worried. For
now Spot know where he and his mother lived; and they would have to
move. Tommy was afraid his mother would be very angry with him for
being so stupid as to let Spot follow him. But he couldn't help it
now.

Meanwhile, old Spot continued to bark, and scratch at the door of
Tommy's home. But at last he stopped. And all was still.

Tommy wondered where his mother was. She was not at home. And he
wanted to see her, even if he was afraid that she would punish him.
For Tommy did not know exactly what to do. He did not dare go out for
fear Spot might be lying in wait for him. So Tommy stayed there. And
still his mother did not come home. He wondered where she could be.




XII

OLD MR. CROW IS PLEASED


There was a very good reason why Mrs. Fox did not come home that day
when the dog Spot chased Tommy Fox into his house. She had heard old
Spot barking in the field and she had hurried toward home as fast as
she could, to see what was the matter.

To her great dismay, when she leaped up on the stone-wall not far from
her house Mrs. Fox could see Spot scratching at her door. And she
guessed at once that he had driven Tommy inside.

The poor old lady hardly knew what to do. But she hid in the grass,
hoping that Spot would grow tired of his task and go home. But old dog
Spot kept up a great barking. He howled so loudly that they heard him
way off at the farm-house; and Mrs. Fox nearly wept when she saw
Farmer Green and his boy Johnnie come hurrying across the fields.

Pretty soon Johnnie Green returned to the farm-house; and when he came
back Mrs. Fox could see that he carried a steel trap. For a short time
Johnnie and his father busied themselves at her doorway. And then they
went away, calling old dog Spot after them.

After they had gone, Mrs. Fox stole sadly across the field to the home
she had liked so well. She knew that she could live there no longer in
peace and quiet. Yes--she would have to move. And now the first thing
to be done was to get Tommy safely out of the house.

Mrs. Fox reached her door-yard. And there she paused. There was no
trap to be seen, anywhere. But the path leading to her door was
sprinkled thick with fresh earth; and wise old Mrs. Fox knew that
hidden underneath it, somewhere, lay that cruel trap, with its jaws
wide open, waiting to catch her if she stepped between them.

She crept as close to her door as she dared, and called softly to
Tommy. I don't need to say that her son was delighted to hear his
mother's voice. He poked his nose out of the hole at once. And he
would have jumped out and fallen right into the trap if his mother had
not warned him.

"Don't come out!" she cried sharply, "There's a trap here, beneath
this dirt. Now, do just as I tell you, or you'll be caught!"

Tommy Fox was frightened. For once, at least, he believed, that his
mother knew more than he did. And he didn't dare move, except when she
ordered. He didn't dare put a foot down except where she told him to.

Tommy had taken several careful steps, and his mother had begun to
think that he was almost safely past the trap, when a very unfortunate
thing happened. Tommy was just about to set one of his front feet down
upon a spot that his mother had pointed out to him, when somebody
suddenly called, "Stop, thief!"

Tommy Fox was so startled that he gave a quick jump. _Snap!_ went the
trap. And though Tommy sprang up into the air, he was just too late.
The trap closed tightly across the tips of his toes. It was only one
foot that was caught; but that was enough. He could not get away--no
matter how hard he pulled.

It was old Mr. Crow who had called "Stop, thief!" He was laughing now.
His "Haw-haw! haw-haw!" could be heard plainly enough, as he flapped
away in great glee, to tell all the forest-people that Tommy Fox would
trouble them no more.




XIII

JOHNNIE GREEN AND HIS NEW PET


Tommy Fox was in a terrible fix. He was caught fast by the foot in a
trap; and if that isn't being in a fix, I should like to know what is.

All night long he whimpered and cried. All night long he tugged and
pulled, trying to get free. But the more he tugged the more the trap
hurt his foot. And the harder he cried.

Mrs. Fox couldn't help Tommy at all. She stayed with him throughout
the night, and tried to comfort him. And she only left when morning
came and she smelled men coming across the fields. Then, with one last
sorrowful look at Tommy, she crept sadly away.

In a few minutes more Farmer Green and his boy Johnnie reached Mrs.
Fox's door. And they were both greatly pleased when they saw that the
trap had done its work so well.

"It's a young cub," Farmer Green said, as soon as he spied Tommy Fox.

"May I have him, Father?" Johnnie asked quickly. "I'd like him for a
pet."

Tommy Fox was terribly frightened when he heard that. You see, he
didn't know what a "pet" was. He thought that probably it was
something like a stew, for he had been told that people ate things
like that; and he could see himself, in his mind's eye, being cut up
and tossed into a pot.

"A pet, eh?" said Farmer Green. "Well, I suppose so. He's hardly worth
skinning. You may have him, I guess. But look out that he doesn't bite
you."

Johnnie Green was delighted. He helped his father put Tommy into an
old sack, and taking the trap too, they started toward the farm-house.
When they reached Farmer Green's home Johnnie and his father fitted a
stout collar about Tommy's neck. And they fastened one end of a chain
to it; and the other end they tied to a long stake, which they drove
into the ground in Farmer Green's door-yard. Then Johnnie Green set a
big wooden box close beside the stake. He tipped the box over on its
side, and threw some straw into it. And that was Tommy Fox's new home.

You might think that it was a much nicer home than he had before. But
Tommy did not like it at all. All the people on the farm came and
looked at him, inside the box; and Johnnie Green never left him for
more than ten minutes all the rest of that day.

Tommy made up his mind that he would make a house of his own. And that
very night he dug a hole in Farmer Green's dooryard, where he could
crawl out of sight of everyone. Tommy liked that much better. No
matter how hard Johnnie Green pulled on the chain, he couldn't drag
Tommy out unless he wanted to come.

But after a few days Tommy began to get used to being a pet. He found
that it was not such a terrible thing, after all. He did miss the fine
runs he used to have; and the hunts; and he missed his mother, too. He
could hear her often, at night, calling to him from the fields. And
then Tommy would answer, and tug at his chain. But he couldn't get
away. And after a while he would go to sleep and dream pleasant
dreams, about catching crickets in the long grass.




XIV

TOMMY FOX MAKES A STRANGE FRIEND


There was one thing, especially, that surprised Tommy Fox. And I think
it surprised the dog Spot even more. Tommy and Spot became friends.

At first, whenever Spot came near, Tommy would run into his hole, as
far as his chain would allow him. But after a time he began to peep
out at his visitor. And finally he grew so bold that when Spot came to
see him he stayed above ground, though to be sure he sat close to the
door of his house, so that he could whisk out of sight if Spot should
come too near him.

Since Spot often came to look at Johnnie Green's new pet, he began to
like Tommy. And instead of growling, he would wag his tail, and try to
be friendly. And the first thing they knew, they were playing
together, and rolling and tumbling about, pretending to bite each
other.

Now, Spot was much bigger than Tommy Fox, and stronger. And sometimes
when they played together he would get so rough that Tommy would run
down into his underground house and hide. But he never lost his
temper, because he knew that Spot did not mean to hurt him. And Tommy
was always ready to come out again and play some more.

Johnnie Green was very proud of his new pet. And one day when he was
going to drive to the village he took Tommy Fox with him. He tied
Tommy's chain to the wagon and Tommy sat up on the seat beside his
young master. He had a fine ride. It frightened him at first, to see
so many people, for it was market-day, when the farmers for miles
around came to the village to sell their butter and eggs and
vegetables. There was a great number of dogs, too, running about the
village streets. Tommy was glad that he was high up on the seat of the
wagon, beside Johnnie Green, for he knew that he was perfectly safe
there. He saw so many strange sights that after that first day
whenever he saw Johnnie starting off for the village he was never
satisfied unless he went too.

On the whole, Tommy Fox did not have a bad time, being Johnnie Green's
pet. And although Farmer Green often complained that Johnnie would
rather play with his young fox than drive the cows, or feed the
chickens, or fetch water from the pump, still Farmer Green himself
rather enjoyed watching Tommy Fox.

But at last something happened that made Farmer Green very angry. One
morning he discovered that a fine hen had disappeared during the
night. And the following night another hen vanished.

Farmer Green was puzzled. Old Spot had been loose all the time, and he
had never barked once. That was what made Farmer Green suspicious.

Farmer Green went out into his door-yard, where Tommy Fox was basking
in the sunshine. Tommy looked up at Farmer Green very innocently. You
would have thought he had never done anything wrong in all his life.

Farmer Green began to examine the ground about Tommy's house. He
didn't find anything unusual. But when he knelt down and peered into
the hole Tommy Fox had dug for himself, what should he see but several
hen-feathers!

That was enough for Farmer Green. He knew then where his fat hens had
gone. But he was puzzled. There was Tommy, chained fast to the stake.
How could he ever have visited the hen-house?

Farmer Green picked up Tommy's chain. And to his surprise he found
that the end of it wasn't fastened to the stake at all! It had worked
loose, somehow. And Tommy had been free to wander about as much as he
pleased.




XV

JOHNNIE GREEN FEELS SAD


Yes--there was trouble when Farmer Green discovered that Tommy Fox had
been stealing his hens. He fastened the end of Tommy's chain to the
stake once more. And then he went out to the barn, where his boy
Johnnie was watering the horses.

"We'll have to kill that fox," he said to Johnnie. "He's got loose,
somehow, and he's stolen two hens. I can't have him on the place any
longer. He's made friends with old Spot and the dog will let him do
anything he likes."

Poor Johnnie Green! He felt so sad! And he begged his father not to
kill Tommy. But Fanner Green was very angry with Tommy.

[Illustration with caption: Tommy Thought It Was His Mother's Voice]

"No!" he said. "That cub's so tricky there's no knowing when he'll get
loose again." But Johnnie begged so hard that his father promised that
he might keep Tommy one more day.

Johnnie Green was in despair. He could not bear to have his pet
killed. And when he went to bed that night he never fell asleep at
all. He was very tired; but he managed to keep awake. And in the
middle of the night Johnnie got out of bed and put on his clothes. He
didn't dare to light his candle. But the moonbeams streamed in through
his little gable-window and Johnnie could see very well without any
other light.

As soon as he was dressed Johnnie stole down the stairs, carrying his
shoes in his hand, so he wouldn't make any noise. In spite of all his
caution, the old stairs would creak now and then. But luckily nobody
heard him; and soon Johnnie was out of the house.

He found Tommy Fox wide awake, sitting on his haunches in the
moonlight, listening. Far away in the distance a fox was barking and
Tommy thought it sounded like his mother's voice.

Tommy was surprised to see Johnnie Green at that hour. And he was
astonished when Johnnie untied the chain from the stake and started
away with him. They went off across the fields, toward Blue Mountain,
right in the direction of that barking.

The meadows smelled sweet; and Tommy Fox began to wish that he could
slip his head out of his collar and scamper away.

And that was exactly what happened.

After they had gone some distance, Johnnie Green stopped. He unbuckled
Tommy's collar, and gave Tommy a push.

At first Tommy was not quite sure that he wanted to leave his good
master. But there was that fox, yelping and calling. Something seemed
to draw Tommy toward that sound. He just couldn't help himself. And
the first thing he knew he was bounding off over the meadow running as
fast as his legs would carry him, and barking as loudly as he could
bark.

Johnnie Green went slowly home again. He crept into the house and
stole upstairs, and cried himself to sleep. But he was glad of one
thing. Tommy Fox would not be killed the next morning.




XVI

TOMMY BECOMES BOASTFUL


When Johnnie Green turned Tommy Fox loose, out in the meadow, in the
moonlight, Tommy hurried across the fields as fast as he could go. You
remember that he heard a fox barking, near the foot of Blue Mountain,
and he thought it sounded like his mother. So Tommy barked, too. And
as he ran he could hear that other fox coming towards him. Pretty soon
they met, and such a joyful meeting you never saw in all your life.
For it _was_ old Mrs. Fox. And she was so delighted to see Tommy that
she licked him all over with her tongue, and looked at him carefully,
to see if he was hurt anywhere. Mrs. Fox had never expected to see
Tommy again. But there he was, bigger than ever, and altogether _too_
fat, for Johnnie had fed him well; and then, there were those two hens
that Tommy had stolen.

Tommy Fox was very glad indeed to see his mother once more. He frisked
about her, and yelped, and jumped up and down. And when she saw that
Tommy had come back safe and sound Mrs. Fox danced a little bit, too.
And then she took Tommy home.

You remember that when Farmer Green caught Tommy in a trap, right at
the door of his mother's house, Mrs. Fox had been obliged to move. Her
new home was not far away from the old one. It was snug and cozy, and
on the whole was a pretty nice sort of house, though the dooryard was
not quite so sunny as she would have preferred, for the branches of a
big tree shaded it.

Tommy had to answer a great many questions. His mother wanted to know
everything that had happened to him. She was astonished when she found
that he had been in the village, right in the daytime. He was the only
fox she knew of who had ever been there. And when she heard of Tommy's
friendship with the dog Spot Mrs. Fox was more surprised than ever.
She couldn't understand it. And she shook her head over and over again
as Tommy told her what good times he and Spot had had together. Mrs.
Fox actually began to think that Tommy was telling stories.

The other forest-people, too, thought that Tommy was fibbing when he
bragged about his strange adventures. And old Mr. Crow began to cry
"Stop, liar!" after him, instead of "Stop, thief!" as he used to do.

But Tommy Fox didn't mind that very much. He knew that he was telling
the truth. And he more than half guessed that old Mr. Crow was jealous
of him, because he had so many wonderful things to tell.

Though the forest-people always listened to Tommy's stories, they
disliked him more than ever. For he was always going about boasting of
what he had seen, and what he had done, and what _his_ friend, the dog
Spot, said.

"If you're such good friends with old dog Spot, why don't you go down
to the farm-yard and see him?" Mr. Crow said to Tommy one day. This
was long after Tommy had come back to live with his mother. In fact,
it was quite late in the fall, and the weather was growing cold.

"All right! I will!" Tommy said. He was not going to let old Mr. Crow
get the better of him. "I'll go now," Tommy said. And with that he
started down the valley toward Farmer Green's buildings.




XVII

PAYING A CALL ON A FRIEND


Mr. Crow had dared Tommy Fox to go down to pay a call on his friend
dog Spot, at Farmer Green's place. And Tommy was trotting along across
the fields. He was quite near Farmer Green's house when he heard a dog
bark not far away.

"There's Spot now!" Tommy said to himself. And he turned at once in
the direction of the barking. He was smiling, for he knew Spot would
be greatly pleased to see him, and very much surprised, too.

Tommy stole slyly up toward the place where the dog was barking. The
sound came from beyond some bushes. And Tommy thought he would jump
out from behind the bushes and startle Spot. So he crept up to the
bushes and then suddenly gave a yelp and leaped clean over them.

It was Tommy Fox himself who got the surprise. For there was a strange
dog! And as soon as he saw Tommy he sprang after him.

Tommy did not wait a second. He left that place a great deal faster
than he came. And as he went skimming over the fields, a red streak
against the brown stubble, he could hear Mr. Crow laughing heartily.
The old fellow had sailed along high over Tommy's head, to see what
happened; and he was greatly pleased with himself. You see, he knew
that Farmer Green's hired man had brought home a new dog just a few
days before, and Mr. Crow hoped that if Tommy went to the farm-yard he
would meet the strange dog.

Tommy was very angry. He saw at once that old Mr. Crow had tricked him
and he made up his mind that if he ever had a chance he would get even
with the old gentleman. But now he had no time to think about that.
There was that strange dog, following hot on his trail. Tommy had
quite enough to worry him, without bothering his head over Mr. Crow
just then.

Now, even if Tommy Fox was conceited, he was really a very bright
youngster. And as he bounded along he thought of a pretty clever
scheme. Yes, he thought of a fine trick to play on that dog. The idea
came to him all at once. And as soon as the thought popped into his
head, Tommy turned toward Swift River. He was at the bank in no time,
and he skipped nimbly down to the river's edge.

Tommy Fox could see no water at all running in Swift River. And you
might think he was disappointed. But he wasn't. He found exactly what
he had hoped for. He could see no water running, down there in the bed
of the river, because _the river was covered with ice._ It was just a
thin shell of ice; but it was strong enough to bear Tommy's weight. He
ran across it quickly. And then what do you suppose he did? He sat
right down on the opposite bank!

Tommy Fox wanted to see the fun. He had to wait only a minute. For
pretty soon the strange dog came rushing down the opposite bank of the
river and leaped far out from the edge of the stream.

There was a crash, and a splitting, crackling noise! And the strange
dog was floundering in the cold water. The ice was not thick enough to
hold him up, and he had hard work to scramble back to the bank again.
But he climbed out of the water at last, and tucked his tail between
his legs and made off.

Old Mr. Crow saw what happened. He stopped laughing. And he sailed
away silently, thinking that Tommy Fox was a pretty smart young cub,
after all.




XVIII

THE WORLD TURNS WHITE


After he outwitted the strange dog, Tommy Fox became more of a
braggart than ever. He thought that he knew just about all there was
to know. But with the coming of winter Tommy found that he had many
things to learn. It was almost like living in a different world, for
the ground was white everywhere. And though Tommy Fox loved to play in
the snow, he discovered one thing about it that he did not like at
all. It frightened him when he saw how plainly his footprints showed
after a fresh snow-fall. And he wondered how he would ever be able to
escape being caught, should any strange dog chase him.

As the winter days passed, Tommy learned that it was very hard for him
to run fast in a light, dry snow--that through such snow a dog could
run much faster than he could. But when there was a thin crust he
could go skipping along like the wind, while dogs, being heavier,
broke through the crust and floundered about in the softer snow
beneath.

One day Tommy and his mother were out hunting. The snow was very deep
everywhere, for it was mid-winter. And it had thawed and frozen so
often that the snow was quite hard, except for just about an inch of
fresh snow which had fallen during the night. Tommy and his mother
could see rabbit tracks all around them; and they had very good luck
hunting. But something happened that wasn't exactly lucky. They had
turned toward home, when a dog bayed somewhere behind them, and pretty
soon Mrs. Fox saw that they were being followed.

She and Tommy started to run. And Tommy saw that there was one more
bad thing about winter. Swift River, and all the little brooks, were
covered with thick ice and there was no chance at all for him and his
mother to run through shallow water and throw the dog off their scent.

It was that strange dog that was chasing them--the one that belonged
to Farmer Green's hired man. He was a very fast runner, and in spite
of the usual tricks that foxes know, Mrs. Fox and Tommy could not lose
him.

Tommy began to be frightened. And old Mrs. Fox herself was somewhat
worried. But she still had a few tricks up her sleeve. She didn't
intend to let that dog catch them if she could help it.

[Illustration with caption: Mrs. Fox and Tommy Started to Run]

"Oh, Mother! whatever shall we do?" Tommy said. "Do you think we can
get away from him?"

"Of course," Mrs. Fox answered. "But you must do just as I tell you.
Now, follow right in my tracks, and don't be frightened, I'm going to
show you a new trick--one that my own mother taught me when I was no
older than you are."

Mrs. Fox turned to the right and started back across the valley. She
was going straight toward Swift River.

"Oh, dear!" Tommy cried. "Don't you know that the river is frozen
solid, Mother? The dog can follow us across it, as easy as anything."

"Stop fussing!" Mrs. Fox said, looking over her shoulder at Tommy.
"We're not going to the river. You just mind me and you'll see, in a
few minutes, that we can fool that dog." And she kept on running, with
Tommy right at her heels.




XIX

TOMMY FOX LEARNS A NEW TRICK


Now, there was a road that ran through the valley, along the bank of
Swift River. And when Mrs. Fox reached it, with Tommy close behind
her, she turned again--this time to the left--and ran along in the
beaten track which the horses and sleighs had made.

Tommy Fox thought it very strange that his mother should lead him to
the road, where they were sure to find people driving. Tommy followed
her. But he was very unhappy. They swung into the road just ahead of a
farmer, who was driving along in a sleigh. The sleigh-bells tinkled
merrily as the horse trotted smartly down the road. But the jingling
of the bells did not sound at all pleasant to Tommy Fox. It only
frightened him all the more.

The farmer in the sleigh did not see Tommy and his mother, for the
snow rose high on both sides, and the road wound in and out. Little
did he know that Mrs. Fox and Tommy were scampering along in front of
him. Of course, he couldn't catch them, anyhow. Tommy knew that much.
But if they ran very far down the road they would be sure to meet some
other man.

To Tommy it seemed bad enough to have that dog chasing them, without
going where they were sure to find other enemies. Tommy could hear the
dog baying. And he knew dogs well enough to know that that dog felt
very sure he was going to catch them. But pretty soon Tommy heard the
dog talking in a very different fashion. He gave a number of short
barks, which meant that he was in trouble.

Mrs. Fox looked over her shoulder and smiled at Tommy. She knew that
they were safe. She knew that the dog had not reached the road until
the farmer had driven right over their footsteps and spoiled their
scent. After the horse had passed over their trail the dog could smell
only the horse's footprints, instead of theirs. And Mrs. Fox could
tell what was happening back there in the road. She knew just exactly
as well as if she had been there herself--she knew that the dog had
stopped short, and was running all around, with his nose to the
ground, trying to find where she and Tommy had gone. But he never
found out.

You see, he wasn't half as clever as Mrs. Fox. It never once occurred
to him that Tommy and his mother had turned into the road just ahead
of that farmer in his sleigh. And finally the stupid dog gave up the
chase and went back to Farmer Green's house.

By that time Mrs. Fox and Tommy were safe at home. Yes--they were even
having a good laugh over the way they had fooled the dog. And Tommy
had quite forgotten how frightened he had been. In fact, he began to
feel very well pleased with himself. For he never once remembered that
it was his mother, and not himself, who had thought of that trick. He
ought to have felt very grateful to his grandmother, for having taught
his mother that clever way of cheating a dog out of his dinner. But
Tommy Fox was so conceited that if his grandmother had been there with
them he would have thought he knew ten times as much as she did. I've
no doubt that he would even have tried to teach her to suck eggs--never
once stopping to think that she knew all about such things many
years before he was born.




XX

THE DRUMMER OF THE WOODS


Tommy Fox stopped short and listened. It was early spring, and the
snow was still deep on the sides of Blue Mountain.

_Thump--thump--thump, thump, thump, thump! Rub--rub--rub--rub,
r-r-r-r-r-r-r!_ If you had heard that sound you would have said that
there was a boy hidden somewhere on the mountain; and that he was
playing a drum. But Tommy Fox knew better than that. He knew that it
was Mr. Grouse, calling to Mrs. Grouse. And Tommy knew that he made
that noise by beating the air with his strong wings.

Now, Tommy Fox had not eaten a grouse for a long, long time. He had
never captured a grouse himself. In fact, he had never even tried,
since that time in the summer, when old Mother Grouse had played a
trick on him, and led him away from her children.

Tommy made up his mind now that he was old enough and wise enough to
capture Mr. Grouse. But he thought he had better wait until night,
when Mr. Grouse couldn't see well. Tommy Fox's eyes, you know, were
even sharper at night than they were in the daytime.

Well! Tommy Fox went home. And that very night he stole back again to
the clump of evergreens where he had heard Mr. Grouse drumming.

It was pretty dark up there on the mountain. But Tommy had no trouble
at all in finding his way. And he kept looking up at the thick
branches of the evergreens, for he hoped that Mr. Grouse was asleep on
a low branch, which he could reach with a good, high jump.

Yes--it was dark. And it was very cold up there on Blue Mountain, for
all it was early springtime. And the evergreen trees bowed beneath a
burden of snow, which had fallen only the day before.

It was very still in the forest. And when Tommy Fox suddenly heard a
cry of _"Whoo--whoo--whoo!"_ he jumped, in spite of himself. Tommy
knew, right away, that it was only Mr. Owl. And he felt very sheepish.
And then all at once Tommy jumped again. This time he was terribly
frightened, for the strangest thing happened. The snow rose right up
beneath his feet, and flew in his face. And something struck him a
good, hard blow under his chin. Tommy fell over backward in the snow,
he was so surprised. And a roar like thunder rang through the forest.

Tommy knew then what had happened. Maybe you have guessed, too. For it
was Mr. Grouse himself. He had burrowed his way into the snow, so that
he might have a warm blanket to cover him during the night. And Tommy
Fox had stepped squarely on top of him.

It was no wonder Mr. Grouse had sprung up in a hurry. He was just as
frightened as Tommy himself, because he had been sound asleep, and he
had no idea what was the matter.

As for Tommy Fox, it was a huge joke on him. But it was a joke that
didn't please Tommy at all. He felt very silly, when it was all over.




XXI

THE BIGGEST SURPRISE OF ALL


It was a pretty big surprise for Tommy Fox, when Mr. Grouse sprang out
of the snow, right beneath his feet. But it was nothing at all,
compared with the surprise Tommy had when he reached home.

Very late at night Tommy stole into his mother's house. In fact, it
was nearly morning. And Tommy crept in very quietly, for he hardly
expected that his mother would be awake and he did not want to disturb
her.

Tommy had just curled up on his bed and was all ready to go to sleep,
when to his great astonishment he heard his mother talking. She was
not talking to _him_, but to someone near her, for she spoke so low
that Tommy could not hear what she was saying.

He thought right away that somebody had come to pay them a visit. And
he called out--

"Who's here, Mother? Is it a visitor?"

"Yes, Tommy," Mrs. Fox answered. "Come here and see who it is."

Tommy jumped out of bed and hopped across the room. At first he
couldn't see anybody but his mother.

"It's just a joke!" Tommy exclaimed. "You're only fooling!"

"Look sharp!" said Mrs. Fox. "It's a surprise. What do you call this?"
She moved aside a bit, and pointed to a little, soft, woolly thing
which lay close beside her. Tommy had to look two or three times to
see what it was. And even then he wasn't sure.

"Is it--is it--a baby?" he asked.

"That's just what it is," his mother said.

Tommy certainly was surprised. And before he could find his voice
again Mrs. Fox showed him another baby fox, and another and another
and another.

Yes--there they were--five of them all together, small and soft and
woolly. They weren't nearly so brightly colored as Tommy and his
mother--just a pale, brownish red. Tommy Fox could hardly believe it.
As he stared at them he suddenly noticed something strange about the
baby foxes. "Why--they're all blind--every one of them!" he cried.
"Hadn't we better send them back and get some good ones?" he asked.

Mrs. Fox laughed.

"Of course they're blind," she said. "You were blind when you were
their age. Their eyes will be open in a few days.... Well--what do you
think of them, Tommy?" she asked; for Tommy Fox seemed to be lost in
thought.

"I was wondering how they would ever be able to hunt--they're so
small."

"Oh! I'll have to hunt for them, for a long time," his mother
explained. "When they get big enough I shall teach them to hunt for
themselves, just as I taught you.

"Now you see why I showed you how to catch mice and rabbits and
woodchucks," Mrs. Fox said. "You'll have to look out for yourself now,
Tommy. For I shall have all I can do to find enough for myself and
five children to eat, without feeding a big fellow like you."

That made Tommy Fox feel very proud. He felt bigger, and stronger, and
wiser than ever before.

"I shall get along all right," Tommy said. "I almost caught Mr. Grouse
tonight. But he got away." Tommy yawned, for he was very sleepy. And
pretty soon he was curled up on his little bed again, dreaming of a
wonderful bird that he had caught, which was so big that he and his
mother and his five little brothers and sisters made a fine meal off
it.

But of course it was only a dream.

THE END




A WORD TO GROWN UPS


To you;--parents, guardians, teachers and all others upon whom
devolves the supremely important responsibility of directing the early
years of development of childhood, this series of TUCK-ME-IN TALES
which sketch such vivid and delightful scenes of the vibrant life of
meadow and woodland should have tremendous appeal. In this collection
of stories you will find precisely the sort of healthy, imaginative
entertainment that is an essential in stimulating thought germs in the
child mind.

Merely from the standpoint of their desirability for helping the
growing tot to pass an idle half hour, any one of these volumes would
be worth your while. But the author had something further than that in
mind. He has, with simplicity and grace, worthy of high commendation,
sought to convey a two-fold lesson throughout the entire series, the
first based upon natural history and the second upon the elementary
principles of living which should be made clear to every child at the
earliest age of understanding.

The first of these aims he has accomplished by adapting every one of
his bird characters to its living counterpart in the realm of biology.
The child learns very definite truths about which the story is woven;
learns in such a fascinating manner that he will not quickly forget,
and is brought into such pleasant intimacy that his immediate sympathy
is aroused.

The author accomplishes the purpose of driving home simple lessons on
good conduct by attributing the many of the same traits of character
to his feathered heroes and heroines that are to be found wherever the
human race made its habitation. The praise-worthy qualities of
courage, love, unselfishness, truth, industry, and humility are
portrayed in the dealings of the field and forest folk and the
consequential reward of these virtues is clearly shown; he also
reveals the unhappy results of greed, jealousy, trickery and other
character weaknesses. The effect is to impress indelibly upon the
imagination of the child that certain deeds are their own desirable
reward while certain others are much better left undone.

If any further recommendation is necessary, would it not be well to
resort to the court of final appeal, the child himself? Simply
purchase a trial copy from your bookseller with the understanding that
if it meets with the disapproval of the little man or woman for whom
it is intended, he will accept its return.



THE TALE OF JOLLY ROBIN

Of course, there is a time when Jolly Robin is only a nestling. Then
one day, after he tumbles out of the apple tree and falls squawking
and fluttering to the ground, he takes his first lesson in flying. So
pleased is Jolly to know that he can actually sail through the air on
his wings, that he goes out into the wide, wide world to shift for
himself. One day, after advising with Jimmy Rabbit, he decides to
become general laugh-maker to the inhabitants of Pleasant Valley, and
he becomes one of Mother Nature's happiest little feathered folk,
going about trying to make things a bit better in the world.

True, he falls into many blunders and has many strange experiences,
but his intentions are always the best, remember. Slyly tucked away in
this story of Jolly Robin and of his adventures, is much bird lore and
philosophy,--both instructive and entertaining.



THE TALE OF BETSY BUTTERFLY

Betsy Butterfly is the owner of a pair of such beautifully colored
wings and her sweet disposition matches them so perfectly that it is a
very common occurrence to hear one of the tiny dwellers in Farmer
Green's meadow remark: "Why, the sun just has to smile on her!" Of
course, any lady so gifted is bound to have many admirers and Betsy is
no exception. But there are a few of her acquaintances who cannot keep
from showing their jealousy of her popularity and these try in various
unkind ways to make her disliked. The story of how she politely
overlooks these rude attempts, in that way causing herself to be all
the more thought of, is the best sort of example to any human girl or
boy who wishes to know how to be sure of making friends. You will find
that Betsy is a great girl for giving parties and perhaps she will
give you a few valuable ideas that will be useful sometime when you
have a party of your own.



BUSTER BUMBLEBEE

Buster's intentions are all very good, but he is so awkward and stupid
that he constantly stumbles into trouble, thereby causing his
acquaintances much unnecessary discomfiture and himself no end of
embarrassment. He is, furthermore, a terrific boaster, as you will
learn when you read of his many declarations of the pummeling he would
give the ferocious Robber Fly, if ever he chanced to meet that
devouring assassin. What Buster actually does when the unexpected
encounter takes place will afford you a good laugh at his expense,
and, finally, after you have romped and dallied with him through his
many happy excursions you will close the book with a feeling that it
has done you good to have known him, lazy and blundering though he is,
for he is indeed the best natured fellow, and he is so anxious to buzz
into everything that attracts his attention that you find you have
learned a great many things you never before dreamed of about the tiny
creatures of the fields.



THE TALE OF FREDDIE FIREFLY

Freddie Firefly is most anxious to lighten the cares of his friends in
Pleasant Valley for he is a most unselfish fellow and enjoys nothing
more than seeing other people as happy as he. He has one grave fault,
however, that prevents him from being a very great help, and that is
his inability to remain long in one place. He is so full of spry
gaiety that he never can be quite content unless he is dancing with
his relatives in the hollow near the swamp or darting about Farmer
Green's lawn. His friends often give him advice as to how he may use
the wonderful light which he always carries with him, and finally Mrs.
Ladybug tells him he should go to the railroad and work as a signalman
for the trains. You will hold your breath as you read about the
exciting adventure that follows this suggestion, and you will no doubt
agree with those to whom he later tells it that he is a very lucky
Freddie to escape.

Rusty Wren is another little neighbor in Pleasant Valley. His
particular home there is Farmer Green's yard where he lives in a
bright shiny home which is really a tin can with a hole in it! And
dear me! I forgot all about Rusty Wren's family--his wife and six baby
children who had to be given Wren food by Rusty and little Chippy, Jr.
You will laugh heartily when you read about Chippy growing so big and
fat that he gets stuck in Rusty's tiny doorway and can't get pulled
out. My, what an exciting time it was! And you will laugh again when
you watch Rusty Wren go way over to the bank of Black Creek all ready
for a party when there really is no party. Yes, you will agree with
Farmer Green's boy and the rest of our friends in Pleasant Valley that
Rusty certainly is a very interesting little neighbor.



THE TALE OF DADDY LONG-LEGS

Daddy is a person of such unusual appearance with, his eight scrawny
legs in contrast to ordinary people's two, and everything about his
private life is such a mystery to his neighbors that his acquaintances
give him credit for having a marvelous ability to look into the
future. In fact, there are many two-legged humans, even today, who
think he is a sort of soothsayer and mystery man. Perhaps, if you are
one of these, you will be inclined to change your mind after reading
about his contest with Old Mr. Crow to see which is really the wiser
of the two. And would you not naturally suppose that anybody with so
many legs to carry him would be the champion walker of the world?
Maybe Daddy finds that it takes time to decide which of his feet he
should put forward in taking the next step, or may be each separate
foot has a notion of choose; at any rate, he proves to be the slowest
traveler imaginable. But he is so popular among his neighbors and you
will like him too--he has so many quaint ideas.



THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID

Kiddy Katydid and his relatives were in possession of a secret that
none of the Pleasant Valley folk can solve, though they waste much
time and energy trying to guess it. Even to this day it is doubtful if
anyone other than Kiddie himself really knows what Katy did! But his
friends are a curious lot and they work their brains over-time to
think of some scheme to make Kiddie tell. If you want to know what
they do accidentally discover about Kiddie himself and how excited
every body becomes as the rare news spreads from mouth to mouth, you
will find that and many other remarkable things about him in this
interesting story of his life in the Maple tree that grows in Farmer
Green's yard. You will like Kiddie. He is very modest and
retiring--behaving very much as any well raised youngster should,
and when you understand just how it happens that he keeps repeating
that funny remark about Katy, you can join him in the hearty laugh
he has on his friends.



THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW

Mr. Crow has a very solemn look--unless you regard him closely. But it
is a very sly, knowing look, if you take pains to stare boldly into
his eyes. Like many human beings, he is fond of clothes, and he
particularly likes gay ones, but perhaps that is because he is so
black himself.

Anyhow, so long as he can wear a bright red coat and a yellow
necktie--or a bright red necktie and a yellow coat--he is generally quite
happy. One fall Mr. Crow decides to stay in Pleasant Valley during the
winter, instead of going South, and he remembers all at once that he
will need some warm clothing. Now, Mr. Frog, the tailor, and Jimmy
Rabbit, the shoemaker, know just how to talk to Mr. Crow to sell their
merchandise, playing upon his vanity to buy the latest, and even to
"set the styles," but they have to be pretty keen and sly to get the
best of Mr. Crow in the end. Mr. Crow has his good points as well as
his bad ones, and he helps Farmer Green a lot more than he injures him
it is said. Nevertheless, Farmer Green does not figure that way,--and
in justice to old "Jim Crow," you should read of his adventures for
yourself.



THE TALE OF SOLOMON OWL

All the folks down in Pleasant Valley know Solomon Owl. Well, It's
this way. If you hear Solomon Owl on a dark night when his "Wha-Wha!
Whoo-ah!" sends a chill 'way up your spine, and if you see him you can
never forget him, either. He has great, big, staring eyes that make
you feel queer when you look at his pale face. No, sir, little folks
like Mr. Frog, the tailor, certainly don't like to have any visits
from Solomon Owl when Solomon has a fine appetite. To be sure, Farmer
Green isn't happy when Solomon steals some of his fine chickens, and
neither are the chickens for that matter. But Solomon doesn't have all
the fun on some one else. Oh no! Reddy Woodpecker knows how to tease
him by tapping with his bill on Solomon's wooden house in the daytime,
when every owl likes to sleep and dream of all the nice frogs and fat
chickens they are going to feast on the next night, and then, out
comes Solomon all blinking with his big, black eyes. But this wise
owl, who really isn't as wise as he looks, you know, finds a good way
to fool Reddy and the rest of the folks who like to annoy him, and
lives his own happy life.



THE TALE OF JASPER JAY

Jasper Jay really is a good sort of a fellow even though he does make
a dreadful racket when he is around; but that is his way of talking.
He just likes to tease for the fun of teasing and so naturally he gets
into lots of scraps and seems bound to get into more. Of course, lots
of folks in Pleasant Valley don't like him because he plays tricks and
pranks on them and makes them feel all ruffled up. Why, he even thinks
he can spoil the Singing Society, but do you know, the Society fools
Jasper himself. And that time Jimmy Rabbit teaches Jasper Jay some
manners down by the cedar tree--the poor jay stays there until his
feet are frozen in the water before he finds out--well--you may
discover for yourself what happens next.










End of Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Tommy Fox, by Arthur Scott Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF TOMMY FOX ***

***** This file should be named 5955.txt or 5955.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/5/5955/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
