Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Kiddie Katydid, by Arthur Scott Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Tale of Kiddie Katydid

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Illustrator: Harry L. Smith

Release Date: February 14, 2008 [EBook #24608]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID ***




Produced by Joe Longo, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











THE TALE OF
KIDDIE KATYDID




TUCK-ME-IN TALES

(Trademark Registered)


  BY
  ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

        AUTHOR OF
        SLEEPY-TIME TALES
        (Trademark Registered)

       *       *       *       *       *

        THE TALE OF JOLLY ROBIN
        THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW
        THE TALE OF SOLOMON OWL
        THE TALE OF JASPER JAY
        THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN
        THE TALE OF DADDY LONG-LEGS
        THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID
        THE TALE OF BUSTER BUMBLEBEE
        THE TALE OF FREDDIE FIREFLY
        THE TALE OF BETSY BUTTERFLY

[Illustration: Kiddie Sees Benjamin Bat in Front of the Moon

_Frontispiece_--(_Page 71_)]




        TUCK-ME-IN TALES
        (Trademark Registered)

THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID

BY

ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

        Author of
        "SLEEPY-TIME TALES"
        (Trademark Registered)

        ILLUSTRATED BY
        HARRY L. SMITH

        NEW YORK
        GROSSET & DUNLAP
        PUBLISHERS

        Made in the United States of America




        Copyright, 1918, by
        GROSSET & DUNLAP




CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                 PAGE

     I. A GREAT SECRET                    1

    II. THE WARNING                       6

   III. MR. NIGHTHAWK                    10

    IV. A WHINING CALLER                 15

     V. SOLOMON OWL'S CRY                20

    VI. FREDDIE FIREFLY'S DISCOVERY      26

   VII. FREDDIE WANTS TO TELL            31

  VIII. SPREADING THE NEWS               36

    IX. MR. FROG IS PLEASED              40

     X. A PAIR OF RASCALS                45

    XI. A CHANGE IN THE WEATHER          51

   XII. A PRESENT FOR KIDDIE             55

   XIII. KIDDIE KATYDID IS SHY           60

    XIV. KIDDIE KEEPS HIS PROMISE        65

     XV. BENJAMIN BAT'S PLAN             70

    XVI. A NOISY CROWD                   75

   XVII. KITTY DID!                      79

  XVIII. THE TWO GRASSHOPPERS            85

    XIX. A QUARREL                       89

     XX. THE STRANGER'S MESSAGE          94

    XXI. LEAPER THE LOCUST IS WORRIED    99

   XXII. THE SHORT-HORNS ARRIVE         104

  XXIII. THE BEST OF FRIENDS            110




ILLUSTRATIONS

  KIDDIE SEES BENJAMIN BAT IN FRONT OF THE MOON   _Frontispiece_

                                                       PAGE
  KIDDIE'S SECRET IS DISCOVERED BY FREDDIE FIREFLY      28

  KIDDIE TOOK HIS NEW COAT FROM THE TWIG                59

  KIDDIE FACED LEAPER THE LOCUST                        90




THE TALE OF
KIDDIE KATYDID




I

A GREAT SECRET


Whoever Katy was, and whatever she might have done, nobody in Pleasant
Valley knew anything about her except Kiddie Katydid and his numerous
and noisy family.

To be sure, many of the wild folk--and the people in the farmhouse,
too--remembered hearing her name mentioned the year before.

But they had quite forgotten about her, until August came and Kiddie
Katydid and his relations brought her to their minds once more.

Each night the Katydids' rasping chant was repeated again and again:
_Katy did, Katy did; she did, she did!_ But since in any crowd there are
always a few that want to be different from the rest, now and then some
member of Kiddie's clan insisted that Katy didn't--somewhat in this
fashion: _Katy did, Katy did; she did, she didn't!_

However, there were always so many others to drown any such puzzling
statement with their shrill clamor that Katy really _did_ do it
(whatever it was!) that nobody paid much attention to those few who
didn't quite agree.

On warm, dry, midsummer nights the Katydids all made a terrific racket.
But there wasn't one of them that outdid Kiddie. He always had the best
time when he was making the most noise. And since he liked to station
himself in a tree near Farmer Green's house, his uproar often rose
plainly above that of the other Katydids.

Lying in bed in his little room under the eaves, Johnnie Green sometimes
wished that Kiddie would keep quiet long enough to let him go to sleep
in peace.

To be sure, the balmy breezes wafted many other night sounds through
Johnnie's open window. From near-by came Chirpy Cricket's cheerful
piping. And in the distant swamp the musical Frog family held a singing
party every evening. Johnnie Green liked to hear them. But he objected
strongly to the weird hooting and horrid laughter of Solomon Owl, who
left the hemlock woods after dark to hunt for field mice.

As for Kiddie Katydid, he paid little attention to any other of the
night cries. No matter what anybody else said, he solemnly hurled back
at him that neverending refrain, _Katy did, Katy did; she did, she did!_

You would have thought, if you had heard Kiddie, that somebody had
disputed his statement. But such was not the case at all. Since no one
except the Katydids knew anything about the mysterious Katy, nobody was
able to say truthfully that she _didn't_ do it. In fact, the whole
affair was a great secret, so far as outsiders were concerned. And one
night Johnnie Green even thrust his head out of the window and cried
impatiently:

"All right! All right! I admit that Katy did it. And now do please keep
still!"

Of course, his plea failed to silence Kiddie Katydid. But it relieved
Johnnie Green's mind and made him feel better, anyhow.

Kiddie told his own people about Johnnie's outburst. And they all agreed
that it was a rude thing to do.

"Doesn't he know," they asked, "that the night belongs to us?"




II

THE WARNING


It must not be supposed that all of Kiddie Katydid's family made the
same neverending din at night. Actually it was only the gentlemen that
so amused themselves. No doubt the ladies, too, knew the secret about
the mysterious Katy--and what she did.

But for some reason they never, never mentioned the matter. Even when
they gossiped among themselves, as they sometimes did, they never
touched upon that subject.

Furthermore, in the daytime Kiddie and his fellows were as quiet as they
could be. Having waked the echoes all night long, they were content,
when morning came, to rest silently among the trees and shrubs. And a
very good reason did they have, too, for such a habit. During the day
there were altogether too many birds flying about, to please the
Katydids. And Kiddie often remarked in a joking way that the only birds
he cared about were those that _didn't care about him_!

Of course, there were a few birds that prowled about Pleasant Valley
after dark. Mr. Nighthawk was one of that crew of nightly wanderers. And
whenever the word was passed around that he had been seen in the
neighborhood, Kiddie Katydid tried to lower his solemn chant, because he
knew that Mr. Nighthawk was usually in search of something to eat.

Now, when Kiddie Katydid felt hungry he drove away his gnawing pangs by
browsing upon leaves and tender twigs. But Mr. Nighthawk had no taste
for such fodder.

He had an appetite for insects. And between dusk and dawn a good many of
Kiddie Katydid's neighbors of one kind or another found their way into
Mr. Nighthawk's tummy.

So you see it was no wonder that Kiddie was not eager to attract the
attention of that night rover. Some of the more timid of Kiddie's
companions even begged him, at times, to hush. They said he was making
such a noise that Mr. Nighthawk would be sure to hear it, even if he
were a quarter of a mile away.

But Kiddie Katydid usually laughed at those faint-hearted ones; and
often he shrilled his _Katy did, Katy did_, more loudly than before,
just to show them that he was not afraid.

"A person has to take a few chances," he remarked one day. "If we were
all afraid to make a sound it would be pretty hard on Katy, for then she
would have nobody to take her part. And what would people think of her?"

Evidently Kiddie's reason was a good one, because a number of his
cousins spoke up at once and said that they agreed with him perfectly.

But their sisters all exclaimed that sooner or later Mr. Nighthawk would
hear them; and then there would certainly be trouble.

Strangely enough, the words were scarcely out of their mouths before
they heard a loud call that struck them cold with fear.

_Peent! Peent!_ The cry came out of the air above them without the least
warning. And everybody--including Kiddie Katydid--knew that Mr.
Nighthawk had come.




III

MR. NIGHTHAWK


Following his cry with two or three quick beats of his wings, Mr.
Nighthawk dropped swiftly down among the trees in Farmer Green's
dooryard.

He fell so fast that Kiddie Katydid, watching from his hiding-place in
one of the maples, couldn't help hoping that the sky-coaster would be
unable to stop himself in time to escape being dashed upon the ground.

But Mr. Nighthawk was very skillful at that sport. Just at the right
moment he turned quickly, while the air rushed through his wing-feathers
with a roaring sound. And then he mounted upward again.

Meanwhile Kiddie Katydid kept very still among the leaves, with his
wings folded over his back. Only his two long, thread-like feelers
_would_ wave backwards and forwards, although he tried to keep them
still. He was so nearly the color of the green of the tree-top that he
trusted Mr. Nighthawk wouldn't be able to spy him.

But he was soon disappointed. For Mr. Nighthawk suddenly cried, "Ha!"
and alighted on a neighboring limb.

"There you are!" he said. "You needn't think I don't see you!"

"Why, good evening!" Kiddie Katydid answered, since he was
discovered--and there was no use denying it. "It's a great
surprise--meeting you so unexpectedly. If you'd only sent word that you
were coming I'd have made different arrangements."

"I've no doubt you would have!" Mr. Nighthawk sneered. "But I like to
take people unawares.... I've heard about you," he added. "They say that
you're a great jumper--the spriest jumper in all Pleasant Valley."

"Well, I can jump fairly well," Kiddie Katydid admitted. "But I don't
pride myself on my jumping. It's something that has always run in my
family, you know. All of us Katydids can leap quite a distance without
any trouble."

"So I understand!" Mr. Nighthawk replied. "And I'll tell you some news
that ought to please you: I've come here to-night for the special
purpose of seeing you jump!"

Kiddie Katydid almost jumped out of his skin when he heard what Mr.
Nighthawk said. And it wouldn't have been anything remarkable for him
if he had. He had already squirmed out of his skin six times that
summer--though not from fear, of course. Casting his skin was almost a
habit with Kiddie. All his family were like that.

Though he was not nearly so old as Mr. Nighthawk, Kiddie Katydid had
learned a thing or two during his brief lifetime. And though he would
have liked very much to jump--and jump out of Mr. Nighthawk's sight,
too--he had no wish to hide himself _inside_ that feathered scoundrel.
So he clung all the tighter to his perch and replied that he didn't
believe he cared to do any jumping that night.

Now, Mr. Nighthawk had a certain odd trick of talking through his nose.
Whether that was because the late hours he kept, even on dark nights,
gave him a cold in his head, nobody seemed to know. Anyhow, he began
teasing Kiddie Katydid to jump for him--and he talked through his nose
more than ever. Yes! although Mr. Nighthawk tried his best to speak
pleasantly, he only succeeded in making Kiddie Katydid want to laugh at
him, for all Kiddie was so uneasy.




IV

A WHINING CALLER


"I certainly hope you aren't going to disappoint me?" Mr. Nighthawk
whined, as he looked hungrily at Kiddie Katydid. "Please, please jump
for me--just once!" he begged. "Here I've come all the way across the
meadow on purpose to see what a fine jumper you are! And I shall feel
very unhappy if you don't perform for me."

But Kiddie Katydid refused to budge.

"I hadn't intended to do any leaping to-night," he told Mr. Nighthawk.
"And if I jumped for you, it would only upset my plans."

"I know--I know," said Mr. Nighthawk, nodding his head. "But I thought
that just to oblige a friend you wouldn't object to jumping from this
tree into that one." And he pointed to the nearest maple, the branches
of which all but touched the tree-top in which they were sitting. But
Kiddie Katydid's mind was made up.

"No jumping for me to-night!" he piped in a shrill voice.

All this time Mr. Nighthawk was growing hungrier than ever. And one
might well wonder why he didn't make one quick spring at Kiddie Katydid
and swallow him. But that was not Mr. Nighthawk's way of dining.

"Well," he said at last, "though you refuse to jump for me, won't you
kindly call some other member of your family and ask him to oblige me?"

"I don't know where my relations are just now," replied Kiddie Katydid.
"Some of them were here a while ago; but they went away." And that was
quite true! At that _peent_--that first warning cry--of Mr. Nighthawk's,
they had all vanished as if by magic, among the leaves.

"What about that Katy you're always talking about?" Mr. Nighthawk then
inquired. "Don't you suppose you could find _her_ and persuade _her_ to
do a little jumping for me--just to show me how it's done?"

"I'm sorry--" Kiddie said somewhat stiffly, "I'm sorry; but I must
absolutely refuse to do such a thing. Now that you've mentioned her,
I'll simply say _Katy did_. And beyond that I cannot discuss her with
you."

"She did what?" Mr. Nighthawk wanted to know--through his nose.

But Kiddie Katydid declined to answer that question. He merely hugged
his wings closer to his green body, and shot a sly glance at Mr.
Nighthawk, as if to say, "Ah! That's for _you_ to find out! But I shan't
tell you!"

Mr. Nighthawk looked rather foolish. He had always supposed that any one
who spent a good part of every night saying the same thing over and over
and over again must be quite dull-witted. But now he began to think that
perhaps Kiddie Katydid was brighter than the field people generally
believed him to be. And when Kiddie suddenly asked _him_ a question, he
was sure of his mistake.

"Did you know," said Kiddie, "that Solomon Owl often visits these farm
buildings?"

"Why, no! I wasn't aware of that," Mr. Nighthawk replied with a quick,
nervous look behind him. "What brings him here?"

"Chickens!" Kiddie Katydid explained. "Solomon Owl is very fond of
chickens. But they do say that he's not above eating a nighthawk when he
happens to stumble upon one."




V

SOLOMON OWL'S CRY


For a few moments Mr. Nighthawk fidgeted about on his branch of the
maple tree. What Kiddie Katydid said to him about Solomon Owl frightened
him. And he almost wished he hadn't come to Farmer Green's dooryard that
night.

But the more he thought about the matter, the less he was inclined to
believe that there was really any danger. And soon he peered at Kiddie
Katydid through the darkness and said:

"You almost fooled me. But I know now what you were trying to do. You
were trying to scare me away from here!"

"_Katy did, Katy did; she did, she did!_"

"You needn't say that!" Mr. Nighthawk exclaimed. "Katy has nothing to do
with my case. She hasn't even mentioned Solomon Owl's name."

"You don't understand," Kiddie told him. "I'm speaking of an entirely
different matter."

And then Mr. Nighthawk had another idea. He chased the frown away from
his face and smiled very pleasantly.

"I'm sorry that you don't feel like jumping for me," he observed. "But
I'd be just as glad to see you fly! I remember being told that you fly
almost as well as you jump."

"Oh, I can't begin to fly as well as you can," Kiddie Katydid told Mr.
Nighthawk. "I only wish I knew how to coast down out of the sky the way
you do, without being dashed upon the ground.... How do you manage to
stop so suddenly?"

"Pooh! That's nothing!" Mr. Nighthawk said. "It's easy, once you know
how."

In spite of his way of belittling his flying feats, Mr. Nighthawk was
secretly very proud of his skill at sky-coasting. And when Kiddie
Katydid asked him if he wouldn't kindly give an exhibition of the art of
fancy flying, Mr. Nighthawk couldn't help feeling pleased.

He wanted to display his skill. But there was just one thing that
troubled him. He was afraid that if he climbed up into the sky, before
he dropped down again Kiddie Katydid would have vanished. And that
didn't suit Mr. Nighthawk's plans.

"Will you promise to stay right where you are until I come back?" he
asked.

Now, Kiddie Katydid had intended to hide himself as soon as Mr.
Nighthawk should leave him. But there was nothing he could do now except
to agree to Mr. Nighthawk's proposal.

"I'll promise," said Kiddie, "if you'll promise me that you'll surely
return. Otherwise I might have to stay here for a month, perhaps,
waiting for you."

"Oh! I'll come back in a minute or two," Mr. Nighthawk laughed, as he
looked hungrily at Kiddie. "Don't you worry about my not coming back to
talk with you!"

Then he began climbing upwards into the sky. And he had gone about as
high as he wished to, when all at once a rolling _Whoo-whoo-whoo_,
_whoo-whoo_, _to-whoo-ah_ startled him. It was Solomon Owl's weird call.
And it drove every thought except one out of Mr. Nighthawk's head. That
one idea--to escape--filled his mind completely. And he turned and
hurried away from Farmer Green's place as fast as he could go; for Mr.
Nighthawk feared that Solomon Owl would arrive there at any moment.

As for Kiddie Katydid, when he heard Solomon's cry he knew at once that
he was rid of Mr. Nighthawk. And Kiddie's _Katy did, Katy did; she did,
she did_ rang out again and again in the night. All his friends and
cousins crept out of their hiding-places and joined in the chorus. And
everybody enjoyed a good laugh over Mr. Nighthawk's visit--and his
sudden departure.

Perhaps Kiddie may be forgiven for boasting the least bit, as his
companions crowded around him.

"I knew better than to jump for Mr. Nighthawk!" he cried. "I happened
to know that he always wants to catch his food _on the wing_. And if I
had jumped, or tried to fly away, he would have snatched me right out of
the air as quick as lightning."




VI

FREDDIE FIREFLY'S DISCOVERY


That secret about Katy, and what she did, was not the only one that
Kiddie hid from the field people. He had another--something about
himself--that nobody ever suspected, until Freddie Firefly stumbled upon
it one night.

Probably Freddie would never have learned this second secret had he not
been trying to find out about the first one. Over in the meadow he had
heard Kiddie Katydid shrilling his well-worn ditty, _Katy did; she did,
she did!_ And he had danced his way into Farmer Green's dooryard because
he wanted to have a talk with Kiddie and ask him some questions about
that unknown lady.

Like all others who tried to pry into the mystery, Freddie Firefly had
no luck at all. For Kiddie Katydid made no reply to his inquiries.
Kiddie merely smiled in a most annoying fashion and kept on repeating
the refrain.

"Doesn't your voice ever get tired, singing those silly words over and
over again all night long?" Freddie Firefly finally asked.

"Oh! no, indeed!" said Kiddie Katydid. "On the contrary it rests my
voice to do this." And he solemnly shrilled the chorus more rapidly than
ever.

"There's something queer about that cry of yours!" Freddie Firefly
suddenly exclaimed. "I'm watching you closely; but I can't see that your
mouth moves the least bit."

Again Kiddie Katydid smiled. He saw that Freddie Firefly was puzzled.

"Why do you keep moving your wings when you say _Katy did_?" Freddie
Firefly asked him at last.

But Kiddie refused to answer that question--a fact which at once made
Freddie suspicious. He moved nearer Kiddie Katydid and flashed his light
upon him every time Kiddie repeated his odd statement about Katy. And
soon Freddie Firefly grew much excited. He actually danced up and down,
he was so astonished.

"I've found you out!" he cried in a loud voice. "It's no wonder your
voice doesn't get tired from that song! For you don't really _sing_ it
at all! You make that queer _sound by rubbing your wing covers
together_!"

Kiddie Katydid abruptly ceased his shrilling. He looked most
uncomfortable. And it was not surprising. He had not supposed that
Freddie Firefly--or anybody else--would be shrewd enough to discover
that secret. It was a family secret--one that had been closely guarded
by the Katydids since the beginning of time, almost. And here he had
gone and let Freddie Firefly find it out!

"I'm right about that and you can't deny it!" cried Freddie Firefly
boldly. "You may as well admit that what I say is true," he added.

"I certainly won't dispute you," Kiddie Katydid replied. "I have too
good manners to do anything so rude as that."

"I don't care about your manners," Freddie answered. "I dare say they're
good enough, although some people think it's rather rude of you to make
so much noise when a good many others are trying to sleep."

"I should like to know who objects to my music?" Kiddie Katydid
exclaimed hotly. "If Farmer Green has been talking to you, I should like
to state that he had better be careful. Anyone who drives a clattering
mowing-machine around, when a lot of us are trying to get our rest in
the daytime, ought not to complain about a little _music_ on a pleasant
night like this."

[Illustration: Kiddie's Secret is Discovered by Freddie Firefly

(_Page 28_)]




VII

FREDDIE WANTS TO TELL


As soon as Kiddie Katydid mentioned the word _music_, Freddie Firefly
began to dance and shout.

"There!" he cried. "You've just the same as told me that I was right. If
you _sang_ your _Katy did, Katy did; she did, she did_, you would call
it _singing_. But since you make that ditty by rubbing your wing covers
together, it is _music_. And you just referred to it as such!"

Well, Kiddie Katydid couldn't say a single word. Freddie Firefly was
right. They both knew it. And the secret was hopelessly "out." In fact,
it was a secret no longer--unless Kiddie Katydid could persuade Freddie
Firefly to keep the news to himself.

"You won't say anything about this little matter, I hope," Kiddie began.

"Won't I?" said Freddie Firefly. "Why, I just couldn't help telling
people what I've learned! It's the biggest bit of news that I've known
since I've lived in Pleasant Valley. And I must get word of it to old
Mr. Crow somehow."

"Why Mr. Crow?" Kiddie Katydid inquired anxiously. He knew that the old
gentleman was a great gossip. "You might as well put this in a newspaper
as tell Mr. Crow about it."

"Ah! That's just the point!" cried Freddie. "Mr. Crow _is_ a newspaper.
Perhaps you didn't know it; but every Saturday he flies over Blue
Mountain to the pond where Brownie Beaver lives and tells Brownie all
the news of the past week."

"Then for pity's sake, don't let _him_ hear of this!" Kiddie begged.

But nothing could have stopped Freddie Firefly.

"You're too modest," he said. "It's a shame to be able to make music the
way you do and not let the neighbors know it. Why, the first thing you
know you'll be one of the most famous people in this whole valley."

"But I don't want to be!" Kiddie Katydid cried. "I'm not like you. You
go dancing about every night, flashing your light so everyone can see
you. But I stay among the trees and shrubs. And I even wear a green
suit--which matches the color of the leaves--so people won't notice me.
Of course," Kiddie added, "I don't mind if the public hears my music.
But I don't care to be seen, as a rule. And I don't like callers a
bit!"

"You don't, eh?" remarked Freddie Firefly. "Then it's time for me to be
moving along. For I never stay where I'm not welcome." And he flitted
away, feeling somewhat peevish--and all the more determined to get the
news of the discovered secret to Mr. Crow at the earliest possible
moment.

How he was going to do that he didn't quite know.

There was little chance of his seeing Mr. Crow, for the old gentleman
only waked up at the time Freddie Firefly was ready to go to bed--about
dawn.

He was pondering over his difficulty, which bothered him not a little,
when a terrific croaking from the direction of the swamp reached his
ears. It was the final chorus of the Frog family's nightly singing
party. And it promptly put an idea into Freddie Firefly's head.

"I'll hurry right over there and speak to Mr. Frog, the well-known
tailor," he said to himself. "He knows old Mr. Crow. He sees him almost
every day. And he'll be glad to give the old gentleman a message."




VIII

SPREADING THE NEWS


When Freddie Firefly reached the swamp he found that the singing party
had already broken up. But luckily, Mr. Frog the tailor was the last one
to leave. He was still poised on the bank of the sluggish stream, ready
to plunge into the water and swim away, when Freddie Firefly dropped
down upon a cat-tail and called him by name, flashing his light
frantically so that Mr. Frog would be sure to notice him.

"Wait a moment!" cried Freddie. "I've something to say to you!"

"Out with it, then!" said Mr. Frog. "My time is valuable, you know. I
ought to be back in my shop this moment; for I promised Paddy Muskrat
I'd make him a policeman's uniform by to-morrow morning. And I haven't
begun it yet."

"Why not?" asked Freddie, forgetting--for the moment--his own errand.

"He wants brass buttons," explained the tailor. "And I couldn't get any
until to-night."

"But couldn't you go ahead without them?" Freddie Firefly inquired.

"Certainly not!" replied Mr. Frog. "I see you don't know much about
making a policeman's suit. You start by laying the buttons in a row on
the ground; and then you sew the cloth onto them.... That's my own
invention--that method," he added with an air of pride. "And now, what
was it you wanted to say to me?"

"I don't believe there's any use of my telling you, after all," Freddie
Firefly replied. "You're going to be so busy that you won't have time
to do an errand for me. I wanted you to give Mr. Crow a message."

"Yes--I'll be altogether too rushed to bother with it," said Mr. Frog.
"I expect to be on the jump all night--and most of to-morrow, too."

"This message," Freddie Firefly went on, "was something about Kiddie
Katydid. I found out his secret to-night. And I thought Mr. Crow ought
to know about it."

Now, Mr. Frog was all ready to leap into the water. But when Freddie
said that, the tailor promptly changed his mind.

"Kiddie Katydid's secret!" he repeated in a tone of amazement. "You
don't mean to say you've discovered what it was that Katy did?"

"Never mind!" said Freddie. "I don't want to trouble you, Mr. Frog. I
know you're too busy to bother your head with such things."

"Tut, tut, young man!" Mr. Frog cried. "I see you have something
important to tell me. And since that is the case, I'll manage somehow to
deliver your message to Mr. Crow, even if I have to disappoint a
customer. _Always oblige a friend!_ That's my motto!" said Mr. Frog.

"Very well, then!" Freddie Firefly replied. "I'll say what I was going
to; but it doesn't concern that Katy person you just mentioned."

"Oh, it doesn't," the tailor echoed. "Then I don't know that I care to
listen to you, after all. I thought you were going to explain about that
mysterious lady that Kiddie's always singing about." He was sadly
disappointed. And once more he turned toward the creek.




IX

MR. FROG IS PLEASED


"Kiddie Katydid doesn't sing!" Freddie Firefly told Mr. Frog hurriedly.

And Mr. Frog was so surprised that he almost sat right down in the mud.

"What do you mean?" he cried. "You must be crazy! For there isn't a
single person in all Pleasant Valley that hasn't heard Kiddie Katydid
singing his tiresome song on a fine midsummer night."

"That--" replied Freddie Firefly--"that is just where you're mistaken,
Mr. Frog. And that's where everybody else is mistaken, too. To-night I
was lucky enough to learn that Kiddie Katydid has been fooling us all
this time."

"You don't say so!" said Mr. Frog. "Then who is it that sings that
everlasting chorus?"

"Nobody!"

"Nonsense!" Mr. Frog scoffed. "I can be fooled once, maybe. But I'm not
to be fooled twice. And you needn't think for a moment that you can make
me believe any such thing."

"I don't care whether you believe it or not," Freddie Firefly declared.
"All I ask you to do is to tell the story to Mr. Crow."

"He won't believe it, either," the tailor retorted.

"Perhaps he will when he hears the rest of the message," Freddie
answered. "I was just going to explain that Kiddie Katydid has a trick
of rubbing his wing covers together to make that _Katy did_ sound."

"For the land's sake!" cried Mr. Frog, as he leaped into the water,
convinced at last of the truth of Freddie Firefly's claim. "I must hurry
home at once, for dawn's already breaking. And Mr. Crow may come sailing
over my place at any moment." He landed with a splash in the creek and
started to swim rapidly away. But after a few strokes he paused and
turned around. "You might almost say that Kiddie Katydid is a fiddler,
mightn't you?" he called.

"Something like that!" Freddie Firefly agreed a bit doubtfully.

"I'll tell Mr. Crow that, anyhow," said the tailor. "It will make the
story more interesting, at least. And so far as I can see, it can't do
any harm."

And then he hastened away, leaving Freddie Firefly to get home as best
he could in the gray of the early morning.

"You may as well put out your light!" Mr. Frog shouted back, as he
disappeared among the reeds. But he didn't wait to see whether Freddie
took his advice. He was too much excited over the strange news. And as
he swam easily along with practiced strokes he kept talking to himself.

"I'm a pretty clever chap, I am!" he chuckled. "I've discovered a great
secret this night. And old Mr. Crow will be glad to hear all about it.
Perhaps he'll want me to help him with his newspaper after this.

"And for all I know I'll have so much to do that I won't be able to make
any more clothes for my customers."

He hadn't swum far before he had entirely forgotten that it was really
Freddie Firefly who had discovered the secret and told it to him.

No doubt if anybody had reminded Mr. Frog of that fact he would have
been very indignant.




X

A PAIR OF RASCALS


Mr. Frog reached home just as the sun peeped over the hills. He slipped
hastily out of the water, sprang up the bank of the creek, and in three
jumps landed on the roof of his tailor's shop. There he squatted, while
his queer, bulging eyes scanned the sky in every direction. He was
watching for Mr. Crow, and all but bursting with the news that he had
for the old gentleman.

Mr. Frog had not sat there long before he heard a hoarse _Caw, caw!_ in
the distance.

"There he is!" cried the tailor aloud. "There's the old boy! He'll be in
sight in a moment."

And sure enough! soon Mr. Crow flapped out of the woods and came sailing
over the meadows.

Thereupon Mr. Frog set up a great croaking. And to his delight his
elderly friend heard him calling and dropped down at once.

"I've some news for you," Mr. Frog announced, as soon as the old black
scamp alighted near him.

"It'll have to keep," Mr. Crow replied. "I'm on my way to the cornfield.
I haven't had my breakfast yet. And a person of my age has to eat his
meals regularly."

The sprightly tailor looked slightly disappointed.

"I don't know whether the news will keep or not," he replied slyly.
"It's very important. And I may have to tell it to someone else first
if you don't care to hear it now."

"What's your news about?" Mr. Crow asked him gruffly. "I suppose you've
made another suit for somebody. And you remember I told you I couldn't
put that news in my newspaper any more unless you paid me something.
It's advertising. And nobody gets free advertising."

"This news is something entirely different from anything you've ever
heard," Mr. Frog insisted. "It's about Kiddie Katydid. He's a----"

"Wait till I come back from the cornfield!" Mr. Crow pleaded.

"I can't! I simply _must_ tell it now!" Mr. Frog cried.

"Very well! But please talk fast; for I'm terribly hungry."

"Kiddie Katydid is a fiddler," Mr. Frog announced. "He fiddles every
night. And that's the way he makes that ditty of his--_Katy did,
Katy_----"

"Don't!" Mr. Crow begged. "Please don't! It's bad enough to have to hear
that silly chorus every time I happen to wake up during the night--bad
enough, I say, without being obliged to listen to it in broad daylight."

"Very well!" the tailor yielded. "But he fiddles it, all the same. And
when you tell my tale to Brownie Beaver I guess he'll be surprised."

"I shan't tell him," Mr. Crow declared, thereby astonishing Mr. Frog.

"Why not?" the tailor demanded.

"We've had a slight disagreement," said Mr. Crow with a hoarse laugh.
"I'm not his newspaper any longer."

"Well, there's nothing to prevent your telling this story to other
people, is there? And you certainly will be willing to mention me at the
same time, won't you?" Mr. Frog inquired with an anxious pucker between
his strange eyes.

"Where do _you_ come in, pray tell?" Mr. Crow inquired coldly.

"Why, I discovered the secret!"

"Perhaps you did--and perhaps you didn't," Mr. Crow observed. Being
very, very old, he was very, very wise. And he had long since learned
that Mr. Frog was a somewhat slippery person. "If I spread any such news
as this about Pleasant Valley I shall do it in my own way," he remarked.
And thereupon the old gentleman rose quickly and disappeared in the
direction of the cornfield, without so much as a "Thank you!"

Mr. Frog gazed after him mournfully.

"If that isn't just my luck!" he lamented. "I ought to have kept the
secret till after the old boy had his breakfast. Then perhaps he'd have
been better natured."




XI

A CHANGE IN THE WEATHER


Well, the day was not half gone before all the wild creatures in
Pleasant Valley had heard all about Kiddie Katydid and his fiddling. At
least twenty-seven people came to Mr. Frog at different times and told
him the news. And he was furious.

"Old Mr. Crow has deceived me!" he complained. "I found out this secret
myself. And now that black rascal's taking all the credit for it."

"Mr. Crow has suggested that Kiddie Katydid be invited to join the
Pleasant Valley orchestra," Long Bill Wren informed Mr. Frog. "They have
no fiddlers, you know. And Kiddie will be a great help to them. Mr.
Crow has appointed a committee to call on Kiddie to-night and ask him to
come to the next concert."

That was the last straw, so far as Mr. Frog was concerned.

"Mr. Crow might at least have put me on the committee," he spluttered.
"But he has left me out in the cold."

"Why, it's not cold to-day!" Long Bill exclaimed. "Quite warm--I call
it!"

"It'll be good and cold by night," said Mr. Frog. "I look for a sudden
change in the weather. Nobody ought to venture out to-night without his
heaviest overcoat on."

After flinging that remark over his shoulder, Mr. Frog flung himself
inside his tailor's shop and slammed the door behind him. And then,
sitting down cross-legged upon his table, he began to think, wrinkling
his low brow until you might have supposed he would need to smooth it
out again with one of his flat-irons.

At last the tailor suddenly quit thinking and smiled very widely from
ear to ear. And carefully selecting some soft, warm, green cloth he
began to fashion a small garment, which was tiny enough to fit--well, to
fit a person as little as Kiddie Katydid.

Being a spry worker, Mr. Frog finished his task by nightfall. And then,
taking his handiwork with him, he left his shop--after locking the door
behind him--and hid himself beneath a shelving rock on the bank of the
creek.

He was in a very happy mood; for his ideas about the weather had proved
to be good. It was already turning cold.

"If it wasn't midsummer I should think we were going to have a frost!"
Mr. Frog exclaimed, buttoning the long coat which he had donned before
going out of doors. "I wish they'd hurry up!" he added mysteriously. He
kept a close watch upon his shop door. It was evident that he expected
callers.

Not long afterward a crowd began to gather in front of Mr. Frog's door.
"Back Soon" said the sign upon it. And the thinly clad, shivering knot
of field folk sat themselves down unhappily and waited for the tailor to
appear. Every one of them wanted a warm new overcoat, for each expected
to be out late that night.

Meanwhile Mr. Frog watched them--and giggled as loud as he dared. It was
Mr. Crow's committee that thronged about his door--the people who were
expecting to call upon Kiddie Katydid that very night to invite him to
join the Pleasant Valley orchestra.

[Illustration: Kiddie Took His New Coat From the Twig

(_Page 59_)]




XII

A PRESENT FOR KIDDIE


Mr. Frog had a delightful time listening to the remarks of his callers,
who had no idea that he was so near at hand. And as the weather grew
colder, they began to shiver and their voices began to shake. And by the
time it was almost dark all the waiting company were quite discouraged.

"I'll never be able to stay out to-night!" Chirpy Cricket declared. "I'm
so cold now that I can scarcely move."

And it was the same with everybody else. Even Freddie Firefly complained
that his light didn't warm him in the least. And he said he would have
to go home at once.

"Mr. Crow will be very angry with us to-morrow when he learns we haven't
called on Kiddie Katydid," somebody remarked. And a hush fell upon the
company. But Chirpy Cricket had a happy thought, which made them all
feel better.

"Kiddie Katydid won't stay out of doors on a night like this!" he
suddenly exclaimed. "He'll find some snug place to creep into. And we
wouldn't be able to find him in Farmer Green's dooryard even if we tried
to."

"That's so!" Chirpy's companions shouted.

"Then there's no need of our freezing here any longer, waiting for that
wretched tailor, Mr. Frog!" said Freddie Firefly.

And somehow, Mr. Frog did not smile quite so widely over that speech.

Nevertheless, he was pleased, on the whole. And not waiting to watch
the shivering party leave the neighborhood, he set off at once toward
Farmer Green's house, making first for the river, which ran near the
farm buildings, because Mr. Frog did not like to travel by land.

Because the air was cool, the water felt all the warmer. And by the time
Mr. Frog had reached his journey's end he was almost overheated.
Besides, as he noticed, it was not so cold in Farmer Green's dooryard as
it had been by the creek.

He stopped, for a few moments, to cool himself in the watering-trough.
And then he hopped briskly on to the front yard.

To his great delight he had scarcely reached the clump of maple trees
when right above him he heard Kiddie Katydid's famous refrain.

"Good evening!" Mr. Frog called. "I've brought a little present for you,
all the way from the creek."

"How-dy do!" said Kiddie Katydid. "It's a cool night, isn't it?"

"You won't mind the weather when you put this on," Mr. Frog replied,
holding up the small garment he had made that afternoon.

"What's that?" Kiddie Katydid asked.

"An overcoat, fashioned expressly for you by the finest tailor in
Pleasant Valley!" said Mr. Frog very proudly.

"You're exceedingly kind, I'm sure," said Kiddie. And he was about to
jump down and slip into the coat when he noticed that Mr. Frog had an
extremely wide mouth.... Suppose, after slipping into the coat, he
should find himself slipping down the tailor's throat?

"Just hang the coat on a twig and I'll get into it a little later,"
Kiddie Katydid suggested.

"I see!" Mr. Frog cried. "That's your way of accepting a gift. And I
wouldn't dream of quarreling with you about that. So I'll hang the coat
right here and go back to the watering-trough to wet my feet. While I'm
gone you can try the coat on, and tell me how you like it when I come
back."

"I hope it's a green one!" said Kiddie Katydid somewhat anxiously. "For
if it isn't green, I couldn't wear it, you know. I always wear green.
It's my favorite color."

"Ah! Trust me not to make a mistake!" Mr. Frog chuckled happily. And
then he withdrew. But he could not help pausing for a moment, to look
back and watch, while Kiddie sprang down from his tree and took his new
coat from the twig on which the tailor had hung it.




XIII

KIDDIE KATYDID IS SHY


"Now--" said Mr. Frog, when he had returned from the
watering-trough--"now tell me, how do you like the overcoat I made for
you?"

And Kiddie Katydid, safe in his tree once more, and snugly buttoned in
Mr. Frog's gift, replied that it was the finest garment he had ever
owned in all his life.

"Good!" said Mr. Frog. "And I dare say you've had many overcoats in your
time, too."

Kiddie Katydid did not correct Mr. Frog's mistake. To tell the truth, he
had never before had an overcoat on his back.

"I've come here to-night to deliver an important message to you," Mr.
Frog went on. "And thinking the weather might be cooler than you liked,
I made you that fine coat so you could stay out here in your tree and
listen to what I have to tell you.... I hear--" he said--"I hear that
you're a musician."

"Yes!" said Kiddie Katydid--for he knew well enough that Freddie Firefly
could not have kept the secret.

"I hear that you're a fiddler," Mr. Frog added.

"Why, no! I've never played the fiddle!" Kiddie Katydid exclaimed. "I
don't know how to do that."

"Well, how do you know that you can't, if you've never tried?" Mr. Frog
retorted. "If you can play _Katy did, Katy did; she did, she did_, by
rubbing your wing covers together, there's no knowing what you could do
with a real fiddle and bow."

"That's true," Kiddie admitted. "I never thought of that."

"Well," said Mr. Frog, who appeared greatly pleased with himself,
"anyhow, I want you to join our singing society. Perhaps you've heard me
and my friends over in the swamp. Almost every night we have a singing
party there. And if you'll only agree to fiddle for us, while we sing, I
venture to say that we'll have Farmer Green getting up out of his bed to
listen to us."

Naturally, the invitation pleased Kiddie Katydid. But for all that, he
shook his head slowly.

"I'm afraid I'm too shy," he told Mr. Frog. "I like to stay hidden among
the leaves, where people can't see me."

"That'll be all right!" Mr. Frog assured him. "You can hide in some bush
near-by, where we can't look at you."

But still Kiddie Katydid wouldn't accept the invitation. Although Mr.
Frog teased and teased, all he would say was that he would think the
matter over.

"Promise me this, at least--" Mr. Frog finally said--"promise me that
you won't agree to make music for anybody else! Now that people know
you're musical, they'll be asking you to play in an orchestra, or a
band, or a fife-and-drum corps, or something. But I've invited you
first, and if you oblige anybody it ought to be me--especially after
I've given you that beautiful warm overcoat." The tailor looked upwards
into the tree so beseechingly that Kiddie Katydid hadn't the heart to
refuse his request.

"I'll promise that," he said.

"Hurrah!" cried Mr. Frog, opening his mouth so widely that Kiddie
Katydid couldn't help shuddering at the sight.

And then Mr. Frog leaped into the air three times. And each time that he
leaped, he struck his heels together three times, just to show how happy
he was.

Then, with a hearty "Good night!" he turned away and went skipping off.

And Kiddie Katydid, making his curious music in the top of the maple
tree, kept thinking that the tailor was one of the oddest chaps he had
ever seen.

He did wish, too, that Mr. Frog had a smaller mouth.




XIV

KIDDIE KEEPS HIS PROMISE


Old Mr. Crow flew into a terrible rage when he found, the next morning,
that his committee had not called on Kiddie Katydid during the night.
And when Chirpy Cricket told him that the weather was too cold for
anybody to stay out late, Mr. Crow said "Nonsense! What about Mr. Frog?"

That was a hard question to answer. And Chirpy Cricket was so afraid of
angry Mr. Crow that he promptly hid himself among the roots of a clump
of grass.

Now, the fact that Mr. Frog had been away from his shop the night before
set Mr. Crow to worrying.

"That slippery tailor has been up to some mischief," Mr. Crow declared.
"And if he has played a trick on me I'll never hear the last of it."

The old gentleman was so disturbed that he quite lost his appetite
during the rest of the day. And he moped and groaned about, hoping for
the best, but fearing the worst. One thing that made him especially
uneasy was the fact that when he called on Mr. Frog he found the tailor
in a gayer mood than he had ever known him to be in.

Mr. Frog bounded about his shop like a rubber ball. And the worst of it
was, he _would_ sing, although Mr. Crow begged him, with tears in his
eyes, to stop.

"What's the matter?" Mr. Frog asked him. "Don't you like my voice? Or is
it the songs I sing? I've a new one that I'd like to sing for you. It's
about one of the Katydid family; and I'm sure you'll enjoy hearing it."

But Mr. Crow wouldn't stay there any longer. With a loud squawk of rage
he scurried away. He was sure, then, that Mr. Frog had tricked him.

That night Mr. Crow's committee called on Kiddie Katydid. It was a fine,
warm, moonlight night. And as they drew near Farmer Green's place they
could hear Kiddie's shrill music, even while they were still a quarter
of a mile away.

"He plays better than ever," said Freddie Firefly. "I wish Mr. Crow
could hear him." And they hurried on, believing that everything was
going to turn out all right, in the end.

"Mr. Crow will be sorry, to-morrow, that he scolded us," said Chirpy
Cricket.

But the committee met with a sad disappointment. When they invited
Kiddie Katydid to join the Pleasant Valley orchestra he told them that
he couldn't.

"Why not?" Freddie Firefly asked.

"I've promised somebody that I wouldn't," Kiddie said.

And though they pressed him for an explanation, he wouldn't give them
any. He wouldn't say another word.

It was a downcast company that left Farmer Green's front yard. And they
quarreled among themselves, too, before they parted. For there wasn't
one of them that was willing to tell Mr. Crow that Kiddie had declined
his invitation.

But they finally hit upon a plan that suited everybody. They agreed to
get Mr. Crow's cousin, Jasper Jay, to break the news gently to the old
gentleman.

It turned out that Jasper was delighted to undertake the task. He hoped
that Mr. Crow would fly into a passion when he heard the sad tale. And
Jasper was not disappointed. For old Mr. Crow was furious.

"It's the work of that sly rascal, Mr. Frog!" he squalled. "He must have
called on Kiddie Katydid and hoodwinked him somehow.... I'd like to know
what he said."

But Mr. Crow never found that out. So Kiddie Katydid had another secret,
which was known only to himself and Mr. Frog.

And Mr. Frog wouldn't tell anybody, because he preferred to tease Mr.
Crow.

And Kiddie Katydid wouldn't tell anybody, because he liked secrets. So
when people tried to pry into the affair, he just folded his wings
tightly over himself--and said nothing.




XV

BENJAMIN BAT'S PLAN


Of course, Kiddie Katydid was not always to be found in his favorite
nook among the trees in Farmer Green's front yard. Quite often he went
skipping about from tree to tree or from bush to bush, sometimes flying
and sometimes leaping. It really made little difference to him which
mode of travel he used. And he never stopped to think how lucky he was
to be able to move so spryly with the help of either his legs or his
wings. He took his good fortune as a matter of course.

There was Mr. Frog! He was a famous jumper; but he couldn't fly. And
there was Mr. Nighthawk! He was a skillful flier; but he couldn't jump.

Such thoughts, however, never entered Kiddie Katydid's head. He went
cheerfully about his business--which was _eating_, principally--and
jumped or flew as the mood seized him. Indeed, if it hadn't been for
that queer fellow, Benjamin Bat, probably Kiddie never would have
realized just what he could--or couldn't--do.

Since Benjamin was another night-prowler like himself, Kiddie Katydid
saw him often. It seemed to Kiddie that he could scarcely ever gaze at
the full moon without catching sight of Benjamin Bat's dusky shape
flitting jerkily across the great, round, yellow disk.

When Benjamin was astir in the neighborhood, Kiddie Katydid lay low--or
high--in his favorite tree-top. At least, he kept very still until the
night was nearly gone, to give Benjamin Bat plenty of time to satisfy
his hunger. For Kiddie found Benjamin Bat a much more agreeable
companion when he had eaten his fill. Early in the evening, soon after
he had waked up, Benjamin was positively ferocious. But the more he ate,
the pleasanter he grew. And by the time faint streaks of light began to
show in the east he could smile and crack a joke as easily as anybody
else.

Well, late one night--or early one morning--Kiddie Katydid and Benjamin
Bat were enjoying a chat in the tree-tops, when Benjamin put a new idea
into Kiddie's head.

"We ought to have some sports right here in Farmer Green's yard," he
suggested. "You're such a fine jumper that you could try your skill
against Mr. Frog. And you're such a fine flier that you and Freddie
Firefly ought to have a race.... I'd suggest--" he added--"I'd suggest
that the sports take place after dark, almost any evening."

But Kiddie Katydid spoke up quickly and said that he wouldn't care to
join in the fun until the night was almost gone. He said he was sure he
could jump and fly better at that time. And that was quite true, because
he knew that if Mr. Bat swallowed him early in the evening he wouldn't
be able to take any part in the sports.

"Very well, then!" Benjamin Bat replied. "But it will be the worst
possible time for me."

"What do you mean?" Kiddie Katydid inquired. "Do you expect to enter any
of the contests?"

"Oh, yes!" said Benjamin. "I'm going to hang by my heels from the limb
of a tree. And since I'm never so heavy early in the evening, before
I've had a chance to eat much, I'd prefer to have the sports begin soon
after dark."

But Kiddie Katydid said that there was no doubt Benjamin Bat would win
in the sport of hanging head downward by his heels. And he told Benjamin
not to worry.




XVI

A NOISY CROWD


When the night of the races and other sports finally came, a great crowd
began to gather about Farmer Green's place soon after dark. Although
Benjamin Bat had told people that the fun wasn't going to begin until
almost morning, they were all so excited that they couldn't wait for the
night to pass.

They lingered around the dooryard and talked so loudly that they
actually disturbed the household. Farmer Green was even tempted to get
up and shut his window, he found it so hard to go to sleep.

The noisiest of all the gathering was Mr. Frog, the tailor, who lived
over by the creek.

He had a great deal to say about everything; and it soon became plain to
everyone that he was trying to manage the whole affair.

Mr. Frog objected to every arrangement that Benjamin Bat had made. When
he learned that he was expected to enter a jumping contest with Kiddie
Katydid he exclaimed that he and Kiddie were such good friends that he
hated the thought of trying to beat Kiddie at jumping.

"Kiddie might feel bad," said Mr. Frog. "People might laugh at him
because I won."

"Don't you worry about me!" Kiddie Katydid called out.

"Where are you?" asked Mr. Frog, looking all around. "I can hear you,
but I can't see you."

But Kiddie Katydid refused to show himself.

He preferred, for the time being, to remain safely hidden among the
leaves, where he could listen to what people said--and talk to them when
he wanted to.

"Wouldn't you prefer some other sort of contest?" Mr. Frog then asked
him. "Now, there's swimming! We could swim in the watering-trough, or
the duck pond. And if I beat you, you could stick your head under water,
so you wouldn't hear what people said. Don't you think that's a good
idea?"

"Goodness, no!" cried Kiddie. "I'd drown myself in no time."

"Dear me!" said Mr. Frog. "I never thought of that."

And then everybody laughed so loudly at him that he hurried off to the
watering-trough to dive under water, and stay there until he was sure
that his remarks had been forgotten.

Meanwhile Benjamin Bat was worrying. He couldn't find anybody who was
willing to try the sport of hanging head downward by his heels. He asked
Kiddie Katydid; and Kiddie declined flatly to do any such thing.

Now, since Benjamin had not yet dined, he was very short-tempered. And
he grew angry at once.

"What's the matter?" he sneered. "Don't you know how to do an easy trick
like that? If I could see you--" he declared, peering among the maple
leaves--"if I could see you I'd show you how it feels to hang beneath a
limb."

Kiddie Katydid said no word in reply. He knew well enough what Benjamin
Bat meant. Benjamin wanted to eat him! And he wished that Benjamin would
go away and get a good meal somewhere before he came back again.




XVII

KITTY DID!


As the hours sped by and the moon at last crossed the sky and dropped
out of sight, Kiddie Katydid saw that there was going to be trouble.

He was worried about Benjamin Bat. Early in the evening Benjamin had
begun to abuse Mr. Frog. And he was so busy doing that that he wouldn't
take the time to go away and snatch even a bite to eat.

Naturally, Benjamin's temper grew worse as the night lengthened. And
Kiddie Katydid had to admit to himself that he would be most unwise if
he did any jumping or flying just then. For Benjamin Bat was in so
fierce a humor that he was ready to snap at anybody who was smaller than
he was. All the tiny flying folk gave him a wide berth. And it began to
look as if he were going to spoil the night's fun.

But all the while Mr. Frog never once lost his temper. Even when
Benjamin Bat called him a long-legged, flat-headed, paddle-footed
meddler, Mr. Frog only smiled and turned a few somersaults backward.

"What's the matter with you?" Benjamin Bat asked him at last. "Can't you
speak?"

"Certainly! Certainly!" Mr. Frog said then. "I've been trying to think
of some way to prevent so much quarreling. It hardly seems fair to
Kiddie Katydid--this uproar right in his dooryard. And since you are the
one that's making the greatest disturbance, I'd suggest that you go
away and leave us to enjoy the rest of the night in peace."

"I'll do nothing of the kind!" Benjamin Bat screamed. "This is _my_
party. I thought of it in the first place. And I'm going to stay here
until dawn."

"Very well! Then the rest of us will leave at once," Mr. Frog told him.
And calling good-by to all his friends, Mr. Frog flopped himself briskly
away.

The smaller folk, too, vanished as if by magic. Though Benjamin Bat
watched sharply, he didn't even see Freddie Firefly when he slipped
away.

"That's strange!" thought Benjamin. "He must have put out his light, to
fool me. But I don't care, because Kiddie Katydid is hidden somewhere in
this tree. And I'm going to find him--for I'm terribly hungry."

So Benjamin began flying in and out among the maple branches. Nobody but
he could have twisted and turned in such a helter-skelter fashion. It
made Kiddie Katydid almost dizzy just to watch him. But Kiddie didn't
take his eyes off Benjamin, because he intended to jump--and jump fast
and far--in case Benjamin should spy him.

Now, although the Bat family was able to see in the dark as well as
Farmer Green's cat could, Benjamin failed to find Kiddie Katydid
anywhere. Crouching motionless upon a leaf, and dressed all in green,
Kiddie Katydid was almost invisible. But if he had moved the least bit,
Benjamin Bat would have found him out.

Looking only for a tiny green figure among the green leaves, Benjamin
Bat paid no attention to the grayish branches of the tree. He was really
strangely careless. Quite unsuspected by him, while he was wrangling
with Mr. Frog, the cat had crept out of the woodshed and stolen softly
into that very tree, where she lay motionless along a limb. She had come
out upon an early morning hunt for birds.

She was a fierce old cat. There was nothing, almost, that she wasn't
ready and willing to fight. Even old dog Spot had learned to shun her.
And now she waited patiently until Benjamin Bat should come within reach
of her quick paws.

That stupid, blundering fellow bumped squarely into her at last. And how
he escaped is still a mystery. The old cat always claimed that when she
found Benjamin wasn't a bird she was so surprised that she let him go.
And as for Benjamin himself, he never would discuss his adventure with
anybody. Kiddie Katydid was the only other one who saw what happened.
But he was so frightened at the time that he only knew that Benjamin Bat
tore away toward the swamp as if a thousand cats were following him. And
people do say that for some time afterward, Kiddie Katydid shrilled a
slightly different ditty. It was _Kitty did, Kitty did; she did, she
did_!

But when Mr. Frog mentioned that news, with a laugh, to Benjamin Bat,
over in the swamp, Benjamin only said, "Stuff and nonsense!"

Yet he looked most uncomfortable.




XVIII

THE TWO GRASSHOPPERS


Kiddie Katydid had a neighbor who was a good deal like him. Indeed, a
careless person had to look sharply to discover much difference between
them. But there was a difference. There was, especially, a certain way
in which one could always tell them apart. One had only to take the
trouble to look at their horns--or feelers. For Kiddie Katydid had horns
as long--or longer--than he was. But his neighbor, who was known as
Leaper the Locust, wore his horns quite short.

Although they saw each other often, Kiddie and this neighbor of his were
not on the best of terms. The trouble was simply this: they couldn't
agree on the question of horns. Whenever they met they were sure to
have a most unpleasant dispute before they parted.

Really, their quarrels were as bad as those that Jimmy Rabbit and Frisky
Squirrel once had over the matter of tails. And many of the field folk
said it was a shame that the Grasshoppers' trouble couldn't be settled
somehow.

Strange as it may seem, that remark always made Leaper the Locust
terribly angry. And it enraged Kiddie Katydid as did nothing else.

The difficulty was that the field people--as well as Farmer Green's
whole family--had fallen into the lazy habit of calling those two by the
same name. They spoke of Kiddie Katydid as "the Long-horned
Grasshopper," while they termed his neighbor "the Short-horned
Grasshopper."

[Illustration: Kiddie Faced Leaper the Locust

(_Page 90_)]

"It's bad enough to look somewhat like Leaper the Locust, without
being tagged with the name of Grasshopper, along with him," Kiddie
Katydid spluttered.

"Honestly, I'm tempted to move away from this neighborhood," Leaper the
Locust began to tell everyone he met. "If that chap would only trim his
horns to the proper length I wouldn't mind it so much. But he's actually
proud of them. He's always waving them over his head, so people will
notice them."

They both declared--Kiddie Katydid and Leaper the Locust--that they
couldn't abide the name "Grasshopper." And they took pains to warn
people in the neighborhood that they wouldn't answer to that name, no
matter how loudly anyone might shout it at them.

After that a few of their neighbors took great delight in crying
"Grasshopper! Grasshopper!" whenever one of the two happened to be
within hearing. But no matter which of them it might be--whether Leaper
the Locust or Kiddie Katydid--he pretended not to hear, and went right
on eating.

But at last something happened that made both those jumpy gentlemen
change their minds. From not wanting to be called Grasshoppers, they
decided suddenly that they liked the name. And each claimed that the
other had no right to it.

This odd state of affairs arose when they learned that a stranger had
come into the valley bearing a message marked "For Mr. Grasshopper."

"That's for me!" Kiddie Katydid cried, as soon as he heard the news.

"You're mistaken!" Leaper the Locust snapped. "The message is clearly
intended for me. And I shan't let anybody else open it."




XIX

A QUARREL


Kiddie Katydid and Leaper the Locust quarreled so loudly that they soon
drew a crowd around them.

"That message for 'Mr. Grasshopper' is certainly meant for me," Kiddie
insisted. "You know yourself how you have objected to being called by
the name of 'Grasshopper.' Why, only last night you refused to stop when
Freddie Firefly shouted it after you."

"And you--" cried Leaper the Locust--"you paid no attention when Chirpy
Cricket went up to you just as the moon rose this evening and said,
'How-dy do, Mr. Grasshopper!' right in your ear. You have no right to
open the message. And I promise you that I shall make trouble for you if
you don't mind your own affairs."

"Well, well--what's all this row about, anyhow?" asked a strange voice.
It was a newcomer in Pleasant Valley who had just spoken. He elbowed his
way briskly through the throng until he reached the center of it, where
Kiddie and Leaper the Locust faced each other angrily. People noticed
that the stranger looked as if he had travelled a long distance. And he
had a mail-pouch slung over his back. Furthermore, he was enough like
Kiddie and Leaper to be a cousin of either one of them.

A person couldn't see his horns, on account of the hat that he wore.

When this traveller asked about the dispute, everybody hastened to
explain the quarrel to him.

He listened carefully, and when he had heard the whole story he said:

"This message--do you know where it is? Do you know who has it now?"

"No!" Leaper the Locust cried, while Kiddie Katydid echoed the word.

"Ah! I thought not!" said the stranger, "I thought not, because I have
it in this mail-bag. And now I must confess that I'm puzzled myself; for
I don't know which one it's intended for." And he pulled off his hat and
began fanning himself with it.

It was perfectly plain to everyone that he was sadly perplexed.

Then Leaper the Locust gave a great shout.

"You're a Short-horn!" he exclaimed. "It can't be that you would have a
message for a person with horns like _his_!" He pointed a scornful
finger at poor Kiddie Katydid.

One glance at the stranger's head--now that he had removed his hat--told
everybody that Leaper the Locust was not mistaken.

The stranger's horns _were_ short. There was no denying that fact.

"I believe you must be the Mr. Grasshopper I'm looking for," said the
stranger.

Then he put his hand inside his mail-pouch and pulled out a letter.

Leaper the Locust made a sudden jump for the message. But he was so
eager that he sprang too far. He sailed far over the stranger's head and
landed some distance away.

"Hullo! He doesn't want it!" said the stranger. "It must be for _you_!"
And he shoved the message into Kiddie Katydid's willing hands.

Almost immediately Leaper the Locust jumped back again.

But of course he was too late.




XX

THE STRANGER'S MESSAGE


Leaper the Locust was a rude fellow. He actually tried to snatch the
message out of Kiddie Katydid's hands. But the stranger promptly bowled
him over and told him sternly to be off.

Leaper did not dare disobey. So he hurried away. But after a few moments
he came sailing back again and hung on the outskirts of the crowd, to
see what was going on.

He soon discovered that there was some difficulty. Kiddie Katydid had
torn open the message; and now he turned it over and over, wondering
what it said--for to tell the truth, he couldn't read a single word.

"Ah!" the stranger remarked presently. "I see what your trouble is. You
haven't your spectacles on!"

He was a polite person--that stranger. He knew better than to suggest
that a body didn't know his letters!

"Let me help you!" he continued. And taking the message from Kiddie
Katydid, he held it upside down and began reciting in a sing-song voice:

        Dear Mr. Grasshopper,
              in Pleasant Valley----

        Though you do not know me, I am a distant
        cousin of yours; and I am now on my way to your
        neighborhood, with my family. Not being
        acquainted in your part of the country, I am
        sending you this message with the hope that
        you will be ready to welcome us when we arrive.
        _Please see that there's a plenty to eat!_

"That's odd!" Kiddie Katydid exclaimed, after the stranger had finished.
"Won't you please read that once more? I want to be sure that I
understand it."

Thereupon the travel-worn messenger repeated the contents of the letter.
And this time he held it with the back towards him, so that he couldn't
see the writing at all. Like Kiddie Katydid, he didn't know how to read
a word. But luckily he had learned the message by heart before starting
on his journey.

"What's my cousin's name?" Kiddie Katydid asked him abruptly. "Hasn't he
signed the message?"

"I'm afraid he forgot to do that," the stranger muttered. "No doubt he
wants to surprise you," he added, as he handed the letter back to
Kiddie.

"This cousin of mine--is he a Long-horn or a Short-horn?" Kiddie Katydid
inquired.

At that question the stranger shifted uneasily from one foot to another.
And since he had six feet, he looked for a moment as if he were engaged
in a queer sort of dance.

"I should say--" he said at last--"I should say his horns were about
_medium_."

Kiddie Katydid stared at the fellow very hard.

"I believe you know more than you're willing to tell!" he suddenly
cried. And then he quickly shoved the letter inside the stranger's
mail-pouch. "That's not for me, after all!" he declared. "Unless I'm
greatly mistaken, the person that sent this letter is a Short-horn, the
same as you. And I want nothing to do with him!"

"Where's that other fellow that was clamoring for the message?" the
stranger asked. And spying Leaper the Locust on the edge of the crowd,
he sprang upon him, collared him, and explained that there had been a
mistake.

"The message is for you," he announced.

"But I don't want it now!" Leaper the Locust shouted. "I've heard it
twice already; and I don't like it in the least!"




XXI

LEAPER THE LOCUST IS WORRIED


Kiddie Katydid looked on happily while Leaper the Locust struggled to
free himself from the clutches of the messenger. But Leaper was no match
for the stranger. In the end he had to accept the message as his own.

"Now," said the stranger, "your cousin and his family will reach here by
to-morrow at the latest. So you'd better be making arrangements to
welcome him.

"Remember! Have plenty of food ready! I'll warn you now that if your
cousin's family have to go hungry they'll be pretty angry with you."

"I don't believe I need to worry," Leaper the Locust remarked
carelessly. "If they don't like what I have they can go without, for all
I care."

Though the stranger said nothing in reply to that, he glared at Leaper
in a threatening fashion which haunted him all the rest of the night.

"I wish I had never heard of this horrid message!" he exclaimed at last.
"I wish I had never laid claim to it. It's going to cause me trouble, I
know!"

The more he worried over the visit of his unknown cousin, the more
Leaper the Locust wished he were safely rid of the whole affair.

"I know what I'll do!" he cried at last. "I'll disguise myself. I'll
make my horns so long that people will think I'm somebody else."

So he set to work. And biting off some slender grasses, he bound them
to his stubby horns with threads from a spider's web which he found in
the pasture.

Then he looked at himself in a pool.

"I'm a Long-horn now!" he exclaimed. And he was greatly pleased at the
sight of himself--he who had once scoffed at Kiddie Katydid's horns and
advised him to have them trimmed.

Meanwhile the strange messenger had disappeared. It was said that he had
gone to meet the other travellers and guide them to their cousin, Leaper
the Locust.

And there was great excitement throughout Pleasant Valley. A good many
of the field people stopped at Farmer Green's dooryard and told Kiddie
Katydid that they thought he had made a mistake.

"You might have had the honor of receiving the guests," they said.

"No, thank you!" he replied to all such remarks. "I'm willing enough to
let Leaper the Locust do the honors. And unless I'm much mistaken, he's
trembling in his shoes this very moment."

Then the field people would shake their heads and say that they didn't
understand. Wasn't everybody _glad_ to have company once in a while? And
wouldn't it be a _pleasure_ to talk with strangers who came from some
far-off place, and ask them how the crops were where they lived, and
what the weather was?

But Kiddie Katydid only said mysteriously, "Wait a bit! And if you want
_strangers_ to talk to, there'll soon be plenty of them in this
neighborhood, if I'm not mistaken."

Well, Kiddie's neighbors couldn't imagine what he meant. They made a
good many guesses. But there was always somebody to point out some flaw
and upset every calculation. So at last everybody stopped guessing and
admitted that he had no idea as to what Kiddie Katydid had in mind. It
was just another one of his secrets. And people might as well wait
patiently to see what happened. Even Solomon Owl agreed to that. "Time
will tell!" he said with a wise nod of his head.




XXII

THE SHORT-HORNS ARRIVE


In at least one respect, the short-horned messenger had told the truth.
Before twenty-four hours had gone by, the fellow returned to Farmer
Green's dooryard; and with him came a great, fat person who belonged
without question to the Locust family.

Nobody could call his horns long. Nor could anyone call them medium.
They were short; and no one in his right mind would deny it.

"Where's that fellow you call Leaper?" the messenger asked Chirpy
Cricket. "Here's his cousin! And the rest of the family will be
dropping down here in just a few minutes."

Chirpy Cricket replied that he hadn't seen Leaper the Locust since the
night before.

"That's strange!" the messenger remarked, turning to his fat companion.
"He was to be here to welcome you."

"Ah! I see him now! He's right here in this tree!" exclaimed the fat
one. And he half-jumped, half-flew into Kiddie Katydid's favorite tree.

"You're wrong!" said Kiddie Katydid. "I'm a Long-horn--and you can't
claim to be a cousin of mine."

"My mistake! My mistake!" said the fat gentleman hastily. And he left
even more suddenly than he had come.

"I hope your friend Leaper hasn't given us the slip," he remarked to the
messenger as he joined him again.

"Never fear! If he fails us we'll find him and punish him as he
deserves," said the messenger with a savage frown.

And Kiddie Katydid, looking down from his tree-top, was gladder than
ever that he had escaped this terrible trouble that had come to Leaper
the Locust.

Soon a patter, patter, patter made itself heard among the leaves.

"My goodness! Can that be rain?" Freddie Firefly exclaimed. "The moon is
shining. And I don't see a cloud in the sky."

Even as he spoke the strange sound grew louder.

"Can it be hailing?" Freddie asked Kiddie Katydid anxiously.

"Oh, no!" Kiddie told him. "What you hear is nothing but Leaper the
Locust's cousin's family. They're just beginning to arrive."

Freddie Firefly could scarcely believe his own ears.

"Why, there must be dozens of them!" he cried.

"More than that!" Kiddie Katydid replied.

"Hundreds, then!"

"Still more!" Kiddie Katydid said.

"Well, _thousands_, then!" cried Freddie Firefly. "You don't mean to say
there are more of 'em than that?"

"There are tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands," Kiddie Katydid
declared solemnly. "They'll eat everything they can find. And we shall
be lucky if they leave enough for the rest of us to live on, after they
pass on."

"How did you learn all this?" Freddie Firefly wanted to know.

"That's another of my secrets," said Kiddie Katydid.

So Freddie Firefly went off to hunt for Leaper the Locust. He knew now
why Leaper had struggled to escape from that mysterious messenger with
the curious message. And Freddie intended to ask Leaper a good many
questions about his cousins.

But he couldn't find Leaper anywhere. He searched for him high and low,
and far and wide. But nobody knew where Leaper was.

"There are lots of Short-horns everywhere to-night," Benjamin Bat told
him. "I claim any one of them is just as good as another." And Benjamin
grinned horribly.

Freddie Firefly shuddered. It seemed to him that he had never passed
such a dreadful night before.

But Benjamin Bat was having the time of his life. He said that he hoped
the Short-horns would like Pleasant Valley so well that they would
decide to stay right there for the rest of their days. But, strange to
say, Benjamin made things as unpleasant as possible for the newcomers.
He _ate_ as many of them as he could, remarking that from such a horde a
few would scarcely be missed.




XXIII

THE BEST OF FRIENDS


In spite of his lengthened horns, Leaper the Locust hardly dared show
himself while his cousins remained in the neighborhood.

But when he did venture out, not one of the hungry horde paid the
slightest heed to him. They just ate and ate and ate. And Pleasant
Valley soon began to take on a brown, withered look, as if fall had
already come.

Kiddie Katydid soon saw that he would have to move, if Leaper's cousins
lingered there much longer. And he didn't like the thought of quitting
his home.

"I wouldn't mind going, if I could take Farmer Green's dooryard with
me," he remarked to a long-horned gentleman who stopped to talk with him
one evening. "But of course," Kiddie added with a smile, "that's out of
the question."

"I quite agree with you," said the other. "In fact, I'm ready to agree
to almost anything you say."

"These Short-horns are a terrible lot!" Kiddie Katydid observed.

"They are, indeed!" exclaimed the polite stranger. "I wish they'd finish
their visit here and leave us in peace."

"I never want to see another Short-horn as long as I live," Kiddie
Katydid declared.

"Nor I!" echoed the strange gentleman.

And Kiddie Katydid couldn't help thinking what a pleasant person the
long-horned stranger was and how gentle were his manners.

"I'd like to know your name!" he cried. "It's a long time since I have
met anybody so agreeable as you are."

The stranger drew nearer and lowered his voice.

"Don't you know me?" he asked.

Kiddie Katydid stared at him for a moment.

"No!" he said at length. "To be sure, you do have a familiar look, in a
way. But I must say I don't recognize you."

Then the stranger spoke in a whisper:

"They used to call me 'Leaper the Locust'!"

"Go 'way!" cried Kiddie Katydid. "_He_ was nothing but a Short-horned
Grasshopper. And anyone can see with half an eye that your horns are
fully as long as my own."

"They're not real horns," said the other sadly. "That is, they're real
only a part of the way."

And looking more closely, Kiddie Katydid saw that what he said was true.
It was, indeed, Leaper the Locust. And he was greatly changed in more
ways than one.

He had lost his old, quarrelsome air; and he had become very meek and
mild.

"Don't tell my cousins what I've done!" he begged Kiddie Katydid. "I
don't want them to know who I am."

Kiddie assured the poor fellow that he would not betray him. He was
sorry for Leaper the Locust.

"You'll be glad when your relations move on, won't you?" he said. "Then
you can take those bits of grass off your horns and be yourself again."

Leaper's answer almost took Kiddie Katydid's breath away, for it was a
most surprising statement.

"I'm never going to be a Short-horn again!" he declared. "I shall wear
my horns long to the end of my days."

He kept his word, too. And so earnestly did he try to be like Kiddie
Katydid in every way that he even attempted Kiddie's well known _Katy
did_ melody. But he never really succeeded at that. Anyone with an ear
for music could tell the difference at once.

Luckily the grasshopper horde soon swept on to new fields. And a few
warm rains, with sunshine sandwiched in between showers, soon turned the
countryside green again. It was really _Pleasant_ Valley once more. And
on fine autumn nights Kiddie Katydid's shrill music could be heard more
than ever near the farmhouse.

Leaper the Locust never could hear enough of it. He was always begging
Kiddie to repeat the odd ditty about the mysterious Katy--hoping,
perhaps, that sometime he might learn more about her.

But Kiddie Katydid guarded his secret too well.


THE END




        TUCK-ME-IN TALES

        (Trademark Registered)

        By ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

        AUTHOR OF THE
        SLEEPY-TIME TALES and SLUMBER-TOWN TALES

=Colored Wrapper and Text Illustrations Drawn by HARRY L. SMITH=

A delightful and unusual series of bird and insect stories for boys and
girls from three to eight years old, or thereabouts.


THE TALE OF JOLLY ROBIN

Jolly Robin spreads happiness everywhere with his merry song.


THE TALE OF OLD MR. CROW

A wise bird was Mr. Crow. He'd laugh when any one tried to catch him.


THE TALE OF SOLOMON OWL

Solomon Owl looked so solemn that many people thought he knew
everything.


THE TALE OF JASPER JAY

Jasper Jay was very mischievous. But many of his neighbors liked him.


THE TALE OF RUSTY WREN

Rusty Wren fought bravely to keep all strangers out of his house.


THE TALE OF DADDY LONG-LEGS

Daddy Long-Legs could point in all directions at once--with his
different legs.


THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID

He was a musical person and chanted all night during the autumn.


THE TALE OF BETSY BUTTERFLY

Betsy spent most of her time among the flowers.


THE TALE OF BUSTER BUMBLEBEE

Buster was clumsy and blundering, but was known far and wide.


THE TALE OF FREDDIE FIREFLY

Freddie had great sport dancing in the meadow and flashing his light.


THE TALE OF BOBBY BOBOLINK

Bobby had a wonderful voice and loved to sing.


THE TALE OF CHIRPY CRICKET

Chirpy loved to stroll about after dark and "chirp."


THE TALE OF MRS. LADYBUG

Mrs. Ladybug loved to find out what her neighbors were doing and to give
them advice.

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




        SLEEPY-TIME TALES

        (Trademark Registered.)

        By ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

        AUTHOR OF THE
        TUCK-ME-IN TALES and SLUMBER-TOWN TALES

=Colored Wrapper and Text Illustrations Drawn by HARRY L. SMITH=

This series of animal stories for children from three to eight years,
tells of the adventures of the four-footed creatures of our American
woods and fields in an amusing way, which delights small two-footed
human beings.

        THE TALE OF CUFFY BEAR
        THE TALE OF FRISKY SQUIRREL
        THE TALE OF TOMMY FOX
        THE TALE OF FATTY COON
        THE TALE OF BILLY WOODCHUCK
        THE TALE OF JIMMY RABBIT
        THE TALE OF PETER MINK
        THE TALE OF SANDY CHIPMUNK
        THE TALE OF BROWNIE BEAVER
        THE TALE OF PADDY MUSKRAT
        THE TALE OF FERDINAND FROG
        THE TALE OF DICKIE DEER MOUSE
        THE TALE OF TIMOTHY TURTLE
        THE TALE OF BENNY BADGER
        THE TALE OF MAJOR MONKEY
        THE TALE OF GRUMPY WEASEL
        THE TALE OF GRANDFATHER MOLE
        THE TALE OF MASTER MEADOW MOUSE

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




        THE MAKE-BELIEVE STORIES

        (Trademark Registered.)

        By LAURA LEE HOPE
        Author of THE BOBBSEY TWINS BOOKS, Etc.

Colored Wrappers and Illustrations by HARRY L. SMITH

In this fascinating line of books Miss Hope has the various toys come to
life "when nobody is looking" and she puts them through a series of
adventures as interesting as can possibly be imagined.


THE STORY OF A SAWDUST DOLL

How the toys held a party at the Toy Counter; how the Sawdust Doll was
taken to the home of a nice little girl, and what happened to her there.


THE STORY OF A WHITE ROCKING HORSE

He was a bold charger and a man purchased him for his son's birthday.
Once the Horse had to go to the Toy Hospital, and my! what sights he saw
there.


THE STORY OF A LAMB ON WHEELS

She was a dainty creature and a sailor bought her and took her to a
little girl's relative and she had a great time.


THE STORY OF A BOLD TIN SOLDIER

He was Captain of the Company and marched up and down in the store at
night. Then he went to live with a little boy and had the time of his
life.


THE STORY OF A CANDY RABBIT

He was continually in danger of losing his life by being eaten up. But
he had plenty of fun, and often saw his many friends from the Toy
Counter.


THE STORY OF A MONKEY ON A STICK

He was mighty lively and could do many tricks. The boy who owned him
gave a show, and many of the Monkey's friends were among the actors.


THE STORY OF A CALICO CLOWN

He was a truly comical chap and all the other toys loved him greatly.


THE STORY OF A NODDING DONKEY

He made happy the life of a little lame boy and did lots of other good
deeds.


THE STORY OF A CHINA CAT

The China Cat had many adventures, but enjoyed herself most of the time.


THE STORY OF A PLUSH BEAR

This fellow came from the North Pole, stopped for a while at the toy
store, and was then taken to the seashore by his little master.


THE STORY OF A STUFFED ELEPHANT

He was a wise looking animal and had a great variety of adventures.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Tuck Me In Tales: "legs" changed to "Legs" to match rest of usage. (Tale
of Daddy Long-Legs)

Page 71, "Bejamin" changed to "Benjamin" (queer fellow, Benjamin Bat)

Ad pages, TALE OF CHIRPY CRICKET: "Crirpy" changed to "Chirpy" (Chirpy
loved to)





End of Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Kiddie Katydid, by Arthur Scott Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF KIDDIE KATYDID ***

***** This file should be named 24608.txt or 24608.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/0/24608/

Produced by Joe Longo, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
