The Project Gutenberg EBook of Christmas Outside of Eden, by Coningsby Dawson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Christmas Outside of Eden

Author: Coningsby Dawson

Release Date: April 5, 2005 [EBook #15552]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS OUTSIDE OF EDEN ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





[Illustration: Christmas Outside of Eden--Book Cover]

[Illustration: There, seated in the entrance to the cave, the Man saw
the Woman but not the Woman as he had left her.]




Christmas Outside of Eden

BY

Coningsby Dawson

Author of "The Garden Without Walls," "Carry On," etc.

ILLUSTRATIONS BY

Eugene Francis Savage


  NEW YORK
  DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
  1922

       *       *       *       *       *


  Copyright, 1921,
  By DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, INC.
  Printed In U.S.A.


       *       *       *       *       *




ILLUSTRATIONS


There, seated in the entrance to the cave, the Man saw the Woman, but
not the Woman as he had left her.

God had given the Man and Woman no time to pack. He had marched them
beyond the walls and locked the golden gates of Eden against them
forever.

The Man yawned. "I am still tired. Fetch the horse, that he may carry me
back to my dwelling."

       *       *       *       *       *


CHRISTMAS OUTSIDE OF EDEN




I


This is the story the robins tell as they huddle beneath the holly on
the Eve of Christmas. They have told it every Christmas Eve since the
world started. They commenced telling it long before Christ was born,
for their memory goes further back than men's. The Christmas which they
celebrate began just outside of Eden, within sight of its gold-locked
doors.

The robins have only two stories: one for Christmas and one for Easter.
Their Easter story is quite different. It has to do with how they got
the splash of red upon their breasts. It was when God's son was hanging
on the cross. They wanted to do something to spare him. They were too
weak to pull out the nails from his feet and hands; so they tore their
little breasts in plucking the thorns one by one from the crown that had
been set upon his forehead. Since then God has allowed their breasts to
remain red as a remembrance of His gratitude.

But their Christmas story happened long before, when they weren't robin
red-breasts but only robins. It is a merry, tender sort of story.
They twitter it in a chuckling fashion to their children. If you prefer
to hear it first-hand, creep out to the nearest holly-bush on almost
any Christmas Eve when snow has made the night all pale and shadowy.
If the robins have chosen your holly-bush as their rendezvous and you
understand their language, you won't need to read what I have written.
Like all true stories, it is much better told than read. It's the story
of the first laugh that was ever heard in earth or heaven. To be enjoyed
properly it needs the chuckling twitter of the grown-up robins and the
squeaky interruptions of the baby birds asking questions. When they get
terrifically excited, they jig up and down on the holly-branches and the
frozen snow falls with a brittle clatter. Then the mother and father
birds say, "Hush!" quite suddenly. No one speaks for a full five
seconds. They huddle closer, listening and holding their breath. That's
how the story ought to be heard, after night-fall on Christmas Eve, when
behind darkened windows little boys and girls have gone to bed early,
having hung up their very biggest stockings. Of course I can't tell it
that way on paper, but I'll do my best to repeat the precise words in
which the robins tell it.




II


It was very long ago at the beginning of all wonders. Sun, moon and
stars were new; they wandered about in the clouds uncertainly, calling
to one another like ships in a fog. It was the same on earth; neither
trees, nor rivers, nor animals were quite sure why they had been created
or what was expected of them. They were terribly afraid of doing wrong
and they had good reason, for the Man and Woman had done wrong and had
been locked out of Eden.

That had happened in April, when the world was three months old. Up to
that time everything had gone very well. No one had known what fear was.
No one had guessed that anything existed outside the walls of Eden or
that there was such a thing as wrong-doing. Animals, trees and rivers
had lived together with the Man and the Woman in the high-walled garden
as a happy family. If they had wanted to know anything, they had asked
the Man; he had always given them answers, even though he had to invent
them. They had never dreamt of doubting him--not even the Woman. The
reason for this had been God.

Every afternoon God had come stepping down from the sky to walk with the
Man through the sun-spangled shadows of the grassy paths. They had heard
the kindly rumble of His voice like distant thunder and the little tones
of the Man as he asked his questions. At six o'clock regularly God had
shaken hands with the Man and climbed leisurely back up the sky-blue
stairs that led to Heaven. Because of this the Man had gained a
reputation among the animals for being wise. They had thought of him as
God's friend. He had given orders to everybody--even to the Woman; and
everyone had been proud to obey him.

It had been in April the great change had occurred. There had been all
kinds of rumours. The first that had been suspected had been when God
had failed to come for His customary walk; the next had been when He had
arrived with His face hidden in anger. The trees of Eden had bent and
clashed as if a strong wind were blowing. Everything living that was not
rooted, had run away to hide. Nevertheless, when God had called to the
Man, they had tiptoed nearer to listen. The trouble had seemed to be
about some fruit. God had told the Man that he must not pluck it; he had
not only plucked it, but had eaten of it. So had the Woman. It had
seemed a small matter to make such a fuss about. They had supposed that
God's anger would soon blow over and that everything would be again as
friendly as before.

[Illustration: God had given the Man and Woman no time to pack. He had
marched them beyond the walls and locked the golden gates of Eden
against them forever.]

And so everything might have been had it not been for the Man. Instead
of saying he was sorry, he had started to argue and blame the Woman. At
that God had refused to speak with him longer. He had ordered the Man
and Woman and all the animals to leave Eden immediately. He had given
them no time to pack. Lining them up like soldiers, He had numbered them
to make certain that none were missing and then, with the Man and Woman
leading, had marched them beyond the walls and locked the golden gates
of Eden against them forever.

Since then all had been privation and confusion. The animals, from
regarding the Man as their lord, had grown to despise him. They had
blamed him for their misfortunes. They had told him that it was his
fault that they had lost their happiness and that God walked the earth
no more. The woman had told him so most particularly. Of all the created
world only the dog and the robin had remained faithful to him. The dog
slept across his feet at night to keep them warm and the robin sang to
him each dawn that he should not lose courage.




III


Through the world's first summer things had not been so bad, though of
course the wilderness that grew outside of Eden was not so comfortable
as the garden they had lost. In the garden no one had needed to work:
food had grown on the trees to one's hand and, because it was so
sheltered, the weather had been always pleasant. It hadn't been
necessary to wear clothing; it hadn't been necessary to build houses,
for it had never rained. Birds hadn't troubled to make nests, nor
rabbits to dig warrens. Everybody had felt perfectly safe to sleep
out-of-doors, wherever he happened to find himself, without a thought
of protection.

Here in the wilderness it was different. There were no paths. The jungle
grew up tall and threatening. Thorns leant out to tear one's flesh. If
it hadn't been for the elephant uprooting trees in his fits of temper,
no one would have been able to travel anywhere. One by one the animals
slunk away and began to lead their own lives independently, making lairs
for themselves. Every day that went by they avoided the Man and Woman
more and more. At first they used to peep out of the thicket to jeer at
their helplessness; soon they learnt to disregard them as if they were
not there. From having believed himself to be the wisest of living
creatures the Man discovered himself to be the most incompetent. Often
and often he would creep to the gold-locked gates and peer between the
bars, hoping to see God walking there as formerly. But God walked no
more. As He had climbed back into Heaven, He had destroyed the sky-blue
stairs behind Him. There was no way in which the Man could reach Him to
ask His advice or pardon.

But it was the Woman who caused the Man most unhappiness. It wasn't that
she despised and blamed him. He'd grown used to that since leaving Eden.
Everybody, except the dog and the robin, despised and blamed him. The
Woman caused him unhappiness because she was unwell--really unwell; not
just an upset stomach or a headache. In Eden she had always been strong
and beautiful, like sunlight leaping on the smooth, green lawn--so white
and pink and darting. Her long gold hair had swayed about her like a
flame; her white arms had parted it as though she were a swimmer. Her
eyes had been shy and merry from dawn to dusk. She had been a darling;
never a cross word had she spoken. The furry creatures of the woods had
been her playmates and the birds had perched upon her shoulders to sing
their finest songs.

Now she was wan and thin as a withered branch. Like the elephant
uprooting trees, she often lost her temper. Sometimes she was sorry for
her crossness; more often she wasn't. When the Man offered her things to
eat, no matter what trouble he'd taken to get them, she'd say she wasn't
hungry. And yet he loved her none the less for her perverseness. He was
so afraid.... He couldn't have told you of what he was afraid, for
nobody had had time to die in the world as yet. He was filled with dread
lest, like God, she might vanish and walk the earth no more. So he
cudgelled his brains to find things to cure her. He invented wrong
remedies, just as in Eden he had invented wrong answers to the animals'
questions. He was never certain whether they would do her good or harm;
but he always assured her gravely that, if she'd only try them, she'd
feel instantly better. She never did; on the contrary she felt worse
and worse. Perhaps the wilderness was the cause. Perhaps it was the
forbidden fruit she had eaten. Perhaps it was a little of both, plus a
touch of Eden-sickness. She had never known an hour's ill-health up to
the moment when she had eaten the fruit and been turned out of the
garden. The poor Man was distracted. He didn't care what he did or whom
he robbed, if only he might hear her singing again and see her once more
smiling.

What he did wasn't tactful; it only made the animals hate him--all
except the dog and the robin--and brought new dangers about his head. It
was the month of October and nights were getting shivery. He had scraped
together fallen leaves to make a bed for her and had woven a covering of
withered grasses. In spite of this, from the setting of the sun till
long after its rising, all through the dark hours her teeth chattered.
She cried continually; every time she cried, out in the jungle the hyena
scoffed. The Man rarely got any rest until full day. All night he was
rubbing her back, her feet and hands in an effort to make her warm. As
a consequence he slept late and accomplished hardly any work. He didn't
even have time to notice how all the animals were building houses. The
Woman was so fretful that he never dared leave her for longer than an
hour. The poor thing was forever complaining that God might have made
her out of something better than a rib, if He was going to make her
at all.

It was a colder night than usual, when the Woman was crying very
bitterly and the hyena was doing more than his ordinary share of
scoffing, that the idea occurred to the Man. The hyena was scoffing
because he was comfortable; he was comfortable because of the heavy coat
that he wore. The Man determined to teach him a lesson by taking his
coat from him. It was another remedy; he hoped that if he clothed the
Woman with it, she might grow strong. Telling her that he wouldn't be
gone for long, he padded stealthily away, followed by the dog, and faded
out of sight among the shadows.

They found the hyena in an open space which the elephant had been
clearing the day before. He was seated on his hind legs, gazing up
at the moon with his fine warm coat all bristly, scoffing and scoffing.
He was far too busy with his ill-natured merriment to hear them coming.
In a flash the dog had him by the throat, holding him while the man
robbed him of his clothing. When they had stripped him of everything,
even of his bushy tail, they let him go and he fled naked, howling the
alarm through the forest. By the time they got back to the Woman all the
underbrush was stirring. From every part of the wilderness, in twos and
threes, the animals were coming together. The night was alive with their
glowing eyes; the leaves trembled with their savage muttering.

"Be quick," whispered the Man. "Put this on."

She dried her tears as she felt the warmth of the fur. "It's comfy," she
sobbed. "It fits exactly." And then, "Oh, Man, I'm frightened. What have
you done? You gave me a present once before."

The Man was making a club out of a tree. As he stripped it of its
branches, he answered boastfully, "It was I and the dog; we did it
together. You were cold, so we stole the hyena's coat from him. All the
animals are angry. They know that we shall do again what we have done
once. They feel safe no longer. They say it must be stopped. They want
to get back the hyena's coat from us."

"And they will, oh, my master," the dog interrupted, "unless we protect
ourselves. Through the wilderness, not many miles from here, a limestone
ridge rises above the forest. In the limestone ridge there is a cave. If
we can win our way to it before our enemies come together, we can stand
in the entrance and guard the Woman."

So the dog ran ahead growling with such fierceness that everything fled
from his path. Behind him came the Man carrying the Woman very closely
because he loved her, and trailing his tremendous club. By dawn, before
their enemies could guess their purpose, they had gained the cave. By
the time the animals had held their conference and decreed that the Man
and the dog must be punished, they had escaped and were ready to defy
all comers.




IV


From that moment a new and exciting kind of life started. Not an hour
out of the twenty-four was free from anxiety. Always, whether it was
day or night, the Man and the dog had to take turns at guarding the
entrance. The Man gathered piles of stones and learnt how to throw them
unerringly. The dog trusted to his teeth and the fear which his bark
inspired. The animals were furiously determined; they never ceased from
attempting to surprise them. Quite often they would have succeeded, had
it not been for the robin, who hiding in the bushes, overheard their
strategies and flew back to the Man in time with warnings.

The cave was well chosen. It was approached by a steep and narrow path.
Only one enemy could attack at once, so the defenders were always able
to roll down bowlders on him before he gained a footing. That was how
they treated the lion, when he came thrashing his tail and roaring on
the first morning to make them prisoners. They gave a rock a big shove
and knocked him over like a ninepin. He was so hurt in his feelings that
he sulked in bed for a week; for many more weeks he was easily tired.
Seeing that he was the King of the Beasts and the President of their
Conference, this made the animals the more indignant and the more
determined that the Man and the dog must be punished. The next to
attempt their capture were the elephant and the rhinoceros. They boasted
that they weren't afraid of rocks; nevertheless they came together to
back up each other's courage. Half way up the slope they stuck. They
were too heavy for so steep a path. The ground crumbled from under them,
the dog worried them, the Man struck them, and away they went, bumping
down the hill, rolling over and over. They never stopped till they had
reached the bottom, where they lay on their backs with their feet in the
air, grunting and panting like a pair of upturned locomotives.

At first the Man and the dog regarded the enmity they had aroused in the
light of a huge joke; they got a good deal of fun out of fighting. But
the sporting side of the affair ceased to appeal to them when they were
compelled to recognize the seriousness of their predicament. They were
absolutely cut off from supplies at a season when food was running
short. They had to sneak out at night at the risk of capture to get
anything to eat at all. They had a sick woman on their hands who cried
not for food, but for delicacies. Instead of gathering strength, she
grew steadily weaker. And then there was the matter of sleep; it was as
scarce as food. They hardly snatched a wink of it. When they weren't on
guard or fighting, they were soothing her fretfulness, foraging for her
or thinking up some new method of keeping her warm. It was damp in the
cave; sunlight rarely tiptoed farther than the entrance. It didn't take
them long to discover that the hyena's coat had been as dearly purchased
as the forbidden fruit that had lost them the garden. Peace, which they
might have concluded in the early days, was now entirely out of the
question. Even an offer to return the hyena's coat wouldn't have made
any impression. They had carried hostilities too far; there wasn't an
animal whom they had not wounded and who wasn't mad with them clean
through from the point of his nose to the tip of his tail. Often and
often, standing in the entrance to his cave, the Man would gaze
longingly across the bronzy roof of the forest to the distant shining of
the padlocked gates of Eden. He was farther than ever from the garden
now with its tranquil blessedness. If only he hadn't learnt to steal!
Stealing had been the cause of his downfall--first the forbidden fruit
and then the hyena's coat. If he had been less enterprising and more
obedient, he would still have been the friend of God. After a wakeful
night he crept to the entrance to discover that the worst thing of all
had happened.

"A worse thing!" you exclaim. "I thought you were going to tell us a
cheerful Christmas story."

And so I am: but all the unfortunate part comes first--that's the way
the robins tell it. If you'll be patient and read on, you'll find this
is the very cheerfullest story that was ever told in earth or heaven.
You may not have noticed that we've not yet come to the first laugh. The
Woman has smiled and the hyena has scoffed; but no one has laughed. It's
when we come to the first laugh that the happiness commences.




V


The worst thing of all that the Man discovered when he crept to the
cave-entrance after a wakeful night, was this: with a terrible stealthy
silence snow was drifting down so that even the distant shining of the
gates of Eden was blotted out. It was frightening; snow had never fallen
in the world before. If it had, the Man had not seen it. Within the
walls of the garden summer had been perpetual. He stood there staring
out forlornly at the misty sea of shifting whiteness. It chilled him to
the bone. It seemed to him that the pillars of the sky had collapsed and
the dust of the moon and stars was falling. Soon everything would be
buried and the world itself would be no more. He looked at the calendar
which he had scratched upon the wall. It was the twenty-fourth day of
December. He wondered whether God knew what was happening and whether
He had planned it. Then he gave up wondering, for behind him, from the
blackness of the cave, the Woman called.

"Oh, Man," she cried, "I cannot bear this any longer!"

He groped his way to her and raised her in his arms so that her head lay
on his breast. Even in the darkness he could see the glow of her hair,
like the shadow of flame growing fainter and fainter.

"My Woman," he whispered, "what can I do for you?" And again he
whispered, "What can I do for you?"

She pressed her face close to his before she answered, petting him the
way she had been used to do in Eden. "Do for me? Nothing. You've tried
with your remedies--you've tried so hard. Poor you! If we could only
find God----"

"If we could," the Man said, "but----"

And then they both grew silent, for how could they find God when He had
climbed back to Heaven, destroying the sky-blue stairs behind Him?

"Perhaps, He still walks in Eden." It was the Woman who had spoken. "If
you were to go and watch through the bars of Eden till He comes and were
to call to Him--if you were to tell Him that I cannot bear it any longer
and that we're sorry, so sorry--that we did it in our ignorance----"
Without ending what she was saying, she fell to sobbing.

He didn't dare to tell her that the moon and stars were falling and that
the gates of Eden were blotted out. From where she lay in the blackness
of the cave she could see nothing; she was too weak even to crawl to the
entrance. As he did his best to comfort her, "If we could only again
find God----" she kept whispering.

So at last, having ordered the dog to guard her, the Man departed on his
hopeless errand. It was brave of him. He believed that in trying to find
God, he would get so lost that he would never be able to retrace his
footsteps. Before he went he kissed the Woman tenderly, begging
forgiveness for all the misery he had caused her.

"But I caused it, too," she confessed. "It wasn't your rib that was to
blame. It wasn't you at all. I wanted the fruit and we ate it together."

It was the first time she had acknowledged it; until then she had
insisted that the fault was his solely. So in the moment of farewell she
restored to him one little ray of the great, lost sun of flaming
happiness.




VI


The air was so thick with falling snow that he was well-nigh stifled.
His eyes were blinded as though they were padded with cottonwool. The
flakes brushed against his cheeks like live things. At his sixth step
from the entrance he had lost his direction. His feet commenced to
slide; against his will he went avalanching and cavorting down the path.

At the bottom he lay panting for a time; then, because he was cold he
picked himself up and went blundering on, not in the least knowing where
he was going. Bushes clutched at his feet. Trees slashed across his
face. He was inclined to weep, but checked himself, remembering that on
one of those sunny afternoon walks God had told him that to cry wasn't
manly. "And I must find God. I must find God," he kept repeating to
himself. The only way he knew of finding God was by pressing forward.
God had once confessed to him, "The reason I am God is because I show
courage."

"Then I'll show courage, too," he thought.

Presently he found himself in the heart of the forest and began to
breathe more freely. Avenues of giant trees stretched before him, which
criss-crossed one another and faded into the gloom of twilit, colonnaded
tunnels. He could almost feel the gnarled trunks bracing themselves
and the crooked branches linking arms to bear up the weight of the
down-poured roof of whiteness. As his eyes grew accustomed to the
dimness, he saw the animals strewn flat among fallen leaves, their noses
pressed between their paws, shivering with terror. Overhead birds and
monkeys sat in rows, squeezed side by side for companionship, weeping
silently. Of a sudden he regained his majesty, being filled with
contempt for their cowardice. "For I am Man," he reminded himself, "so
like to God that I could easily be mistaken for Him--and these are the
creatures who dared to talk of punishing me."

Throwing out his chest, he strode valiantly past them, utterly ignoring
their presence.

From behind him a voice called whimperingly. It was the lion's, the King
of Beasts, squeaky and falsetto with panic. "Master, thou art wise. What
has happened? Tell us."

Had he known how, the Man would have laughed. But the laugh comes later
in the story. Without turning his head, still going away from them he
answered. "It is a punishment for what thou and thy people have done to
me and my Woman, oh, lion."

He had made the answer up on the spur of the moment; he knew no more
than they did what had happened. But he loved inventing and was never
so content as when he was pretending that he was God.

Immediately they forgot the wrong answers he had given them and how he
had deceived them in the past. The leaves rustled as they lifted up
their heads from between their paws. Their voices trembled as one when
they besought him, "Master, stay with us. We are in terror. Make it
leave off."

Turning slowly, he blinked at them through the dimness. Folding his
arms, he regarded them thoughtfully with his legs wide apart. He did it
as he supposed God might have done it. He spoke at last. "It's only just
begun. Why should I make it leave off?"

"Because thou art strong and we are repentant."

Their manner was so humble and adoring that he felt sorry for them.
They had begged his pardon in the same words that he had intended to
beg God's. And then he was just--the only just creature that God had
created. In his heart he knew that he had merited their revenge--there
was scarcely one of them at whom he had not hurled his rocks. He came
back walking in stately fashion till he stood fearlessly in the centre
of them. Looking up through the burdened branches at the calamity which
he did not understand, he commanded, "Leave off."

To his immense surprise, on the instant the snow ceased falling. It
settled gently like a tired bird into its nest. The serenity of the
stillness was unbroken.

"I am hungry," he said.

The animals hurried to their stores of food and waited on him.

"I have not slept."

The squirrels scraped fallen leaves into a bed, and the bear and the
wolf stood guard.

When he awoke it was a brilliant winter's morning. The sun was
charioteering in highest heaven. The forest was white as though
cotton-wool had blown through it. As far as eye could search, everything
glittered, sheathed in a film of glass. Snow bulged from branches like
pillows filled to bursting. Icicles hung down like fantastic swords.
Down the colonnaded avenues trees cast their shadows in heavy bars; the
spaces between them were golden splashes.

[Illustration: The Man yawned. "I am still tired. Fetch the horse, that
he may carry me back to my dwelling."]

The Man yawned. "I am still tired. Fetch the horse that he may carry me
back to my dwelling."

He ordered the horse to be fetched because he had forgotten where his
cave was. It was clever of him. He did it to keep the animals from
knowing his ignorance.

The horse came galloping up obediently. Clutching him by the mane, the
Man bestrode him. Off they started at a sharp trot, with the animals
shouting and bounding beside them. As they travelled, the Man could
hardly keep from smiling at picturing what a fine fellow he was. He made
no attempt to restrain himself from giving orders. All the time he kept
urging the animals to shout louder. He wanted the Woman to hear them, so
that she might crawl to the entrance of the cave and be a witness of his
triumphant home-coming. It wasn't good enough merely to picture himself
as a fine fellow. He was anxious to hear her say to him, "Oh, Man, what
a fine fellow you are!" He'd forgotten completely the purpose of his
errand--that he'd set out through the world's first snowstorm in search
of God.

So at last they burst forth from the forest and reached the foot of the
slippery ascent. Because it was so slippery, the Man dismounted; the
horse could carry him no further. Having commanded the animals to go on
shouting for at least half-an-hour, he left them and commenced to climb
the steep and narrow path. He had to go gingerly on his hands and knees.
There were places where he slipped back two steps for every one he
advanced. By snatching at rocks and bushes, he dragged himself slowly to
the turning which brought him in sight of the entrance. There, seated in
the entrance to the cave, he saw ...

You must remember that by now it was the twenty-fifth of December.
To remember that is most extraordinarily important. What he saw is so
exciting that it deserves another chapter.




VII


He saw the Woman--but not the Woman as he had left her. She was no
longer sick. She was completely restored. As in the old days her hair
clothed her like a flame. Her face parted it into waves as though she
were a swimmer. He could see the pink dimples in her knees where she sat
and the marble whiteness of her feet, which flashed like jewels. She was
again the darling who had delighted his heart when she had darted like a
sunbeam across the shaven lawns of Eden; but now she was ten times more
radiant.

What was it that had changed her? Her tenderness made a golden mist
about her which inspired him with awe. He had had precisely this sense
of sunny quietness when he had walked through those long, still
afternoons with God.

She was unaware of him. Her eyes were deep pools of sapphire. She was
smiling gently and brooding above something which nestled in her arms.
He called to her softly; she paid him no attention. Far below the ridge,
in obedience to his commands, the animals were still shouting. Was it
because of them that she was smiling? Had the robin flown ahead of him
to tell her what had happened? The robin was perched on her shoulder,
fluttering his little wings and singing her his finest song. He called
to the robin; like the Woman, the robin was too occupied to hear him.
No, it wasn't because of him that she was smiling--he felt sure. Then
why was it?

He gazed back on the dazzling landscape that spread away below him,
hoping to find something there that would tell him. How transformed it
was from the gloomy jungle that had been wont to threaten him! It was
like a nest of down. From its farthest edge where Eden lay, a beam of
glory spanned it with an orange path. It was this beam that made the
golden mist about the Woman. To his amazement he saw that Eden's gates
were open. Even while he watched they began to close, slowly and slowly,
with the beam ever shortening, till at last they were utterly locked and
barred.

The memory of lost happiness overwhelmed him. He turned again to the
Woman. There she sat in the golden mantle of her hair, enthroned on the
snow's pure whiteness. Creeping to her humbly, he fell to covering her
feet with kisses, so great was his need of her.

"My Woman," he wept, "they are cold--so cold. Never again will I leave
thee, not even to find God."

She bent towards him, lifting his chin in her hand. "I shall feel the
cold no more. Put thy hand in my breast. Dost thou feel it? I have that
next my heart which, though I grow old, shall keep me forever warm."

As he slipped his hand in her breast, she parted her hair and showed
him. Kneeling beside her, he gazed down wonderingly at a thing that he
had never seen before. He could find no name for it. It was like himself
and it was like her also, only it was tiny and no thicker than his
fore-arm. It had wee feet and hands, a rose-bud of a mouth and it was
smooth and soft. Its head, which was the size of an apple, was covered
with silky floss. Lowering his face, he sniffed it all over. It smelt
sweet like the flowers that used to bloom in Eden.

"What is it?"

She shook her head. "It was here when I wakened." Her eyes became bright
and immense as stars. "It's our's," she whispered tenderly.




VIII


It was awkward to have something for which you could find no name,
especially when it was something that you had begun to love already.

"We'll have to ask someone," the Man said. "If I knew where He was,
I might ask----"

The Woman's face blanched. "Not God," she begged. "Because of the fruit
we ate, He might take it from us."

Just then they were disturbed by a rustling of snow. Looking up, they
saw the rabbit, watching them with timid eyes and recovering his breath
after the long climb.

"What d'you want?" the Man asked sharply.

The rabbit flicked his white scut and sat up on his hind-legs, his
whiskers quivering with excitement.

"I want to see it," he panted. "The dog's been boasting. I hurried
because I wanted to be the first to see it. I'm so little; I couldn't do
it any harm."

"Let him see it," said the Woman. "He's gentle. He might be able to tell
us what to call it."

So the Man told the rabbit that he could have just one peep. But when
the rabbit tried to get his peep by standing against the Woman's knees,
he wasn't tall enough, so the Man had to lift him till he lay all furry
against the little creature that was in the Woman's arms.

"I can't suggest anything," said the rabbit. "We ought to consult the
other animals. They all want to be friends; they're so curious. But
there's one thing I do know: we're both small and my coat would just fit
it."

Before they could stop him, he had pulled off his coat and was tucking
it snugly about the little stranger. He was right; it did fit exactly.
So the first garment of the earth's first baby was a rabbitskin, which
accounts for the rhyme which mothers sing about "Gone to fetch a
rabbitskin, to wrap the baby bunting in."

When the rabbit had presented his gift, he hopped down from the Woman's
lap very much thinner.

"And now can I bring the other animals?" he asked.

The Man hesitated. He was remembering the last visits of the lion and
the elephant and the rhinoceros. "They might find a name for it," the
rabbit pleaded.

Then the Man nodded and the rabbit scuttled off.

They hadn't long to wait before they heard a deep breathing and
grunting. Struggling up the frozen path to the cave came all the animals
that God had created. They advanced in single file, the great and the
small mixed up together; the giraffe followed by the hedgehog and the
mastodon preceded by the frog. They came hand-in-hand, forming a chain
to pull one another up, treading on each other's heels, jostling and
slipping back on one another. Those behind kept whispering to those in
front to hurry; those in front were too winded to retort. Their ascent
was made more difficult by their generosity, for all save one of them
carried presents. The one who came empty-handed was the stork. He led
the procession looking stately and pompous, as though he were taking the
credit for having occasioned the disturbance. The Man learnt later that
that was precisely what he was doing--taking all the credit. He had been
telling the animals that it was he who had left the strange little
creature at the Woman's side the night before. Because of this he
pretended that it wasn't necessary for him to bring a present. There
were many who believed him. There still are.

When they had all climbed safely to the top they gathered in a
semi-circle about the Woman, having piled their gifts before her. In
silence they waited; then she parted her hair and showed them the wonder
that nestled in her arms.

The Man, standing at her side, addressed them. "Oh, brothers, I am wise,
for I have walked with God; yet have I never seen anything like it.
There was nothing like it in Eden. I have sent for you that I may ask
you what to call it."

No one answered. He questioned each in turn, but none of them could
advise him.

"We have to find a name for it," he said crossly; "so let's sit down and
think hard."

So they sat down in the snow, scratching their heads, and thought hard.
From time to time the Man enquired whether any of them had had an
inspiration. They never had, which was discouraging when you consider
what a lot of them were thinking. In this way at least an hour must have
passed.

Things were getting both cold and embarrassing, when the little
creature, who was being thought about so hard, showed signs of waking
and began to stir in the Woman's arms. I ought to have told you that
ever since the Man's home-coming it had been sleeping. First it kicked
out with its bandy legs. Then it fisted its pudgy hands and yawned.
Then it puckered its wee red face in a manner most alarming and, to the
amazement of them all.... The Woman was so amazed that she nearly let
it drop. And yet what it did was perfectly natural; it opened its eyes,
like two blue patches of heaven, and blinked at them. Last of all it
emitted a thin, wailing sound that made everybody abominably unhappy.
The crocodile became so emotional that his tears froze in two long
icicles. After a pause the sound was repeated. All the animals rose on
their hind-legs and covered their ears with their paws.

The Woman stared at them apologetically. She was distressed and puzzled.
"Please don't cover your ears," she begged. "And don't think that I'm
hurting it. There's something that it's trying to tell us. It's said the
same thing before. It began saying it the moment I first found it. It's
gone on saying it, on and on.... There, there my little one, my
belovedest."

As if to corroborate her assertion that it had gone on and on, it
commenced to cry afresh. Out of politeness to the Woman, though the
sound hurt them, the tenderhearted animals uncovered their ears and
listened intently. This is what they heard, repeated over and over,
"Baa-aa-by! Baa-aa-by! Baa-aa-by!"

They were all shaking with sobbing when the elephant, in his coarsest
manner, lifted, up his trunk and snorted through it contemptuously.

"Stop snorting," the Man ordered impatiently. "There's no reason why you
should snort."

"Isn't there?" The elephant shuffled to his feet to depart. Before he
went, just to show his independence, again he snorted. Across his
shoulder he remarked. "And you think yourself so wise! You want to know
what to call it. Every time it speaks it tells you." It cried once more.
"There you are!" The elephant trumpeted triumphantly as he seated
himself at the top of the slide, having pulled his tail from under him
preparatory to tobogganning down the path. "Don't you hear what it says?
'Baa-aa-by! Baa-aa-by!' It couldn't be put more plainly. It's asking you
to call it baby."

As the elephant pushed off and vanished in a whirl of flying snow, the
Woman turned to the Man with a smile of gladness. "The clumsy fellow's
right. Weren't we the stupids? Fancy not understanding our own baby!"




IX


As you may imagine, all the beasts and birds went back to the jungle
very discontented. They didn't see why they shouldn't have babies. They
were wild to have babies. They talked of nothing else. No sooner had
they got down the hill from visiting the cave than they turned round and
started to climb back again. They kept urging the Woman to be frank with
them and to confess how her baby had happened. Of course she couldn't
confess, seeing that she didn't know herself. All that she knew was that
she hadn't felt well since she had eaten the forbidden fruit in Eden
and, now that the baby had been born, she felt completely restored. Such
information wasn't of much use to the animals, for the forbidden fruit
grew inside of Eden and the gates of Eden were locked. At last the Man
had to interfere to prevent her from being bothered. He stuck up a
notice at the entrance to the cave, _December 25th. Mother And Child
Both Doing Well. Don't knock._ When the animals came to call, he
prevented them from entering by explaining gravely that having a baby
was a very touch-and-go business and left one decidedly exhausted. To
have listened to him you might have supposed that he'd spent all his
life in rocking cradles, whereas he was such a novice that, had it not
been for the elephant, he wouldn't even have known that babies were
called babies. Like all fathers he deceived himself that there was
nothing he didn't know about baby-lore. What was very much more
surprising, by whispering and looking secretive he managed to impress
the animals with his new-found learning and paternal importance.

But what had happened to the robin while all these excitements were
going on? The last time we mentioned him he was sitting perched on the
Woman's shoulder, singing her his very finest song.

The robin, though you may not have heard it, has always been a most
religious bird. He had made up his mind, the moment the Man had come
back, that the first thing to be done was to go and tell God. The chief
difficulty about accomplishing this errand was due to God Himself; as
you will remember, in returning to Heaven God had destroyed the sky-blue
stairs behind Him. But the robin had wings; moreover he was an optimist.
He hoped that by fluttering up and up he would be able to reach Heaven
in safety. The reason that he had never tried before was because he had
been afraid that God would not want him. He felt sure of his welcome now
that he was the bearer of such glad tidings.

He found the journey much harder than he had expected. There were parts
of it that were so bitter that his wings would scarcely flutter. After
he had lost sight of earth, he had to wind his way between the burning
stars; they were so close together in places that his feathers were
scorched. But he pressed on valiantly till he made out the quiet shining
of the gates of Heaven and entered through the unguarded walls of jasper
into a garden, which was in no way different from the one that God had
planted upon earth.

Beneath scented trees the angels were scattered about disconsolately.
There were black rims under their eyes; it was easy to see they had been
worrying. Their beautiful white gowns had come unstarched; it was many
days since they had tidied themselves. There wasn't a sound of any
sort--least of all of music. Some of them still carried their harps; but
most of them had stacked them in open spaces the way soldiers stack
their rifles. When the robin sank spent to the grass in front of them,
they paid him scant attention. When he weakly chirped his question,
"Where's God?" they jerked their thumbs, indicating the direction, too
listless to waste breath on words.

"What's the matter?" asked the robin.

"We're unhappy." After they had said it, they had difficulty to choke
back their sobs.

"But why are you unhappy? Whoever heard of being unhappy in Heaven!"

"Because--because----." They glanced at one another forlornly, hoping
that someone else would be the first to answer. "Because of the
forbidden fruit. It's made God cross."

"Pshaw!" The robin swelled out his little breast with importance. "You'd
better visit earth and see our baby. If the Woman hadn't eaten the
forbidden fruit, there wouldn't be any baby."

The word "baby" was entirely new to them. They sat up beneath their
scented trees and began to ask questions. But the robin didn't want to
be delayed; he spread his wings and fluttered on.

At last he came to the smoothest of smooth lawns, in the midst of which
grew a mulberry-tree, beneath whose shadow God was seated with the
Virgin Mary. Despite the flakes of sunlight falling and the gold-blue
peace by which They were surrounded. Their attitudes were no less
despondent than the angels'. God sat with His elbows digging into His
knees. His face was buried in His delicate hands. His eyes, peering
through His fingers, were strained and red with always staring
broodingly straight before Him. Of the Virgin Mary, crouching at His
feet, the robin could only see the glint of her flaxen hair and the
paleness of her narrow shoulders. Her head was bowed in the lap of her
Maker as if she had been beseeching Him always.

The robin was overwhelmed with terror. All his chirpiness was gone.
"Dear God," he quavered, "I beg Thy forgiveness. I have come when I was
not bidden."

He paused, hoping that God would encourage him. When God took no notice,
he felt himself to be the most insignificant and impertinent of living
creatures. He spoke again, lest the silence should kill him on the spot.

"I have brought glad tidings--at least, we on earth think they are
glad. The Woman, whom Thou didst cast out for eating the fruit that was
forbidden, has been very sick. She has been sick since April till just
before day-break this morning, when she miraculously recovered. At her
side she found lying a little thing--such a little thing--so like
to Thyself, oh, God. It has bandy legs and arms no thicker than Thy
smallest finger. It has a baldy head, about the size of an apple, with
threads of gold spread over it like floss. It has a pink, wee face and
a rose-bud of a mouth. It's eyes are like patches of Thine own blue
Heaven. And it's soft and cuddly. The Women calls it her 'Belovedest.'
And it smells sweet like the flowers we used to breathe in Eden. We
didn't know what it was. Even the Man didn't know. He summoned the
animals to come and find a name for it. While they were sitting on their
hind-legs, behold, it awoke and told us that its rightful name was baby.
And now, oh, God, we birds and animals want to have babies. We're all
trying to find out how it happened. And I want to find out most
especially, because----"

"A baby, thou sayest! What is a baby? I, thy Creator, know nothing of
it. The last thing I fashioned was the Woman, who has brought this deep
shame upon Us."

God had spoken through His hands very softly, yet His voice was like a
great wind blowing. It took the robin some seconds to recover from the
shock. By the time he was ready to answer, the angels were rustling
through all the glades of Heaven and the Virgin was gazing at him with
wistful intensity.

"What is a baby!" he said audaciously repeating God's words. "It is a
little Man and a little God. Surely, Thou knowest?"

"I know nothing," God thundered, letting fall His hands from before His
face. "Be gone."

When the hurricane of sound had ended, the robin found himself hovering
in the gateway between the jasper walls, where the sheer drop which lies
between earth and Heaven commences. He turned to look back before he
took the leap and saw that behind him the angels were following.
Following most closely was the Virgin.

"Tell me again," she pleaded. "It's little and soft. It's cuddly and it
smells like the flowers that bloom in Eden."

Perched on her shoulder, with his beak against her ear, he twittered to
her his tale once more. While he was telling her, the angels crowded
round, smoothing his feathers with shy caresses. But he didn't dare to
stay too long, for distantly from beneath the mulberry tree, he still
felt the brooding eyes of God. Launching himself from the Virgin's
shoulder, he sank between the burning stars and through the bitter
coldness of clouds snow-laden, till late in the wintry afternoon he
reached the cave on the limestone ridge, whence a murmur of secret
singing was emerging.




X


On the threshold he paused to listen. Yes, it was the Woman. It was the
first time she had been happy enough to sing since she had been cast out
of Eden. But her song was entirely different from anything that she had
sung before. It was more little and tender. It was a lullaby of
mother-nonsense, which she hummed when she couldn't find the proper
rhymes and made up as she went along.

As the robin fluttered through the gloom to her shoulder, she pressed
her finger to her lips to warn him. The baby eyes were the merest slits
of blueness. The little thumb was in the mouth and the baby lips were
sucking hard. The tiny knees were digging into the Woman's body and the
baldy head was cushioned on her bosom. The dog snoozed across her feet.
The Man crouched against her, shrouded in the mantle of her hair,
overcome with weariness. She was mothering them all, rocking herself
slowly and singing gently her silly little song. The crooning of it over
and over seemed to hush them with a sense of security.


  "You are my ownty,
  Dear little donty,
  Sweetest and wonty,
  Pudding and pie;
  Good little laddie,
  Just like your daddie.
  Fallen from Heaven,
  Come from the sky."


"But he didn't," whispered the robin.

The Woman paused in her singing. "Didn't what?"

"He didn't fall from Heaven. God's just been telling me; He never heard
about him."

The Woman smiled. "Never heard about him! It doesn't matter; his Mummy's
heard about him." She stooped to kiss the soft little bundle, for he had
commenced to stir. Then she resumed her singing.

Gradually the day failed. The late afternoon faded into evening. Gray
twilight stole swiftly down. For a while the white fields of snow
outside reflected a vague dimness; then night came with a noiseless
rush, closing up the entrance to the cave with a wall of blackness.

Perched on the Woman's shoulder the robin dozed. She still went on
singing. How long he had been dozing he had no means of telling. He
was wakened by a multitudinous rustling, as of a crowd assembling and
drawing nearer. At first he thought that it was some of the more
persistent of the animals, coming once more to urge the Woman to tell
them how babies happened. Then, of a sudden, he knew that he had been
mistaken. The gloom of the cave was lit up by a glowing brightness.
Peering across the threshold, with all the haloed hosts of Heaven
tiptoeing behind her, was the Virgin Mary. It was the crowd of haloes
that was causing so much brightness.

Stepping to the Woman's side, she gazed down longingly at the small
God-Man.

"I want one. Oh, I want one so badly," she murmured.

The angels, thronging behind her, folded their wings and repeated her
words, "So badly! So badly!" The sound was like a prayer, dying out in
the void which spreads between earth and Heaven.

"Let me hold him," she begged.

Because she was the Virgin, even though it might wake him, the Woman did
not dare to refuse her. But she asserted her authority, as all mothers
must, by pretending that she was the only person who knew how to hold
him properly. And perhaps she was the only one at that moment, for there
was no other mother besides herself in earth or Heaven. She showed the
Virgin how to support his little head because it was wobbly; and how to
keep one arm beneath his back because it was weak; and how he liked to
be cuddled against her breast because it was warm and cushiony. And
then, becoming generous, she taught her the silly little lullaby.

"I shall never go back to Heaven," the Virgin whispered. "I shall stay
here always and help you nurse him."

"Never go back to Heaven," the angels echoed; "stay here always."

The Woman's eyes became troubled. "But I want him to myself," she
faltered. "I don't want helping." Then she ceased to frown, for she had
discovered a stronger argument. "Besides, what about God? You wouldn't
leave Him all by Himself in Heaven. He'd be lonely."

The Virgin nodded her head vigorously. "I would, for I also am a woman.
There are no babies in Heaven. I couldn't be happy without a baby."

Behind her the angels nodded their haloes. "No babies in Heaven.
Couldn't be happy without a baby."

It must have been so much talking that disturbed him; the baby woke up.
As he opened his eyes and saw the Queen of Heaven bending over him, he
smiled. It was his first smile. On the instant the Woman, like all
mothers, became jealous and snatched him back into her own possession.
She liked to believe that no one, not even the Man, could make him as
comfortable as she could. Piling her golden hair upon her knees to make
a pillow for him, she laid him naked on his back and commenced playing
with his toes. If he had not given her his first smile, she would at
least make certain of his second.

She was so taken up with her playing that she did not notice who had
entered. She was the only one who had not noticed. The angels were
cowering against the walls of the cave. The Man had roused and crouched
covering his face with his hands. Only the Virgin stood upright, meek
and fearless, with a look of unconquerable challenge. The Woman was
quite oblivious; she went on with her mother-nonsense. And there stood
God regarding her through a cloud of puzzlement and anger.

The game that she played with the baby-feet she was inventing on the
spur of the moment. Starting with the tiniest toe, she wiggled it.
Then she wiggled the next tiniest, and the next tiniest, and the next
tiniest, till she had come to the biggest of the tiny toes. To each toe
as she wiggled it, she gave a name; when she had wiggled them all she
buried her face in the fat, kicking legs.

"And this is Peedy Peedy," she said as she wiggled the littlest toe.
"And this next babiest is Polly Loody. And this in the middle is Lady
Fissle. And this tall fellow is Lally Vassal. And last we come of the
big, big toe, who's king of them all. His name is Great Ormondon." Then
she dived her lips into the little squirming legs and kissed them as if
she were going to make a meal of them.

She had to do it four times before the baby smiled at her. At first he
only looked serious and astonished. The fifth time his smile broadened
and he gurgled. But the sixth, as she came to "The Great Ormondon," he
burst into a crowing laugh. Never before had a laugh been heard in earth
or Heaven. It was so surprising that the angels ceased from cowering and
the Man uncovered his face to see better.

Then God spoke. His voice was kind and tender like the cooing of
doves--so kind and tender that the Woman, discovering His presence,
wasn't a bit frightened. Sweeping the hair back from her eyes, she
nodded to Him in the old friendly fashion in which she had been used to
greet Him in Eden.

"Can you make him do it again?" God asked.

He came nearer and leant above her shoulder. So she made the baby laugh
again.

"Could I make him?"

"Try," said the Woman.

So God wiggled the little toes, starting with the tiniest, and the Woman
whispered the five magic names to Him secretly so that He might say them
all correctly. "Peedy Peedy. Polly Loody. Lady Fissle. Lally Vassal. And
the Great Ormondon."

When God boomed out the last large sounding name, the baby doubled his
little fists, crowing and laughing unmistakably. Then God laughed, too,
and the Virgin, and all the Hosts of Heaven, and the Man and the Woman,
till at last the dog and the robin couldn't restrain themselves any
longer and joined in His laughter. When once they'd started laughing it
was difficult to stop. Besides, they didn't want to stop. They were
doing it for the first time and they liked the feeling of it. God
laughed till the tears streamed down His face. By the time He held up
His hand for silence, there was scarcely an angel who wasn't wearing his
halo crooked.

"That's done us all good," said God. "I must have a baby for my very own
exactly like him. I almost think that everybody ought to have babies."
Then catching sight of the dog and the robin, He added, "I mean the
animals, too."

He turned to the Man. "What day is this? I've not been counting since I
ceased to walk in Eden."

The Man answered humbly. "Dear God, it is the twenty-fifth of December."

"I must remember that," said God thoughtfully. And then to the Virgin,
"Come. It grows late. There is no one to light the lamps of Heaven. You
shall have your desire; for you, too, are a woman."

And the robins say that God did remember, for it was on the twenty-fifth
of December, centuries later, that his own son was born into the world.
They say that the limestone ridge within sight of Eden was the spot
where Bethlehem grew up after Eden vanished. They even say that the cave
to which Mary came on another winter's night, when the doors of the inn
had been closed against her, was the very same. There, where the world's
first baby had been born, she wrapped God's son in swaddling clothes and
laid him in a manger, for the cave had now become a stable. Perhaps the
heavenly host who sang "Peace and Goodwill" to the shepherds was the
same, though the robins do not assert that.

Of one thing they are certain: that every time a baby is born God
laughs again and His laughter travels down the ages. And that is why on
Christmas Day everyone is especially kind to children, because it was a
little child who gave the first laugh and taught grown people, even God
Himself, how easy it is to love when one is merry.



THE END




CHRISTMAS OUTSIDE OF EDEN

_By_

CONINGSBY DAWSON

  _Author of_ "The Little House,"
  "The Seventh Christmas,"
  "Carry On," etc.

WITH _ILLUSTRATIONS_ BY

EUGENE FRANCIS SAVAGE


A delightful Christmas fantasy told with inimitable charm and delicate
humor. It is "the story the robins tell as they huddle beneath the holly
on the Eve of Christmas"--the sensation created by the birth of the
first baby, among the animals on earth, the angels in heaven, and even
in the mind of the surprised Almighty Himself. The conception of the
Deity is a primitive one, as required by the nature of the tale, and the
story should be read as a "myth-story."


DODD, MEAD & COMPANY

_Publishers_ NEW YORK






End of Project Gutenberg's Christmas Outside of Eden, by Coningsby Dawson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS OUTSIDE OF EDEN ***

***** This file should be named 15552.txt or 15552.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/5/5/15552/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, David Garcia and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
