The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Kris Kringle, by S. Weir Mitchell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mr. Kris Kringle
       A Christmas Tale

Author: S. Weir Mitchell

Release Date: December 25, 2006 [EBook #20180]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. KRIS KRINGLE ***




Produced by David Edwards, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









           [Illustration: A SILENT GROUP ABOUT THE HEARTH.]


                          MR. KRIS KRINGLE.

                                  A

                           Christmas Tale.



                                  BY

              S. WEIR MITCHELL, M. D., LL. D., HARVARD.




                          SEVENTH THOUSAND.




                            PHILADELPHIA:

                       GEORGE W. JACOBS & CO.,

                        103 South 15th Street,

                                1898.



                           COPYRIGHT, 1893,

                         BY S. WEIR MITCHELL.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The following little Christmas story was written, and is
    published for the benefit of the Home of the Merciful Saviour
    for Crippled Children, Philadelphia.

                                            S. WEIR MITCHELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




MR. KRIS KRINGLE.


It was Christmas Eve. The snow had clad the rolling hills in white, as
if in preparation for the sacred morrow. The winds, boisterous all day
long, at fall of night ceased to roar amidst the naked forest, and
now, the silent industry of the falling flakes made of pine and spruce
tall white tents. At last, as the darkness grew, a deepening stillness
came on hill and valley, and all nature seemed to wait expectant of
the coming of the Christmas time.

Above the broad river a long, gray stone house lay quiet; its vine and
roof heavy with the softly-falling snow, and showing no sign of light
or life except in a feeble, red glow through the Venetian blinds of
the many windows of one large room. Within, a huge fire of mighty logs
lit up with distinctness only the middle space, and fell with variable
illumination on a silent group about the hearth.

On one side a mother sat with her cheek upon her hand, her elbow on
the table, gazing steadily into the fire; on the other side were two
children, a girl and a boy; he on a cushion, she in a low chair. Some
half-felt sadness repressed for these little ones the usual gay
Christmas humor of the hopeful hour, commonly so full for them of
that anticipative joy to which life brings shadowy sadness as the
years run on.

Now and then the boy looked across the room, pleased when the leaping
flames sent flaring over floor and wall long shadows from the tall
brass andirons or claw-footed chair and table. Sometimes he glanced
shyly at the mother, but getting no answering smile kept silence. Once
or twice the girl whispered a word to him, as the logs fell and a
sheet of flame from the hickory and the quick-burning birch set free
the stored-up sunshine of many a summer day. A moment later, the girl
caught the boy's arm.

"Oh! hear the ice, Hugh," she cried, for mysterious noises came up
from the river and died away.

"Yes, it is the ice, dear," said the mother. "I like to hear it." As
she spoke she struck a match and lit two candles which stood on the
table beside her.

For a few minutes as she stood her gaze wandered along the walls over
the portraits of men and women once famous in Colonial days. The great
china bowls, set high for safety on top of the book-cases, tankards,
and tall candelabra troubled her with memories of more prosperous
times. Whatever emotions these relics of departed pride and joy
excited, they left neither on brow nor on cheek the unrelenting
signals of life's disasters. A glance distinctly tender and distinctly
proud made sweet her face for a moment as she turned to look upon the
children.

The little fellow on the cushion at her feet looked up.

"Mamma, we do want to know why Christmas comes only once a year?"

"Hush, dear, I cannot talk to you now; not to-night; not at all,
to-night."

"But was not Christ always born?" he persisted.

"Yes, yes," she replied. "But I cannot talk to you now. Be quiet a
little while. I have something to do," and so saying, she drew to her
side a basket of old letters.

The children remained silent, or made little signs to one another as
they watched the fire. Meanwhile the mother considered the papers, now
with a gleam of anger in her eyes, as she read, and now with a
momentary blur of tear-dimmed vision. Most of the letters she threw at
once on the fire. They writhed a moment like living creatures, and of
a sudden blazed out as if tormented into sudden confession of the
passions of years gone by; then they fell away to black unmemoried
things, curling crumpled in the heat.

The children saw them burn with simple interest in each new
conflagration. Something in the mother's ways quieted them, and they
became intuitively conscious of sadness in the hour and the task. At
last the boy grew uneasy at the long repose of tongue.

"O Alice! see the red sparks going about," he said, looking at the
wandering points of light in the blackening scrolls of shrivelled
paper.

"Nurse says those are people going to church," said his sister,
authoritatively.

Her mother looked up, smiling. "Ah, that is what they used to tell me
when I was little."

"They're fire-flies," said the boy, "like in a vewy dark night." Now
and then his r's troubled him a little, and conscious of his
difficulty, he spoke at times with oddly serious deliberation.

"You really must be quiet," said the mother. "Now, do keep still, or
you will have to go to bed," and so saying she turned anew to the
basket.

Presently the girl exclaimed, "Why do you burn the letters?" She had
some of her mother's persistency, and was not readily controlled. This
time the mother made no reply. A sharp spasm of pain went over her
features. Looking into the fire, as if altogether unconscious of the
quick spies at her side, she said aloud, "Oh! I can no more! Let them
wait. What a fool I was. What a fool!" and abruptly pushed the basket
aside.

The little fellow leaped up and cast his arms about her while his
long, yellow hair fell on her neck and shoulder. "O Mamma!" he cried,
"don't read any more. Let _me_ burn them. I hate them to hurt you."

She smiled on him through tears--rare things for her. "Every one must
bear his own troubles, Hugh. You couldn't help me. You couldn't know,
dear, what to burn."

"But I know," said the girl, decisively. "I know. I had a letter once;
but Hugh never had a letter. I wish Kris Kringle would take them away
this very, very night; and lessons, too, I do. What will he bring us
for Christmas, mamma? I know what. I want"--

"A Kris Kringle to take away troubles would suit me well, Alice; I
could hang up a big stocking."

"And I know what I want," said the boy. "Nurse says Kris has no money
this Christmas. I don't care." But the great blue eyes filled as he
spoke.

The mother rose. "There will be no presents this year, Hugh.
Only--only more love from me, from one another; and you must be brave
and help me, because you know this is not the worst of it. We are to
go away next week, and must live in the town. You see, dears, it can't
be helped."

"Yes," said Hugh, thoughtfully, "it can't be helped, Alice."

"I don't want to go," said the girl.

"Hush," said Hugh.

"And I do want a doll."

"I told you to be quiet, Alice," returned the mother, a rising note of
anger in her voice. In fact, she was close upon a burst of tears, but
the emotions are all near of kin and linked in mystery of
relationship. Pity and love for the moment became unreasoning wrath.
"You are disobedient," she continued.

"O mamma! we are vewy sorry," said the lad, who had been the less
offending culprit.

"Well, well. No matter. It is bed-time, children. Now to bed, and no
more nonsense. I can't have it, I can't bear it."

The children rose submissively, and, kissing her, were just leaving
the room, when she said: "Oh! but we must not lose our manners. You
forget."

The girl, pausing near the doorway, dropped a courtesy.

"That wasn't very well done, Alice. Ah! that was better."

The little fellow made a bow quite worthy of the days of minuet and
hoop, and then, running back, kissed the tall mother with a certain
passionate tenderness, saying, softly, "Now, don't you cry when we are
gone, dear, dear mamma," and then, in a whisper, "I will pway God not
to let you cwy," and so fled away, leaving her still perilously close
to tears. Very soon, up-stairs, the old nurse, troubled by the
children's disappointment, was assuring them with eager mendacity
that Kris would be certain to make his usual visit, while down-stairs
the mother walked slowly to and fro. She had that miserable gift, an
unfailing memory of anniversaries, and now, despite herself, the long
years rolled back upon her, so that under the sad power of their
recurrent memories she seemed a helpless prey.

[Illustration: AND OPENED THE CASE OF A MINIATURE, SLOWLY AND WITH
DELIBERATE CARE.]

While the children were yet too young to recognize their loss the
great calamity of her life had come. Then by degrees the wreck of her
fortune had gone to pieces, and now at last the home of her own
people, deeply mortgaged, was about to pass from her forever. Much
that was humbling had fallen to her in life, but nothing as sore as
this final disaster. At length she rose, took a lighted candle from
the table, and walked slowly around the great library room. The
sombre bindings of the books her childhood knew called back dim
recollections. The great china bowls, the tall silver tankards, the
shining sconces, and above, all the Stuart portraits or the Copleys of
the men who shone in Colonial days and helped to make a more than
imperial nation, each and all disturbed her as she gazed. At last, she
returned to the fireside, sat down and began anew her unfinished task.
With hasty hands she tumbled over the letters, and at length came upon
a package tied with a faded ribbon; one of those thin orange-colored
silk bands with which cigars are tied in bundles. She threw it aside
with a quick movement of disdain, and opened the case of a miniature,
slowly, and with deliberate care. A letter fell on to her lap as she
bent over the portrait of a young man. The day, the time, the need to
dispose of accumulated letters, had brought her to this which she
meant to be a final settlement of one of life's grim accounts. For
awhile, she steadily regarded the relics of happier hours. Then,
throwing herself back in her chair, she cried aloud, "How long I
hoped; how hopeless was my hope, and he said, he said, I was cruel and
hard. That I loved him no more. Oh! that was a lie! a bitter lie! But
a sot, a sot, and my children to grow up and see what I saw, and learn
to bear what I have borne. No! no! a thousand times no! I chose
between two duties, and I was right. I was the man of the two, and I
sent him away--forever. He said,--yes, I was right, but, my God! how
cruel is life! I would never have gone, never! never! There!" she
exclaimed, and threw back the miniature into the basket, closing it
with violence, as she did so, as one may shut an unpleasant book read
and done with.

For a moment, and with firmer face, she considered the letter, reading
scraps of it aloud, as if testing her resolution to make an end of it
all. "Hard, was I? Yes. Would I had been sooner hard. My children
would have been better off. 'I went because you bid me.' Yes I did.
Will he ever know what that cost me? 'I shall never come again until
you bid me come.' Not in this world then?" she cried. "O Hugh! Hugh!"
And in a passion of tears that told of a too great trial, still
resolute despite her partial defeat, she tore the letter and cast it
on the fire. "There!" she cried, "would to God I loved him less." And
then, with strange firmness, she took up a book, and sternly set
herself to comprehend what she read.

The hours went by and at last she rose wearily, put out one candle,
raked ashes over the embers, and taking the other light, went slowly
up to bed. She paused a moment at the nursery door where she heard
voices. "What! awake still?"

"We was only talking about Khwis," said the small boy. "We won't any
more, will we, Alice? She thinks he won't come, but I think he will
come because we are both so good all to-day."

"No, no, he will not come this Christmas, my darlings. Go to sleep. Go
to sleep," and with too full a heart she turned away.

But the usual tranquil slumber of childhood was not theirs. The
immense fact that they were soon to leave their home troubled the
imaginative little man. Then, too, a great wind began to sweep over
the hills and to shake the snow-laden pines. On its way, it carried
anew from the ice of the river wild sounds of disturbance and at last,
in the mid hours of night, an avalanche of snow slid from the roof.
Hugh sat up; he realized well enough what had happened. But presently
the quick ear of childhood was aware of other, and less familiar
sounds. Was it Kris Kringle? Oh! if he could only see him once! He
touched the sister asleep in her bed near by, and at last shook her
gently.

"What is it, Hugh?" she said.

"I hear Khwis. I know it is Khwis!"

"O Hugh! I hear too, but it might be a robber."

"No, nevah on Chwistmas Eve. It couldn't be a wobber. It is Khwis. I
mean to go and see. I hear him outside. You know, Alice, there is
nevah, nevah any wickedness on Chwistmas Eve."

"But if it is a robber he might take you away."

"Oh! wobbers steal girls, but they nevah, nevah steal boys, and you
needn't go."

"But are you sure? Oh! do listen," she added. Both heard the creaking
noise of footsteps in the dry snow.

[Illustration: "MR. KHWIS KWINGLE, ARE YOU THERE? OR IS YOU A
WOBBER?"]

"I will look--I must look," cried Hugh, slipping from his bed. In a
moment he had raised the sash and was looking out into the night.
The sounds he had heard ceased. He could see no one. "He has gone,
Alice." Then he cried, "Mr. Khwis Kwingle, are you there? or is you a
wobber?" As he spoke a cloaked man came from behind a great pine and
stood amid the thickly-fallen flakes.

"Why, that is Hugh," he said. "Hugh!"

"He does know my name," whispered the lad to the small counsellor now
at his side.

"And, of course, I am Kris Kringle. And I have a bag full of presents.
But come softly down and let me in, and don't make a noise or away I
go; and bring Alice."

The girl was still in doubt, but her desire for the promised gifts was
strong, and in the very blood of the boy was the spirit of daring
adventure. There was a moment of whispered indecision, resulting in
two bits of conclusive wisdom.

Said Alice, "If we go together, Hugh, and he takes one, the other can
squeal. Oh! very loud like a bear--a _big_ bear."

"And," said Hugh, "I will get my gweat gwandpapa's sword." And with
this he got upon a chair and by the failing light of the nursery fire
carefully took down from over the chimney the dress rapier which had
figured at peaceful levees of other days. "Now," he said, "if you are
afwaid I will go all alone myself."

"I am dreadfully afraid," said she, "but I will go, too." So she
hastily slipped on a little white wrapper and he his well-worn brown
velvet knickerbocker trousers. Neither had ever known a being they
had reason to fear, and so, with beating hearts, but brave enough,
they stole quietly out in their sweet innocence and hand in hand went
down the dark staircase, still hearing faint noises as they felt their
way. They crossed the great warm library and entered the hall, where,
with much effort, they unlocked the door and lifted the old-fashioned
bar which guarded it. The cold air swept in, and before them was a
tall man in a cloak half white with snow. He said at once, "Oh! Hugh!
Alice! Pleasant Christmas to you. Let us get in out of the cold; but
carefully--carefully, no sound!" As he spoke he shut the door behind
him. "Come," he said, and seeming to know the way, went before them
into the library.

"Oh! I'm so frightened," said Alice to Hugh in a whisper. "I wish I
was in bed."

Not so the boy. The man pushed away the ashes from the smouldering
logs, and took from the wood basket a quantity of birch bark and great
cones of the pine. As he cast them on the quick embers a fierce red
blaze went up, and the room was all alight. And now he turned quickly,
for Hugh, of a mind to settle the matter, was standing on guard
between him and the door to the stairway, which they had left open
when they came down. The man smiled as he saw the lad push his sister
back and come a step or two forward. He made a pretty picture in his
white shirt, brown knee-breeches, and little bare legs, the yellow
locks about his shoulders, the rapier in his hand, alert and quite
fearless.

[Illustration: HE MADE A PRETTY PICTURE--ALERT AND QUITE FEARLESS.]

"My sister thinks perhaps you are a wobber, sir; but I think you are
Mr. Khwis Kwingle."

"Yes, I am Kris Kringle to-night, and you see I know your
names--Alice, Hugh." His cloak fell from him, and he stood smiling, a
handsome Chris. "Do not be afraid. Be sure I love little children.
Come, let us talk a bit."

"It's all wite, Alice," said the boy. "I said he wasn't a wobber."

And they went hand in hand toward the fire, now a brilliant blaze. The
man leaned heavily upon a chair back, his lips moving, a great stir of
emotion shaking him as he gazed on the little ones. But he said again,
quickly:

"Yes, yes, I'm Kris Kringle," and then, with much amusement, "and what
do you mean to do with your sword, my little man?"

"It was to kill the wobber, sir; but you mustn't be afraid, because
you're not a wobber."

"And he really won't hurt you," added Alice.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Kris, smiling, "you're a gallant little
gentleman. And you have been--are you always a good boy to--your
mother?"

"I has been a vewy good boy." Then his conscience entered a protest,
and he added: "for two whole days. I'll go and ask mamma to come and
tell you."

"No, no," said Kris. "It is only children can see me. Old folks
couldn't see me."

"My mother is vewy young."

"Oh! but not like a child; not like you."

"Please, sir, do let us see the presents," said Alice, much at her
ease. For now he pushed a great chair to the fire, and seated them
both in it, saying: "Ah! the poor little cold toes." Then he carefully
closed the door they had left open, and said, smiling as he sat down
opposite them: "I have come far--very far--to see you."

"Has you come far to-night?" said the little host, with rising
courage.

"No, not far to-night." Then he paused. "Is--is your mother--well?"

"Yes," said Hugh, "she is vewy well, and we are much obliged."

"May we soon see the presents?" said Alice. "They did say you would
not come to-night because we are poor now."

"And," added Hugh, "my pony is sold to a man, and his tail is vewy
long, and he loves sugar--the pony, I mean; and mamma says we must go
away and live in the town."

"Yes, yes," said Kris. "I know."

"He knows," said Hugh.

"Oh! they know everything in fairyland," said Alice.

"Was you evah in faywyland, sir?" asked Hugh.

"Yes."

"Where 'bouts is it, sir, and please how is it bounded on the north?
And what are the pwincipal wivers? We might look for it on the map."

"It is in the Black Hills."

"Oh! the Black Hills," said Alice. "I know."

"Yes, but you're not sleepy? Not a bit sleepy?"

"No, no."

"Then before the pretty things hop out of my bag let me tell you a
story," and he smiled at his desire to lengthen a delicious hour.

"I would like that."

"And I hope it won't be very, very long," said Alice, on more sordid
things intent.

"That's the way with girls, Mr. Kwingle; they can't wait."

"Ah, well, well. Once on a time there was a bad boy, and he was very
naughty, and no one loved him because he spent love like money till
it was all gone. When he found he had no more love given him, he went
away, and away, to a far country."

"Like the man in the Bible," said Hugh, promptly. "The--the--what's
his name, Alice?"

"The prodigal son," said Kris, "you mean--"

"Yes, sir. The pwodigal son."

"Yes, like the prodigal son."

"Well, at last he came to the Black Hills, and there he lived with
other rough men."

"But you did say he was a boy," said Alice, accurately critical.

"He was gwowed up, Alice. Don't you int--inter--"

"Interrupt, you goosey," said Alice.

"One Christmas Eve these men fell to talking of their homes, and made
up their minds to have a good dinner. But Hugh--"

"Oh!" exclaimed the lad, "Hugh!"

Mr. Chris nodded and continued. "But Hugh felt very weak because he
was just getting well of a fever, yet they persuaded him to come to
table with the rest. One man, a German, stood up and said, 'This is
the eve of Christmas. I will say our grace what we say at home.' One
man laughed, but the others were still. Then the German said,

    'Come, Lord Christ, and be our guest,
    Take with us what Thou hast blest.'

When Hugh heard the words the German said he began to think of home
and of many Christmas eves, and because he felt a strangeness in his
head, he said, 'I'm not well; I will go into the air.' As he moved, he
saw before him a man in the doorway. The face of the man was sad, and
his garment was white as snow. He said, 'Follow me.' But no others,
except Hugh, saw or heard. Now, when Hugh went outside, the man he had
seen was gone; but being still confused, Hugh went over the hard snow
and among trees, not knowing what he did; and at last after wandering
a long time he came to a steep hillside. Here he slipped and rolling
down fell over a high place. Down, down, down he fell, and he fell."

"Oh! make him stop," cried little Hugh.

"He fell on to a deep bed of soft snow and was not hurt, but soon got
up, and thought he was buried in a white tomb. But soon he
understood, and his head grew clearer, and he beat the snow away and
got out. Then, first he said a prayer, and that was the only prayer he
had said in a long time."

"Oh my!" cried little Hugh. "I did think people could nevah sleep
unless they say their prayers. That's what nurse says. Doesn't she,
Alice?"

And just here Kris had to wipe his eyes, but he took the little
fellow's hand in his and went on.

"Soon he found shelter under a cliff, where no snow was, and with his
flint and steel struck a light, and made with sticks and logs a big
fire. After this he felt warm and better all over and fell asleep.
When he woke up it was early morning, and looking about, he saw in
the rock little yellow streaks and small lumps, and then he knew he
had found a great mine of gold no man had ever seen before. By and by
he got out of the valley and found his companions, and in the spring
he went to his mine, which, because he had found it, was all his own,
and he got people to work there and dig out the gold. After that he
was no longer poor, but very, very rich."

"And was he good then?" said Hugh.

"And did he go home," said Alice, "and buy things?"

"Yes, he went. One day he went home and at night saw his house and
little children, and--but he will not stay, because there is no love
waiting in his house, and all the money in the world is no good unless
there is some love too. You see, dear, a house is just a house of
brick and mortar, but when it is full of love, then it is a home."

"I like that man," said Hugh. "Tell me more."

"But first," said Alice, "oh! we do want to see all our presents."

"Ah, well. That is all, I think; and the presents. Now for the
presents." Then he opened a bag and took out first a string of great
pearls, and said, as he hung them around Alice's neck, "There, these
the oysters made for you years ago under the deep blue sea. They are
for a wedding gift from Chris. They are too fine for a little maid. No
Queen has prettier pearls. But when you are married and some one you
love vexes you or is unkind, look at these pearls, and forgive, oh! a
hundred times over; twice, thrice, for every pearl, because Kris said
it. You won't understand now, but some day you will."

"Yes, sir," said Alice, puzzled, and playing with the pearls.

Said Hugh, "You said, Mr. Khwis, that the oysters make pearls. Why do
the oysters make pearls?"

"I will tell you," replied Kris. "If a bit of something rough or sharp
gets inside the oyster's house, and it can't be got rid of, the oyster
begins to make a pearl of it, and covers it over and over until the
rough, rude thing is one of these beautiful pearls."

"I see," said Hugh.

"That is a little fairy tale I made for myself; I often make stories
for myself."

"That must be very nice, Mr. Khwis. How nice it must be for your
little children every night when you tell them stories."

"Yes--yes"--and here Kris had to wipe his eyes with his handkerchief.

"Isn't that a doll?" said Alice, looking at the bag.

"Yes; a doll from Japan."

"Oh!" exclaimed Alice.

"And boxes of sugar-plums for Christmas," he added. "And, Hugh, here
are skates for you and this bundle of books."

"Thank you, sir."

"And these--and these for my--for Alice," and Kris drew forth a
half-dozen delicate Eastern scarves and cast them, laughing, around
the girl's neck as she stood delighted.

"And now I want to trust you. This is for--for your mother; only an
envelope from Kris to her. Inside is a fairy paper, and whenever she
pleases it will turn to gold--oh! much gold, and she will be able then
to keep her old home and you need never go away, and the pony will
stay."

"Oh! that will be nice. We do sank you, sir; don't we, Alice?"

"Yes. But now I must go. Kiss me. You _will_ kiss me?" He seemed to
doubt it.

"Oh! yes," they cried, and cast their little arms about him while he
held them in a long embrace, loath to let them go.

"O Alice!" said Hugh, "Mr. Khwis is cwying. What's the matter, Mr.
Khwis?"

"Nothing," he said. "Once I had two little children, and you see you
look like them, and--and I have not seen them this long while."

Alice silently reflected on the amount of presents which Kris's
children must have, but Hugh said:

"We are bofe wewy sorry for you, Mr. Khwis."

"Thank you," he returned, "I shall remember that, and now be still a
little, I must write to your mother, and you must give her my letter
after she has my present."

"Yes," said Alice, "we will."

Then Kris lit a candle and took paper and pen from the table, and as
they sat quietly waiting, full of the marvel of this famous adventure,
he wrote busily, now and then pausing to smile on them, until he
closed and gave the letter to the boy.

"Be careful of these things," he said, "for now I must go."

"And will you nevah, nevah come back?"

"My God!" cried the man. "Never--perhaps never. Don't forget me,
Alice, Hugh." And this time he kissed them again and went by and
opened the door to the stairway.

"We thank you ever so much," said Hugh, and standing aside he waited
for Alice to pass, having in his child-like ways something of the
grave courtesy of the ancestors who looked down on him from the walls.
Alice courtesied and the small cavalier, still with the old rapier in
hand, bowed low. Kris stood at the door and listened to the patter of
little feet upon the stair; then he closed it with noiseless care. In
a few minutes he had put out the candles, resumed his cloak, and left
the house. The snow no longer fell. The waning night was clearer, and
to eastward a faint rosy gleam foretold the coming of the sun of
Christmas. Kris glanced up at the long-windowed house and turning went
slowly down the garden path.

Long before their usual hour of rising, the children burst into the
mother's room. "You monkeys," she cried, smiling; "Merry Christmas to
you! What is the matter?"

"Oh! he was here! he did come!" cried Alice.

"Khwis was here," said Hugh. "I did hear him in the night, and I told
Alice it was Khwis, and she said it was a wobber, and I said it
wasn't a wobber. And we went to see, and it was a man. It was Khwis.
He did say so."

"What! a man at night in the house! Are you crazy, children?"

"And Hugh took grandpapa's sword, and--"

"Gweat-gwanpapa's," said Hugh, with strict accuracy.

"You brave boy!" cried the woman, proudly. "And he stole nothing, and,
oh! what a silly tale."

"But it _was_ Khwis, mamma. He did give us things. I do tell you it
was Khwis Kwingle."

"Oh! he gave us things for you, and for me, and for Hugh, and he gave
me this," cried Alice, who had kept her hand behind her, and now threw
the royal pearls on the bed amid a glory of Eastern scarves.

"Are we all bewitched?" cried the mother.

"Oh! and skates, and sugar-plums, and books, and a doll, and this for
you. Oh! Khwis didn't forget nobody, mamma."

The mother seized and hastily opened the blank envelope which the boy
gave her.

"What! what!" she cried, as she stared at the inclosure; "is this a
jest?"

UNION TRUST CO., NEW YORK.

     MADAME:--We have the honor to hold at your disposal the
     following registered United States bonds, in all amounting
     to ----.

The sum was a great fortune. The Trust Company was known to her, even
its president's signature.

"What's the matter, mamma," cried Alice, amazed at the unusual look
the calm mother's face wore as she arose from the bed, while the
great pearls tumbled over and lay on the sunlit floor, and the fairy
letter fell unheeded. Her thoughts were away in the desert of her past
life.

"And here, I forgot," said Hugh, "Mr. Khwis did write you a letter."

"Quick," she cried. "Give it to me." She opened it with fierce
eagerness. Then she said, "Go away, leave me alone. Yes, yes, I will
talk to you by and by. Go now." And she drove the astonished children
from the room and sat down with her letter.

     "DEAR ALICE:--Shall I say wife? I promised to come no more
     until you asked me to come. I can stand it no longer. I came
     only meaning to see the dear home, and to send you and my
     dear children a remembrance, but I--You know the rest. If in
     those dark days the mother care and fear instinctively set
     aside what little love was left for me I do not now wonder.
     Was it well, or ill, what you did when you bid me go? In
     God's time I have learned to think it well. That hour is to
     me now like a blurred dream. To-day I can bless the anger
     and the sense of duty to our children which drove me
     forth--too debased a thing to realize my loss. I have won
     again my self-control, thank God! am a man once more. You
     have, have always had, my love. You have to-day again a
     dozen times the fortune I meanly squandered. I shall never
     touch it; it is yours and your children's. And now, Alice,
     is all love dead for me? And is it Yes or No? And shall I
     be always to my little ones Kris, and to-night a mysterious
     memory, or shall I be once more

                                                   YOUR HUGH?

"A letter to the bank will find me."

As she read, the quick tears came aflood. She turned to her desk and
wrote in tremulous haste, "Come, come at once," and ringing for the
maid, sent it off to the address he gave. The next morning she dressed
with unusual care. At the sound of the whistle of the train she went
down to the door. Presently, a strong, erect, eager man came swiftly
up the pathway. She was in his arms a minute after, little Hugh
exclaiming, "O Alice! Mr. Khwis is kissing mamma!"

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mr. Kris Kringle, by S. Weir Mitchell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MR. KRIS KRINGLE ***

***** This file should be named 20180.txt or 20180.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/1/8/20180/

Produced by David Edwards, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
