Project Gutenberg's Betty Gordon in Washington, by Alice B. Emerson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Betty Gordon in Washington

Author: Alice B. Emerson

Posting Date: March 11, 2014 [EBook #6853]
Release Date: November, 2004
First Posted: February 2, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON ***




Produced by Avinash Kothare, Tom Allen, Charles Franks and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON

OR

Strange Adventures in a Great City

BY

ALICE B. EMERSON




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

I     THE GORED COW

II    HOSPITALITY UNDER DIFFICULTIES

III   BOB HAS GREAT NEWS

IV    AT THE VENDUE

V     CONSEQUENCES

VI    THE RUNAWAY MISSED

VII   A BELATED LETTER

VIII  GOOD-BY TO BRAMBLE FARM

IX    NEW FRIENDS

X     FELLOW TRAVELERS

XI    A SERIOUS MIX-UP

XII   STRAIGHTENING THINGS OUT

XIII  WASHINGTON MONUMENT

XIV   LIBBIE IS ROMANTIC

XV    OFF TO INVESTIGATE

XVI   WHAT HALE HAD TO TELL

XVII  MORE SIGHTSEEING

XVIII BETTY UNDERSTANDS

XIX   AN UNEXPECTED MEETING

XX    MUTUAL CONFIDENCES

XXI   THE ACCIDENT

XXII  BEING RESCUED

XXIII ANOTHER RESCUE

XXIV  BOB IS CLEARED

XXV   FUTURE PLANS




BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON




CHAPTER I

THE GORED COW


For lack of a better listener, Betty Gordon addressed the saucy
little chipmunk that sat on the top rail of the old worn fence and
stared at her with bright, unwinking eyes.

"It is the loveliest vase you ever saw," said Betty, busily sorting
the tangled mass of grasses and flowers in her lap. "Heavy old
colonial glass, you know, plain, but with beautiful lines."

The chipmunk continued to regard her gravely.

"I found it this morning when I was helping Mrs. Peabody clean the
kitchen closet shelves," the girl went on, her slim fingers selecting
and discarding slender stems with fascinating quickness. "It was on
the very last shelf, and was covered with dust. I washed it, and
we're going to have it on the supper table to-night with this bouquet
in it. There! don't you think that's pretty?"

She held out the flowers deftly arranged and surveyed them proudly.
The chipmunk cocked his brown head and seemed to be withholding his
opinion.

Betty put the bouquet carefully down on the grass beside her and
stretched the length of her trim, graceful self on the turf, burying
her face luxuriously in the warm dry "second crop" of hay that had
been raked into a thin pile under the pin oak and left there
forgotten. Presently she rolled over and lay flat on her back,
studying the lazy clouds that drifted across the very blue sky.

"I'd like to be up in an airplane," she murmured drowsily, her
eyelids drooping. "I'd sail right into a cloud and see--What was that?"

She sat up with a jerk that sent the hitherto motionless chipmunk
scurrying indignantly up the nearest tree, there to sit and shake his
head angrily at her.

"Sounds like Bob!" said Betty to herself. "My goodness, that was Mr.
Peabody--they must be having an awful quarrel!"

The voices and shouts came from the next field, separated from her
by a brook, almost dry now, and a border of crooked young willow
trees grown together in an effective windbreak.

"Anybody who'll gore a cow like that isn't fit to own a single dumb
creature!" A clear young voice shaking with passion was carried by
the wind to the listening girl.

"When I need a blithering, no-'count upstart to teach me my
business, I'll call on you and not before," a deeper, harsh voice
snarled. "When you're farming for yourself you can feed the
neighbors' critters on your corn all you've a mind to!"

"Oh, dear!" Betty scrambled to her feet, forgetting the bouquet so
carefully culled, and darted in the direction of the willow hedge. "I
do hope Mr. Peabody hasn't been cruel to an animal. Bob is always so
furious when he catches him at that!"

She crossed the puttering little brook by the simple expedient of
jumping from one bank to the other and scrambled through the willow
trees, emerging, flushed and anxious-eyed, to confront a boy about
fourteen years old in a torn straw hat and faded overalls and a tall,
lean middle-aged man with a pitchfork in his hands.

"Well?" the latter grunted, as Betty glanced fearfully at him. "What
did you come for? I suppose you think two rows of corn down flat is
something to snicker at?"

They stood on the edge of a flourishing field of corn, and,
following the direction of Mr. Peabody's accusing finger, Betty
Gordon saw that two fine rows had been partially eaten and trampled.

"Oh, that's too bad!" she said impulsively, "What did it--a stray
cow?"

"Keppler's black and white heifer," answered Mr. Peabody grimly.
"Bob here is finding fault with me because I didn't let it eat its
head off."

"No such thing!" Bob Henderson was stung into speech. "Because the
poor creature didn't get out fast enough to suit you--and you
bewildered her with your shouting till she didn't know which way to
turn--you jabbed her with the pitchfork. I saw the blood! And I say
nobody but an out and out coward would do a thing like that to a dumb
animal."

"Oh!" breathed Betty again, softly. "How could you!"

"Now I've heard about enough of that!" retorted Mr. Peabody angrily.
"If you'd both attend to your own business and leave me to mind mine,
we'd save a lot of time. You, Bob, go let down the bars and turn that
critter into the road. Maybe Keppler will wake up and repair his
fences after all his stock runs off. You'd better help him, Betty. He
might step on a grub-worm if you don't go along to watch him!"

Bob strode off, kicking stones as he went, and Betty followed
silently. She helped him lower the bars and drive the cow into the
road, then put the bars in place again.

"Where are you going?" she ventured in surprise, as Bob moodily
trudged after the animal wending an erratic way down the road.

"Going to take her home," snapped Bob, "Peabody would like to see
Keppler have to get her out of the pound, but I'll save him that
trouble. You can go on back and read your book."

"Just because you're mad at Mr. Peabody is no reason why you should
be cross to me," said Betty with spirit. "I wasn't reading a book,
and I'm coming with you. So there!"

Bob laughed and told her to "come on." He was seldom out of sorts
long. Indeed, of the two, Betty had the quicker temper and cherished
a grudge more enduringly.

"Just the same, Betty," Bob announced, as he skillfully persuaded
the cow to forego the delights of a section of particularly sweet
grass and proceed on her course, "I'm about through. I can't stand it
much longer; and lately I've been afraid that in a rage I might
strike Mr. Peabody with something and either kill him or hurt him
badly. Of course, I wouldn't do it if I stopped to think, but when he
gets me furious as he did to-day, I don't stop to think."

"Well, for mercy's sake, Bob Henderson," ejaculated Betty in an
instant alarm, "don't kill him, whatever you do. Then you'd be put in
prison for life!"

"All right," agreed Bob equably, "I won't kill him--just nick him in
a few places--how will that do?"

"But I'm really serious," insisted Betty. "Don't let the cow turn up
that lane. Think how awful you would feel if you were sent to prison,
Bob."

Bob took refuge in a masculine stronghold.

"If that isn't just like a girl!" he said scornfully. "Who said I
was going to prison? I merely say I don't want to lose my temper and
do something rash, and you have me convicted and sentenced for life.
Gee, Betty, have a little mercy!"

Betty's lips trembled.

"I can't bear to think of you going away and leaving me here," she
faltered. "I'm not going to stay either, Bob, not one minute after I
hear from Uncle Dick. I'm sure if the Benders knew how things were
going, they would think we had a right to leave. I had the loveliest
letter from Mrs. Bender this morning--but it had been opened."

Bob switched an unoffending flower head savagely.

"You come out of that!" he shouted to the perverse cow that seemed
determined to turn to the left when she was plainly asked to turn to
the right. "Wait a minute, Betty; here's Fred Keppler."

The half-grown boy who accosted them with "What are you doing with
our cow?" grinned fatuously at Betty, showing several gaps in a row
of fine teeth.

"Keep your cow at home where she belongs," directed Bob
magnificently. "She's been making her dinner off our corn."

"Oh, gee," sighed the boy nervously. "I'll bet old Peabody was in a
tearing fury. Look, Bob, something's tore her hide! She must have
been down in the blackberry bushes along the brook."

"Well, see that it doesn't happen again," commanded Bob, gracefully
withdrawing by walking backward. "Corn that's as high as ours is
worth something, you know."

"You never told him about the pitchfork," said Betty accusingly, as
soon as Fred Keppler and the cow were out of earshot. "You let him
think it was blackberry bushes that scratched her like that."

"Well, his father will know the difference," grinned Bob cheerfully.
"Why should I start an argument with Fred? Saving the cow from the
pound ought to be enough, anyway. Mr. Keppler has had to buy more
than one animal out before this; he will not pay attention to his
fences."

Betty sat down on a broad boulder and leaned up against an old
hickory tree.

"Stone in my shoe," she said briefly. "You'll have to wait just a
minute, Bob."

Bob sat down on the grass and began to hunt for four leaf clovers,
an occupation of which he never tired.

"Do you think Mr. Peabody opened your letter?" he asked abruptly.

Betty paused in the operation of untying her shoe.

"Who else would?" she said thoughtfully. "It wasn't even pasted
together again, but slit across one end, showing that whoever did it
didn't care whether I noticed it or not. I'll never mail another
letter from that box. I'll walk to Glenside three times a day first!"

"Well, the only thing to do is to clear out," said Bob firmly.
"You'll have to wait till you hear from your uncle, or at least till
the Benders get back. We promised, you know, that we wouldn't run
away without telling them, or if there wasn't time, writing to them
and saying where we go. That shows, I think, that they suspected
things might get too hot to be endured."

"I simply must get a letter from Uncle Dick or go crazy," sighed
Betty feverishly. She put on her shoe and stood up. "I wish he would
come for me himself and see how horrid everything is."




CHAPTER II

HOSPITALITY UNDER DIFFICULTIES


Betty Gordon had come to Bramble Farm, as Mr. Peabody's home was
known, early in the summer to stay until her uncle, Richard Gordon,
should be able to establish a home for her, or at least know enough
of his future plans to have Betty travel with him. He was interested
in mines and oil wells, and his business took him all over the country.

Betty was an orphan, and this Uncle Dick was her only living
relative. He came to her in Pineville after her mother's death and
when the friends with whom she had been staying decided to go to
California. He remembered Mrs. Peabody, an old school friend, and
suggested that Betty might enjoy a summer spent on a farm. These
events are related in the first book of this series, called "Betty
Gordon at Bramble Farm."

That story tells how Betty came to the farm to find Joseph Peabody a
domineering, pitiless miser, his wife Agatha, a drab woman crushed in
spirit, and Bob Henderson, the "poorhouse rat," a bright intelligent
lad whom the Peabodys had taken from the local almshouse for his
board and clothes. Betty Gordon found life at Bramble Farm very
different from the picture she and her uncle had drawn in
imagination, and only the fact that her uncle's absence in the oil
fields had prevented easy communication with him had held her through
the summer.

Once, indeed, she had run away, but circumstances had brought her
and Bob to the pleasant home of the town police recorder, and Mr. and
Mrs. Bender had proved themselves true and steadfast friends to the
boy and girl who stood sorely in need of friendship. It was the
Benders who had exacted a promise from both Bob and Betty that they
would not run away from Bramble Farm without letting them know.

Betty had been instrumental in causing the arrest of two men who had
stolen chickens from the Peabody farm, and at the hearing before the
recorder something of Mr. Peabody's characteristics and of the
conditions at Bramble Farm had been revealed.

Anxious to have Betty and Bob return, Joseph Peabody had practically
agreed to treat them more humanely, and for a few weeks, during which
the Benders had gone away for their annual vacation, matters at
Bramble Farm had in the main improved. But they were gradually
slipping back to the old level, and this morning, when Peabody had
gored the cow with his pitchfork, Bob had thought disgustedly that it
was useless to expect anything good at the hands of the owner of
Bramble Farm.

As he and Betty tramped back after delivering the cow, Bob's mind
was busy with plans that would free him from Mr. Peabody and set him
forward on the road that led to fortune. Bob included making a
fortune in his life work, having a shrewd idea that money rightly
used was a good gift.

"Where do you suppose your uncle is?" he asked Betty, coming out of
a reverie wherein he bade Bramble Farm and all the dwellers there
with a single exception a cold and haughty farewell.

"Why, I imagine he is in Washington," returned Betty confidently.
"His last letter was from there, though two days ago a postal came
from Philadelphia. I think likely he went up to see his lawyer and
get his mail. You know it was held there while he was out West. I
hope he has all my letters now, and last night I wrote him another,
asking him if I couldn't leave here. I said I'd rather go to the
strictest kind of a boarding school; and so I would. I'll mail the
letter this afternoon in Glenside."

"It's too long a walk for you to take on a hot afternoon," grumbled
Bob. "I'm going over to Trowbridge, and I'll mail it there for you."

Betty pulled the letter from her blouse pocket and handed it to him.

"Where's Trowbridge?" she asked, as they came in sight of the
boundary line of Bramble Farm and sighted Mr. Peabody in conversation
with the mail carrier at the head of the lane. "Can I go with you?"

"We'd better hurry," suggested Bob, quickening his steps.
"Trowbridge is four miles beyond Laurel Grove. You've never been
there. No, you can't go, Betty, because I have to ride the sorrel. I
suppose in time old Peabody will buy another wagon, but no one can
tell when that will come to pass."

The wagon house had burned one night, and the master of Bramble Farm
could not bring himself to pay out the cash for even a secondhand
wagon. As a result, the always limited social activities of the farm
were curtailed to the vanishing point.

"What are you going for?" persisted Betty, who had her fair share of
feminine curiosity with the additional excuse that interesting events
were few and far between in her present everyday life.

Bob grinned.

"Going to a vendue," he announced. "Now how much do you know?"

Betty tossed her head, and elevated her small, freckled nose.

"A vendue?" she repeated. "Why, a vendue is a--a--what is it, Bob?"

"A sale," said Bob. "Some farmer is going to sell out and Peabody
wants a wagon. So I have to ride that horse fourteen miles and back--and
he has a backbone like a razor blade!--to buy a wagon; that is,
if no one bids over me."

"And Mr. Peabody won't pay more than six dollars; he said so at the
supper table last night," mourned Betty. "You'll never be able to buy
a wagon for that. I wish I could go, too. Bob, I never saw a country
vendue. Please, can't I?"

"You cannot," replied Bob with unaccustomed decision. Betty usually
wheedled him into granting her requests. "Haven't I just told you
there is nothing to go in? If you see yourself perched on that raw-boned
nag with me, I don't, that's all. But I tell you what; there's
a sale to-morrow at a farm this side of Glenside--I'll take you to
that, if you like. I guess Peabody will let me off, seeing as how
there are wagons advertised. We can easily walk to Faulkner's place."

This promise contented Betty, and she ate her dinner quietly. Bob
rode off on the old horse directly after dinner, and then for the
first time Betty noticed that Mrs. Peabody seemed worried about
something.

"Don't you feel well? Won't you go upstairs and lie down and let me
do the dishes?" urged the girl. "Do, Mrs. Peabody. You can have a
nice, long rest before it's time to feed the chickens."

"I feel all right," said Mrs. Peabody dully. "Only--well, I found
this card from the new minister back of the pump this morning. It's a
week old, and he says he's coming out to call this afternoon. There's
no place in the house I can show him, and I haven't got a decent
dress, either."

Betty swallowed her first impulse to say what she thought of a
husband who would make no effort to see that his wife received her
mail, and instead turned her practical mind to consideration of the
immediate moment. The so-called parlor was hopeless she knew, and she
dismissed it from the list of possibilities at once. It was a
sparsely furnished, gloomy room, damp and musty from being tightly
closed all summer, and the unpainted, rough boards had never been
carpeted.

"There's the porch," said Betty suddenly. "Luckily that's shady in
the afternoon, and we can bring out the best things to make it look
used. You let me fix it, Mrs. Peabody. And you can wear--let me see,
what can you wear?"

Mrs. Peabody waited patiently, her eyes mirroring her explicit faith
in Betty's planning powers.

"Your white shirtwaist and skirt," announced the girl at length.
"They're both clean, aren't they? I thought so. Well, I'll lend you a
ribbon girdle, and you can turn in the high neck so it will be more
in style. You'll see, it will look all right."

While Mrs. Peabody washed her dishes with more energy than usual
because she had a definite interest in the coming hours, Betty flew
to the shabby room that was titled by courtesy the parlor. She flung
up the windows and opened the blinds recklessly. She would take only
the plain wooden chair and the two rockers, she decided, for the
stuffed plush furniture would look ridiculous masquerading as summer
furnishings. The sturdy, square table would fit into her scheme, and
also the small rug before the blackened fireplace.

She dashed back to the kitchen and grabbed the broom. She did not
dare scrub the porch floor for fear that it would not dry in time,
but she swept it carefully and spread down the rug. Then one by one,
and making a separate trip each time, she carried out the table and
the chairs. With a passing sigh for the bouquet abandoned in the
field and probably withered by this time, she managed to get enough
flowers from the overgrown neglected garden near the house to fill
the really lovely colonial glass vase she had discovered that morning.

"It looks real pretty," pronounced Mrs. Peabody, when she was
brought out to see the transformed corner of the porch. "Looks as if
we used it regular every afternoon, doesn't it? Do you think it will
be all right not to ask him in, Betty?"

"Of course," said Betty stoutly. "Don't dare ask him in! If he wants
a drink of water, call me, and I'll get it for him. You must be
sitting in your chair reading a magazine when he comes and he'll
think you always spend your afternoons like that."

"I'll hurry and get dressed," agreed Mrs. Peabody, giving a last
satisfied glance at the porch. "I declare, I never saw your beat,
Betty, for making things look pretty."

Betty needed that encouragement, for when it came to making Mrs.
Peabody look pretty in the voluminous white skirt and stiff
shirtwaist of ten years past, the task seemed positively hopeless.
Betty, however, was not one to give in easily, and when she had
brushed and pinned her hostess's thin hair as softly as she could
arrange it, and had turned in the high collar of her blouse and
pinned it with a cameo pin, the one fine thing remaining to Mrs.
Peabody from her wedding outfit, adding a soft silk girdle of gray-blue,
she knew the improvement was marked. Mrs. Peabody stared at
herself in the glass contentedly.

"I didn't know I could look that nice," she said with a candor at
once pathetic and naive. "I've been wishing he wouldn't come, but now
I kinda hope he will."

Betty gently propelled her to the porch and established her in one
of the rocking chairs with a magazine to give her an air of leisure.

"You'll come and talk to him, won't you?" urged Mrs. Peabody
anxiously. "It's been so long since I've seen a stranger I won't know
what to say."

"Yes, you will," Betty assured her "I'll come out after you've
talked a little while. He won't stay long, I imagine, because he will
probably have a number of calls to pay."

"Well, I hope Joseph stays out of sight," remarked Joseph Peabody's
wife frankly. "Of course, in time the new minister will know him as
well as the old one did; but I would like to have him call on me like
other parishioners first."




CHAPTER III

BOB HAS GREAT NEWS


The new minister proved to be a gentle old man, evidently retired to
a country charge and, in his way, quite as diffident as Mrs. Peabody.
He was apparently charmed to be entertained on the porch, and saw
nothing wrong with the neglected house and grounds. His near-sighted
eyes, beaming with kindness and good-will, apparently took comfort
and serenity for granted, and when Betty came out half an hour after
his arrival, carrying a little tray of lemonade and cakes, he was
deep in a recital of the first charge he had held upon his graduation
from the theological seminary forty years before.

"There, that's over!" sighed Mrs. Peabody, quite like the
experienced hostess, when the minister's shabby black buggy was well
on its way out of the lane. "You're dreadful good, Betty, to help me
through with it. He won't come again for another six months--it takes
him that long to cover his parish, the farms are so far apart. Let me
help you carry back the chairs."

Betty longed to suggest that they leave them out and use the porch
as an outdoor sitting room, but she knew that such an idea would be
sure to meet with active opposition from the master of Bramble Farm.
Long before he came in to supper that night the chairs had been
restored to their proper places and Mrs. Peabody had resumed the gray
wrapper she habitually wore. Only the vase of flowers on the table
was left to show that the afternoon had been slightly out of the
ordinary. That and the tray of glasses Betty had unfortunately left
on the draining board of the sink, intending to wash them with the
supper dishes.

"Whose glasses, and what's been in 'em?" demanded Mr. Peabody
suspiciously. "There's sugar in the bottom of one of 'em. You haven't
been making lemonade?" He turned to his wife accusingly.

Bob had not come home yet, and there was only Ethan, the hired man,
Betty, and the Peabodys at the supper table.

"I made lemonade," said Betty quietly. "Those are my own glasses I
bought in Glenside, and the sugar and lemons were mine, too. So were
the cakes."

This silenced Peabody, for he knew that Betty's uncle sent her money
from time to time, and though he fairly writhed to think that she
Could spend it so foolishly, he could not interfere.

As soon as it was dark the Peabody household retired, to save
lighting lamps, and this evening was no exception. Betty learned from
a stray question Mrs. Peabody put to Ethan, the hired man, that Bob
was not expected home until ten or eleven o'clock. There was no
thought of sitting up for him, though Betty knew that in all
likelihood he would have had no supper, having no money and knowing
no one in Trowbridge.

She was not sleepy, and having brushed and braided her hair for the
night, she threw her sweater over her dressing gown and sat down at
the window of her room, a tin of sardines and a box of crackers in
her lap, determined to see to it that Bob had something to eat.

There was a full moon, and the road lay like a white ribbon between
the silver fields. Betty could follow the lane road out to where it
met the main highway, and now and then the sound of an automobile
horn came to her and she saw a car speed by on the main road. Sitting
there in the sweet stillness of the summer night, she thought of her
mother, of the old friends in Pineville, and, of course, of her
uncle. She wondered where he was that night, if he thought of her,
and what would be his answer to her letter.

"Is that a horse?" said Betty to herself, breaking off her reverie
abruptly. "Hark! that sounds like a trotting horse."

She was sure that she could make out the outlines of a horse and
rider on the main road, but it was several minutes before she was
positive that it had turned into the lane. Yes, it must be Bob. No
one else would be out riding at that hour of the night. Betty glanced
at her wrist-watch--half-past ten.

The rhythmic beat of the horse's hoofs sounded more plainly, and
soon Betty heard the sound of singing. Bob was moved to song in that
lovely moonlight, as his sorry mount was urged to unaccustomed spirit
and a feeling of freedom.

  "When in thy dreaming,
   moons like these shall shine again,
  And, daylight beaming,
  prove thy dreams are vain."

Bob's fresh, untrained voice sounded sweet and clear on the night
air, and to Betty's surprise, tears came unbidden into her eyes. She
was not given to analysis.

"Moonlight always makes me want to cry," she murmured, dashing the
drops from her eyes. "I hope Bob will look up and know that I'm at
the window. I don't dare call to him."

But Bob, who had stopped singing while still some distance from the
house, clattered straight to the barn.

Betty hurried over to her lamp, lit it, and set it on the window sill.

"He'll see it from the barn," she argued wisely, "and know that I am
not asleep."

Her reasoning proved correct, for in a few minutes a well-known
whistle sounded below her window. She blew out the light and leaned
out.

"Oh, Betty!" Bob's tone was one of repressed excitement. "I've got
something great to tell you."

"Have you had any supper?" demanded Betty, more concerned with that
question than with any news. "I've something for you, if you're
hungry."

"Hungry? Gee, I'm starved!" was the response. "I didn't dare stop to
ask for a meal anywhere, because I knew I'd be late getting home as
it was. The horse was never cut out for a saddle horse; I'm so stiff
I don't believe I can move to-morrow. Where's the eats?"

"Here. I'll let it down in a moment," answered Betty, tying a string
to the parcel. "Sorry it isn't more, Bob, but the larder's getting
low again."

Bob untied the can and cracker box she lowered to him, and Betty
pulled in the string to be preserved for future use.

"Thanks, awfully," said Bob. "You're a brick, Betty. And, say, what
do you think I heard over in Trowbridge?"

"Don't talk so loud!" cautioned Betty. "What, Bob?"

"Why, the poorhouse farm is this side of the town," said Bob,
munching a cracker with liveliest manifestations of appreciation.
"Coming back to-night--that's what made me late--Jim Turner, who's
poormaster now, called me in. Said he had something to tell me. It
seems there was a queer old duffer spent one night there a while
back--Jim thought it must have been a month ago. He has a secondhand
bookshop in Washington, and he came to the poorhouse to look at some
old books they have there--thought they might be valuable. They
opened all the records to him, and Jim says he was quite interested
when he came to my mother's name. Asked a lot of questions about her
and wanted to see me. Jim said he was as queer as could be, and all
they could get out of him was that maybe he could tell me something
to interest me. He wouldn't give any of the poorhouse authorities an
inkling of what he knew, and insisted that he'd have to see me first."

"Where is he?" demanded Betty energetically. "I hope you didn't come
away without seeing him, Bob. What's his name? How does he look?"

"His name," said Bob slowly, "is Lockwood Hale. And he went back to
Washington the next day."

Betty's air castles tumbled with a sickening slump.

"Bob Henderson!" she cried, remembering, however, to keep her voice
low. "The idea! Do you mean to tell me they let that man go without
notifying you? Why I never heard of anything so mean!"

"Oh, I'm not important," explained Bob, quite without bitterness.
"Poorhouse heads don't put themselves out much for those under
'em--though Jim Turner's always treated me fair enough. But Lockwood Hale
had to go back to Washington the next day, Betty. There honestly
wasn't time to send for me."

"Perhaps they gave him your address," said Betty hopefully. "But,
oh, Bob, you say he was there a month ago?"

Bob nodded unhappily.

"He hasn't my address," he admitted. "Jim says he meant to give it
to him, but the old fellow left suddenly without saying a word to any
one. Jim thought maybe he had the name in mind and would write
anyway. I'd get it, you know, if it went to the poorhouse. But I
guess Hale's memory is like a ragbag--stuffed with odds and ends that
he can't get hold of when he wants 'em. No, Betty, I guess the only
thing for me to do is to go to Washington."

"Well, if you don't go to bed, young man, I'll come down there and
help you along," an angry whisper came from the little window up
under the roof. "You've been babbling and babbling steady for half an
hour," grumbled the annoyed Ethan. "How do you expect me to get any
sleep with that racket going on? Come on up to bed before the old man
wakes up."

Thankful that it was Ethan instead of Mr. Peabody, Bob gathered up
his sardines and the remnants of the crackers and tiptoed up the
attic stairs to the room he shared with the hired man.

Betty hastily slipped into bed, and though Bob's news had excited
her, she was tired enough to fall asleep readily.

In the morning she watched her chance to speak to Bob alone, and
when she heard him grinding a sickle in the toolhouse ran out to tell
him something.

"You must let me lend you some money, Bob," she said earnestly. "I
know you haven't enough to go to Washington on. I've been saving,
thanks to your advice, and I have more than I need. Besides, I could
borrow from the Guerins or the Benders. You will take some, won't you?"

"I have enough, really I have," insisted Bob. "You know Dr. Guerin
sold every one of those charms I carved, and I haven't spent a cent.
It's all buried in a little canvas bag under the rose bush, just like
a movie. I hate to take money from a girl, Betty."

"Don't be silly!" Betty stamped her foot angrily. "It's only a loan,
Bob. And you'd feel cheap, wouldn't you, if you had to come back
after you ran away because you didn't have enough money? You take
this, and you can pay it back as soon as you please after you have
seen the old bookstore man."

She pushed a tight little wad of money into the boy's perspiring hand.

"All right," he capitulated. "I'll borrow it. I would like to know I
had enough. Sure I'm not crippling you, Betsey?"

Betty shook her head, smiling.

"I've enough to buy a ticket to Washington," she assured him.
"That's all we need, isn't it, Bob? Oh, how I wish Uncle Dick would
send for me!"




CHAPTER IV

AT THE VENDUE


"You, Bob!"

The shout awakened Betty at dawn the next morning, and running to
the window she saw Bob disappear into the barn, Mr. Peabody close on
his heels.

"Oh, goodness, I suppose he's scolding about something," sighed the
girl. "There always is something to find fault about. I hope Bob will
keep his temper, because I want him to be able to take me to the
vendue this afternoon."

Joseph Peabody came into breakfast in a surly frame of mind, a
mental condition faithfully reflected in the attitude of his hired
man who jerked back his chair and subsided into it with a grunt.
Betty's irrepressible sense of humor pictured the dog (the Peabodys
kept no dog because the head of the house considered that dogs ate
more than they were worth) tucking his tail between his legs and
slinking under the table as a port in the storm. The dog, she
decided, glancing at Mrs. Peabody's timid face, was all that was
needed to set the seal on a scene of ill-nature and discomfort.

Bob, when he came in late with the milk pails, wore a black scowl
and set his burden down with a crash that spilled some of the
precious fluid on to the oilcloth top of the side table.

"Be a little more careful with that," growled Mr. Peabody, taking
the last piece of ham, which left nothing but the fried potatoes and
bread for Bob's breakfast. "The cows are going dry fast enough
without you trying to waste the little they give."

Bob, looking as though he could cheerfully fling the contents of
both pails over his employer, sullenly began to pump water into the
hand basin. This habit of "washing up" at the kitchen sink while a
meal was in progress always thoroughly disgusted Betty, and Bob
usually performed his ablutions on the back porch. This morning he
was evidently too cross to consider a second person's feelings.

"Always ready enough to throw out what doesn't belong to you," went
on Mr. Peabody grumbling. "Born in the poorhouse, you're in a fair
way to die there. If I didn't watch you every minute, you'd waste
more than I can save in a year."

Bob, his face buried in the roller towel, lost his temper at this
point.

"Oh, for Pete's sake, shut up!" he muttered.

But Mr. Peabody had heard. With a quickness that surprised even his
wife, for ordinarily he slouched his way around, he sprang from his
chair, reached the side of the unconscious Bob, and soundly boxed his
ears twice.

"I'll take no impudence from you!" he cried, enraged. "Here, come
back!" he yelled, as Bob started for the door. "You come back here
and sit down. When you don't come to the table, it will be because I
say so. Sit down, I say!"

Bob, his face livid, his ears ringing, dropped into a chair at the
table. Ethan continued to eat stolidly, and Betty kept her eyes
resolutely fastened on her plate.

"Just for that, you stay home from the Faulkner sale!" announced Mr.
Peabody who was more than ordinarily loquacious that morning. "I'll
find something for you to do this afternoon that'll keep your hands
busy, if not your tongue. Eat your breakfast. I'll have no mincing
over food at my table."

Poor Bob, who had often been forbidden a meal as punishment, now
mechanically tried to eat the unappetizing food placed before him.
Betty was terribly disappointed about the sale, for she had set her
heart on going. There were few pleasures open to her as a member of
the household at Bramble Farm, and, with the exception of the Guerin
girls in town, she had no girl friends her own age. Bob had proved
himself a sympathetic, loyal chum, and he alone had made the summer
endurable.

"Don't care!" she cried, to console the boy, as Peabody and his
helper went out of the house to begin the field work for the day.
"Don't care, Bob. I really don't mind not going to the sale."

Mrs. Peabody was in the pantry, straining the milk.

"We're going," whispered Bob. "You meet me right after dinner at the
end of the lane. I'm sick of being knocked around, and I think Jim
Turner will be at the sale. I want to see him. Anyway, we're going."

"But--but Mr. Peabody will be furious!" ventured Betty. "You know
what a scene he will make, Bob. Do you think we had better go?"

"You needn't," said Bob ungraciously. "I am."

"Of course, if you go, so will I," replied Betty, swallowing a sharp
retort. Bob was badgered enough without a contribution from her.
"Perhaps he will not miss us--we can get back in time for supper."

Immediately after dinner at noon Mr. Peabody sent Bob out to the hay
loft to pitch down hay for the balers who were expected to come and
set up their machine that night, ready for work the next day. He
could not have selected a meaner job, for the hay loft was stifling
in the heat of the midday sun which beat down on the roof of the
barn, and there were only two tiny windows to supply air. Mr. Peabody
himself was going up in the woods to mark trees for some needed fence
rails.

Bob departed with a significant backward glance at Betty, which sent
her flying upstairs to get into a clean frock. Mrs. Peabody
manifested so little interest in her activities that the girl
anticipated no difficulty in getting safely out of the house. As it
happened, her hostess made the way even easier.

"If you're going to Glenside, Betty," she remarked dully, stopping
in the doorway of Betty's room as the girl pulled on her hat, "I wish
you'd see if Grimshaw has any meat scraps. Joseph might get me a bit
the next time he goes over. Just ask how much it is, an' all--the
hens need something more than they're getting."

Betty knew that Joseph Peabody would never buy meat scraps for his
wife's hens. Indeed, she had priced stuff several times at Mrs.
Peabody's request and nothing had ever come of it. But she agreed to
go to Grimshaw's if she got that far in her walk, and Mrs. Peabody
turned aside into her own room without asking any questions.

"Gee! thought you never were coming," complained Bob, when the slim
figure in the navy serge skirt and white middy met him at the end of
the lane road. "The sale starts at one sharp, you know, and we'll
miss the first of it. Lots of 'em will come in overalls, so I'll be
in style."

Before they had walked very far they were overtaken by a rattling
blackboard, drawn by a lean, raw-boned white horse and driven by a
cheerful farmer's wife who invited them to "hop in," an invitation
which they accepted gratefully. She was going to the Faulkner vendue,
she informed them, and her heart was set on three wooden wash tubs
and seven yards of ingrain carpet advertised in the list of household
goods offered for sale.

"My daughter's going to set up for herself next fall," she said
happily, "and that ingrain will be just the thing for her spare room."

When they reached the Faulkner farm, a rather commonplace group of
buildings set slightly in a hollow, they found teams and automobiles
of every description blocking the lane that led to the house.

Bob tied the white horse to an unoccupied post for the woman, and
she hastened away, worried lest the ingrain carpet be sold before she
could reach the crowd surrounding the auctioneer.

Betty, for whom all this was a brand-new experience, enjoyed the
excitement keenly. She followed Bob up to the front porch of the
house where the household effects were being put up for sale, Bob
explaining that the live stock would be sold later.

"Well, look who's here!" cried a hearty voice, as a man, moving
aside to give Betty room, allowed the person standing next to him to
see the girl's face. "Betty Gordon! And Bob, too! Not thinking of
going to farming, are you?"

Gray-haired, kindly-faced Doctor Guerin shook hands cordially, and
kept a friendly arm across Bob's thin shoulders.

"Friends of yours coming home next Tuesday," he said, smiling as one
who knows he brings pleasant news. "The Benders are due in Laurel
Grove. Mrs. Guerin had a postal card last night."

Betty was glad to hear this, for she did not want Bob to leave
Bramble Farm without seeking the advice of the fine young police
recorder who had been so good to them and whose friendship both she
and Bob valued as only those can who need real friends.

"I came to bid on a secretary," Doctor Guerin confided presently.
"It's the only good thing in the whole house. Rest of the stuff is
nothing but trash. That antique dealer from Petria is here, too, and
I suspect he has his eye on the same piece. Don't you want to bid for
me Bob, to keep him in the dark?"

Bob was delighted to do the doctor a service, and when the mahogany
secretary was put up for sale the few other bidders soon dropped out,
leaving the field to the Petria dealer and the lad in the faded
overalls. The dealer, of course, knew that Bob must represent some
buyer, but he could not decide for whom he was bidding, and so was in
the dark as to how high his opponent would go. Had he known that
Doctor Hal Guerin was bidding against him, he would have been
enlightened, for the doctor's collection of antiques was really
famous and the envy of many a professional collector.

"I suppose some rube wants the desk for his sitting room," thought
the Petria man lazily, his eye, keen as it was, failing to see the
doctor in the crowd. "Let him have it, and I'll buy it from him for
ten dollars more before he leaves the sale. He can't resist turning
over his money quick like that."

So when the auctioneer boomed "Sold for forty dollars," and in
answer to his request for the buyer's name Bob said clearly, "Doctor
Guerin," in his own language, the man from Petria was "just plain
sick."

After the household things were sold--and Betty noted with
satisfaction that the three tubs and the ingrain carpet went to the
woman who had so coveted them--she and Bob went out to the barn and
watched the horses and cows, wagons, harnesses and farm machinery
sold. It was an absorbing and colorful scene, and the boy and girl,
fascinated, lingered till the last item was checked off. Then, with a
start, Bob heard a farmer announce that it was half past five.

"Oh dear!" sighed Betty nervously, "you ought to be milking this
minute. Oh, Bob, let's not go home! Couldn't we stay overnight with
Doctor Guerin?"

"Now don't you be afraid, there won't anything happen to scare you,"
responded Bob soothingly. It must be confessed that the knowledge of
the little sum of money tucked away under the rosebush gave him a
bolder outlook on the future.

Hiram Keppler, who owned the farm just beyond the Peabody place,
gave them a lift as far as their lane, and as they hurried down the
road Betty tried her best to master her dread of the coming
interview. She had not a doubt but that Bob's absence would have been
noticed. Looking ahead fearfully, she saw a sight that confirmed her
worst forebodings.

Joseph Peabody stood at the barnyard gate, a horsewhip in his hand




CHAPTER V

CONSEQUENCES


"Oh, Bob!" Betty clutched the boy's sleeve in a panic. "And the
balers have come!"

"So!" began Mr. Peabody, in tones of cold fury. "That's the way you
carry out my orders! Not one forkful of hay pitched down, and the men
ready to go to work to-morrow. You miserable, sneaking loafer, where
have you been?"

"To the vendue," said Bob defiantly.

"Flatly refuse to mind, do you? Well, I'll give you one lesson you
won't forget!" the man reached over and gripped Bob by his shirt
collar. Struggling violently, he was pulled over the five-barred gate.

"I'll learn you!" snarled Peabody, raising the whip.

Betty sprang up on the gate, her eyes blazing.

"How dare you!" she cried, her voice shaking with anger. "How dare
you strike him! I'll scream till some one comes if you touch him.
Those men at the barn won't stand by and see you beat a boy."

"Hoity toity!" sputtered the amazed farmer, confronting the angry
girl in the middy blouse with the blazing cheeks and tangled dark
braids.

Bob tried to pull himself free, but was brought up short by a quick
twist.

"I'm not through with you," Peabody informed him grimly. He glanced
quickly toward the barn and observed the men watching him covertly.
It was the better part of discretion, something told him, not to flog
the boy before so many witnesses.

"I'm through with you!" declared Bob through clenched teeth. "I'm
going! You've had all out of me you're going to get. Let go of me!"

For answer, Peabody tightened his hold on the worn shirt collar.

"Is that so?" he drawled. "Let me tell you, Mr. Smarty, you'll go
out to that barn and pitch down the hay you were supposed to do this
afternoon or you'll go back to the poorhouse. You can take your
choice. The county has a place for incorrigible boys, and if you go
far enough you'll land in the reform school. Are you going out to the
barn or not?"

"I'll go," agreed Bob sullenly.

"Then see that you do. And you needn't bother to stop for supper--you've
several hours' lost time to make up," said Peabody nastily.
"Now go!"

He shook the boy till his teeth rattled and then released him with a
powerful sling that sent him spinning into the dust. Bruised and
shaken, Bob picked himself up and started for the barn.

"You hold your tongue a bit better, or something'll come your way,"
said Peabody shortly, eyeing Betty with disfavor and turning on his
heel at a shout of "Ho, Boss!" from the foreman of the balers.

"Hateful!" cried Betty stormily, climbing down from the gate. "He's
the most absolutely hateful man that ever lived! I wonder if he could
send Bob back to the poorhouse?"

The same thought was troubling Bob, she found, when after supper she
went out to the barn and climbed the loft ladder to see him. She had
brought him some bread and water, the latter contributed by the
Peabody pump and the bread saved from Betty's own meal.

"Do you know, Betty," confided the boy, wiping the heavy
perspiration from his face with a distressingly hot looking red
cotton handkerchief, "I've been thinking over what old Peabody said.
He might take it into his head to send me back to the poorhouse. He
really needs a younger boy, one he can slam about more. I'm getting
so I can fight back. I don't fancy hanging on here till he makes up
his mind to get another boy, and running away from the poorhouse
isn't a simple matter. I'd better make the plunge while there's good
swimming."

It was stifling in the loft, and Betty felt almost giddy. She sat at
the top of the ladder, her feet hanging over the edge of the floor
and regarded Bob anxiously.

"Well, perhaps you had better go early next week," she said
judiciously. "It would be dreadful if he did return you to the
poorhouse."

"Therefore, I'm going to-night," announced Bob coolly. "There's an
eleven-thirty train from Glenside that will make some sort of
connection with the southern local at the Junction. Wish me luck,
Betty!"

"To-night!" gasped Betty in dismay. "Oh, Bob! don't go to-night.
Wait just one night more, ah, please do!"

Betty had the truly feminine horror of quick decisions, and she was
frankly upset by this determination of Bob's. Even as she pleaded she
knew he had made up his mind and that it was useless to ask him to
change it.

"I don't see how you can go--you're not ready," she argued
feverishly. "Your shirts are on the line; I saw them. You're dead
tired after all this work, and it's a long walk to Glenside. Wait
just till to-morrow, Bob, and I won't say a word."

"No, I'm going to-night," said Bob firmly. "I haven't so much
packing to do that it will take me over fifteen minutes. I'll help
myself to the shirts on the line as I go in. By to-morrow morning
I'll be as far away from Bramble Farm as the local can take me."

"But--but--I'll miss you so!" protested Betty, the catch in her
voice sounding perilously close to tears. "What shall I ever do all
alone in this hateful place!"

"Oh, now, Betty!" Bob put a clumsy hand on her shoulder in an effort
to comfort her. "Don't you care--you'll be going to Washington as
soon as you get word from your uncle. Maybe I'll be there when you
come, and we'll go sightseeing together."

"Are you going right to Washington?" asked Betty, drying her eyes.
"And are you sure you have enough money?"

"Oceans of cash," Bob assured her cheerfully. "That's right, brace
up and smile. Think what it will mean to have one peaceful breakfast,
for the last week Peabody has ragged me every meal. Sure I'm going to
Washington to dig out a few facts from this Lockwood Hale. Now I'll
throw down a little more hay for good measure and we'll go on in.
Mustn't rouse suspicions by staying out too long. Peabody will
probably sit up for me to come in to-night."

Betty waited till the hay was pitched down, then followed Bob to the
main floor of the barn.

"Couldn't I walk just a little way with you?" she asked wistfully.
"How soon are you going to start? I could go as far as the end of the
lane."

"I'd rather you went to bed and to sleep," said Bob kindly. "You
couldn't very well traipse around at night, Betty, and I'm not going
till it is good and dark. There's no moon to-night, and you might
have trouble getting back to the house."

"Well--all right," conceded Betty forlornly. "There doesn't seem to
be anything I can do. Whistle under my window, please do, Bob. I'll
be awake. And I could say good-by. I won't make a fuss, I promise."

The boy's packing was of the simplest, for he owned neither suitcase
nor trunk, and his few belongings easily went into a square of old
wrapping paper. He had earned them, few as they were, and felt no
compunctions about taking them with him.

After the bundle was tied up he waited a half hour or so, purely as
a precaution, for the Peabody household went to bed with the chickens
and, with the possible exception of Mrs. Peabody, slumbered heavily.
Bob slipped down the stairs, waking no one, unfastened the heavy
front door, never locked and only occasionally, as to-night, bolted
with a chain, and stepped softly around to the bush where his
precious tin box was buried.

This box was Bob's sole inheritance from his mother, and he had only
a vague knowledge of the papers entrusted to it. Among the yellowed
slips was the marriage certificate of his parents, and he knew that
there were one or two letters. When Joseph Peabody had taken him from
the poorhouse, the lad had buried the box for safekeeping, and during
the three or four years he had been with Mr. Peabody had never taken
it up.

It was not buried very deeply, and he easily uncovered it, smoothing
down the earth to hide the traces of his hasty excavating. He went
around to Betty's window and whistled softly, half hoping that she
might be asleep.

"Hello, Bob dear!" she called instantly, leaning from the window,
her vivid face so alight with affection and hope for him that it was
a pity he could not see her clearly. "I'm wishing you the best of
luck, and I hope the old bookstore man has splendid news for you. You
wait for me in Washington."

"I will!" whispered Bob heartily. "And you tell Mr. Bender, won't
you? He'll understand. I'll write him the first chance I get, and Doc
Guerin, too. Good-by, Betty--I--I--"

To his surprise and confusion, Bob suddenly choked.

"Here's something to take with you," said Betty softly, dropping a
little packet that landed at his feet. "Good-by, Bob. I just know
things will turn out all right for you."

The dark head was withdrawn, and Bob, picking up the little package,
turned and began his long walk to the Glenside station. A hoot-owl
screeched at mournful intervals, and the night sounds would have
tried a city lad's nerves in that long dark stretch that led him
finally to the station. But Bob could identify every sound, and
nature had always proved kind to him, far kinder than many of the
people he had known. He trudged along sturdily, and, twenty minutes
before the train was due, found himself the solitary passenger on the
Glenside platform.

He stood under the uncertain rays of the lamp to examine the parting
gift Betty had given him. Tucked under half a dozen chocolate wafers
was a five dollar bill folded into the tiniest possible wad. The
choky feeling assailed Bob again.

"She certainly is some girl!" he thought with mixed gratitude and
admiration.




CHAPTER VI

THE RUNAWAY MISSED


Bob's absence was not discovered till breakfast time, for Ethan, who
was a sound sleeper, when he woke and saw Bob's empty cot, supposed
the boy had risen earlier than usual and gone to the barn. Mr.
Peabody, too, took it for granted that the boy was milking, and it
was not until they were seated at the table and half way through the
meal that anything out of the ordinary was suspected.

"Why in tarnation doesn't that good for nothing bring in the milk?"
grumbled Mr. Peabody. "I declare he gets later and later every
morning. The balers will be over to start work at seven, and if he
thinks he's going to spend half an hour dawdling over his breakfast
after they get here, he's much mistaken."

The men who were to bale the hay had slept at the adjoining farm,
according to the agreement made, and would be at Bramble Farm for
dinner and supper and to spend that night.

"You're finished, Ethan. Go hurry him up," ordered Joe Peabody.
"Send him in here flying and turn the cows out to pasture."

"He hasn't milked!" Ethan cleared the porch steps at a single bound
and burst into the kitchen, shouting this intelligence. Excitement
was scarce in Ethan's life, and he enjoyed the pleasurable sensation
of carrying unusual tidings, even if unpleasant. "The barn door was
shut and the cows were bellowing their heads off. Not a one of 'em's
been milked!"

"I want to know!" said Joseph Peabody stupidly. "Was he in bed when
you came down, Ethan?"

"No, he wasn't," answered the hired man. "I thought he'd gone on
out. Do you suppose something's happened to him?"

Mr. Peabody stepped to the porch and gave a quick glance at the
bench where the milk pails were usually left to air and dry. They
were there, just as they had been left the night before.

"I think he's cleared out!" he announced: grimly. "Betty, do you
know what this young scoundrel is up to?"

Betty's eyes brimmed over, and she flung herself blindly into Mrs.
Peabody's arms which closed around her, though that good woman was
unaccustomed to demonstrations of affection.

"There, there." She tried to soothe the girl, for Betty's convulsive
sobbing really alarmed her.

"Don't you go to feel bad, dearie. If Bob's gone, he's gone, and
that's all there is to it."

Peabody, milk pail in hand, motioned to Ethan to go out and begin
milking.

"That isn't all there is to it, not by a long shot!" he growled at
his wife. "If I get my hands on that boy he'll rue the day he ever
set foot off this farm. He'll go back to the poorhouse and there
he'll stay till he's of age."

Betty sat up, pushing the tumbled hair from her hot forehead.

"I'm glad Bob ran away!" she cried recklessly. "He's gone where you
won't catch him, either. You never treated him fairly, and you know
it."

Peabody banged the kitchen door by way of relieving his feelings,
but the latch did not fasten so that he heard Betty's next sentence
addressed to his wife.

"I'm only waiting for a letter from Uncle Dick," confided Betty.
"Then I'm going to Washington. Things will never be any different
here, Mrs. Peabody; you've said so yourself. I wish Uncle Dick would
hurry and write. It's been a good while since I heard." And there was
a catch in the girl's voice.

The man slouched off the porch, a peculiar smile on his lean, shrewd
face. One hand, thrust into his ragged coat pocket, rested on a
letter there. As he felt it beneath his fingers, his crafty eyes
brightened with a gleam of mockery.

Mrs. Peabody may have been curious about Bob's departure, but she
asked no questions, somewhat to Betty's surprise.

"I'm glad she doesn't ask me," thought Betty, helping mechanically
in the preparations for dinner which were more elaborate than usual
because of the presence of the three balers. "Bob must be half way to
Washington by now, and I don't believe they have the slightest idea
he is headed for there." The Peabodys, she reasoned, knew nothing of
Lockwood Hale, and of the attraction the capital of the country held
for the orphan lad.

Betty insisted on doing a fair share of the extra work after the
noon meal, and then ran upstairs to get ready to go over to Glenside.
She wanted to tell the Guerins that Bob had gone, and from their
house she knew she could telephone to those other good friends, the
Benders. Laurel Grove was too far to walk, even for a practised hiker
like Betty.

To her dismay, as she left the house, Mr. Peabody joined her and
fell into step.

"I'll go as far as Durlings with you," he announced affably, Durling
being their neighbor on the south, his farm lying along the road in
the direction of Glenside. "Sorry the horses haven't shoes, Betty, or
you might drive."

Betty shot him a suspicious glance. The three horses never were
shod, except when a certain amount of traveling had to be done on the
stone road. In all the weeks she had spent at Bramble Farm a horse
had never been offered for her convenience, and all of her trips to
town had been either afoot, or taken with Bob in the rattling,
shabby, one-horse work wagon.

"Where did you say Bob was going?" came next.

Betty bit her lip.

"I didn't say," she said evenly. "I--I don't think it's fair to ask
me."

"But you know," snapped Mr. Peabody. "I guess I have a right to know
where he's gone. I'm responsible for him. I've got papers that show
it. The poorhouse folks are going to ask me what becomes of him. You
just tell me where he went, and I'll satisfy 'em. I won't follow him
and try to bring him back, Betty. He's too old for that. Making his
bed, he'll have to lie on it. I won't follow him."

The girl twisted her handkerchief nervously. She was not afraid of
the man. That is, she feared no physical violence at his hands, but
he was capable, she knew, of forcing her back to the farm and locking
her up in her room till she furnished him with the required
information. And what harm could it do Bob? It was not likely that
Peabody could find the boy in a large city.

"He won't be made to come back," repeated her tormentor.

"I wish I could believe you," said Betty pitifully.

She looked so young and helpless, trying to pit her girlish
intelligence and strength against the wily miser, that another man
would have been ashamed to press her. Not so Peabody--he had always
considered that he was entitled to whatever he could get from others,
information, cash, or work, it mattered not.

They were approaching the Durling farm now, and suddenly Betty's
pointed chin lifted.

"I won't tell you!" she said firmly. "I do know where Bob went, but
he was perfectly justified in leaving a place where he was treated
worse than a dog. You would do him no good--I'm sure of that. And if
the poorhouse authorities make a fuss about his running off, I'll
tell them what he had to endure."

Joseph Peabody's mouth dropped in astonishment. He had seen Betty
lose her temper before, but she had never so openly defied him.

"You think you're high and mighty," he sneered. "Let me tell you,
Miss, there's more ways than one of getting what you want in this
world. Joe Peabody isn't checkmated very often, and it takes more
than an impudent girl to do it. I'm going into Lem Durling's and
telephone Jim Turner, the poormaster. I kind of surmise he can give
me a line on the direction Bob's taken."

Betty walked on, disdaining to answer, her head very high in the air
but her heart in her shoes. Jim Turner would be sure to tell of
Lockwood Hale, and Mr. Peabody would be astute enough to guess that
Bob's destination was Washington.

When she reached Doctor Guerin's house, between the heat and the
dust and the long walk and her anxiety, she was in a highly excited
state, and the doctor's wife made her lie down on the couch and rest
before she would allow her to telephone to the Benders. Mrs. Bender's
sister answered the telephone. The recorder and his wife had made a
detour on their homeward trip that would extend their absence for
another week.

"Betty, you'll be ill if you're going to get all worked up like
this," scolded Mrs. Guerin, for Betty was crying as she hung up the
receiver. "I never saw you so unstrung, my dear. You won't be fit to
go to your uncle when he does send for you. I wonder if the doctor
hadn't better see you?"

Norma and Alice Guerin, two pretty girls, the former about Betty's
age, the latter a year or two older, looked at her anxiously. Betty
in tears was an unusual sight to them.

"I'm all right," gulped that young person, inwardly alarmed at the
thought of being too ill to travel when the word came. "I didn't
sleep very well last night, thinking of Bob. Is that the secretary he
bid on at the Faulkner sale?"

Knowing that the quickest way for Betty to get control of her nerves
was to forget her troubles, Mrs. Guerin entered into an enthusiastic
description of the beauties of the old desk, showing the secret
drawer and the half score of carved pigeonholes and dwelling on the
doctor's delight in securing such a treasure at a bargain. Mrs.
Guerin succeeded in having Betty more like her old self before Doctor
Hal Guerin came in from a round of calls.

He was delighted to see Betty, who was an especial favorite of his,
and much interested in her account of Bob's flight.

"Did the lad have money enough?" he growled. "I suppose he'd walk
before he'd borrow from me."

"He had enough," Betty assured him. "All the charms you sold for him
amounted to quite a lot, and he had saved every cent of that."

"And you probably helped him out," commented the doctor shrewdly.
"Well, well, the lad may yet whittle his way to fame and fortune."

He referred to Bob's knack for fashioning pretty and quaint little
wooden charms and pendants, which he polished to satin smoothness and
painted and stained in bright colors. Norma Guerin had worn one at
boarding school, and it was through her and her father that Bob had
secured a large number of orders which had netted him a tidy little
sum.

When the time came for Betty to go, the doctor insisted that he
would take her as far as the lane, and on the trip she told him that
as soon as she heard from her uncle she meant to pack her trunk and
leave for Washington.

"I don't like the idea of your making the journey alone," grumbled
Doctor Guerin; "but I don't see who there is to go with you. One
thing, Betty girl, brushing up against the Peabodys has given you a
practical fund of self-reliance. You're better fitted than Alice to
find your way about alone. Not that I would have chosen to have you
get your knocks just in the manner they've been handed to you, but
the results leave nothing to be desired. You're standing squarely on
your own feet, Betsey, and it's this summer's grilling training that
has done it."




CHAPTER VII

A BELATED LETTER


The hay was all baled by the next morning, and the balers, atop the
lumbering machine, caroled loudly if not musically as the fat horses
dragged them slowly up the lane. Neat bales of hay were piled high on
the barn floor, to be carted over to Hagar's Corners and loaded on a
freight car. That would be Ethan's job, and he grumbled at the
prospect of doing it without Bob's help.

Betty, coming in from the garden, stumbled over something in the
narrow entry. It was a man's coat--Mr. Peabody's, she recognized when
she picked it up and shook it slightly to free it from dust. A letter
fell from the pocket as she replaced it on the hook where it usually
hung, and, stopping to pick it up, she saw to her surprise that it
was addressed to her.

"From Washington!" she said aloud, deciphering the postmark. "And
mailed five days ago! He's carried it in his pocket ever since it
came!"

At first she feared it had been read, but evidently Mr. Peabody had
not troubled to open it; so hastily tearing the envelope, she read
the brief note. A check was enclosed for her, and Mr. Gordon
suggested that she go to Pineville and visit old friends there for a
week or two until his plans were definitely shaped.

"I know the Arnolds are in California," he wrote; "but the
Bensingers will be glad to have you, or any of your mother's old
friends. You do not have to stay one minute where you are unhappy."

Betty looked up as a shadow fell across the sunny floor. It was Mr.
Peabody, and he had the grace to show confusion when he saw the
letter in her hand.

Betty sprang to her feet.

"Why did you keep my letter?" she demanded hotly. "How did you dare
to hold back mail? This must have been in your coat pocket three or
four days. It was mailed five days ago!"

"Been rummaging in my coat pocket, have you?" sneered the farmer.

"I have not! The coat was on the floor, and I fell over it. The
letter fell out while I was trying to hang it up. No one has a right
to hold back another person's mail!"

"Now hold your horses," advised Peabody pacifically. "Who's been
holding back mail? If a body takes the mail out of the box and
carries it around in his coat a day or two, because he doesn't
remember it, that ain't such a crime that I ever knew. I just forgot
there was a letter for you."

Betty turned away in disgust and went out to her favorite apple tree
to think things over. She did not believe for one moment that Mr.
Peabody had forgotten her letter. Indeed, absent-mindedness was far
from being one of his traits. However, there was absolutely nothing
to be gained by arguing, and the way was now clear for her to leave
Bramble Farm. Surely the worst of her troubles were over.

"I might go to Pineville," she thought meditatively. "I'd love to
see the Bensingers again and the dear little house where we lived.
I'll pack this afternoon."

Betty was an orderly little person, and at her work that afternoon
she stopped frequently to sew on a button here, to mend a rip in this
garment or to whip a frayed edge that might mar an otherwise dainty
belonging. Singing softly over her task, a timid knock at her door
wakened the girl from a happy reverie.

"Come in, Mrs. Peabody," she called cheerfully. "Do sit down and
give me advice about where things should go. I thought I hadn't
bought anything this summer, but I seem to have a great deal more
stuff than I brought with me."

"You're packing then?" asked Mrs. Peabody, taking a chair near the
bed and regarding Betty oddly. "Are you really going, Betty?"

"Oh, yes," Betty answered matter-of-factly, "Uncle Dick wants me to
stop in Pineville and visit old friends for a bit. And there's no use
in pretending, Mrs. Peabody, that--that--"

"No, I suppose not," sighed the woman, understanding only too well.
"Land knows, if I could get away I'd have no misgivings about the
right of it. I'll miss you, though. You've been a sight of company
this summer, and no one could have been sweeter to me, Betty."

"Agatha!" came a stentorian shout from the front hall. "Are you
going to stay up there all day?"

"My stars, I forgot what I came up for!" Mrs. Peabody rose
hurriedly. "Joseph sent me up to tell you he wanted to ask you
something, Betty. And here I sit right down and him waiting there all
this time!"

Betty was far from concerned over Mr. Peabody's wasted time, but she
wondered uneasily what he could wish to ask her. Something connected
with Bob, doubtless. She followed Mrs. Peabody downstairs and found
the master of Bramble Farm striding up and down impatiently.

"Never saw the beat of women," he muttered. "Gabble, gabble, and an
hour right out of a day's work means nothing to 'em. Oh, here you
are, Miss. You know that gray alpaca coat of mine you took the letter
from this morning?"

"The coat the letter fell out of?" corrected Betty, knowing that
such quibbling was foolish On her part and might provoke serious
irritation in her questioner, yet unable to refrain. "Of course I
remember it; what about it?"

Peabody accepted her description of the coat. He was plainly excited
and nervous, and betrayed a curious disposition to conciliate Betty,
instantly detected in his change of tone.

"Did you pick up any other papers?" he asked quite politely. "Any
folded sheets, I mean, or a long envelope? I thought you might have
put them back of the clock or somewhere for safe keeping and
forgotten to mention them to me."

Betty looked her astonishment. Automatically her eyes traveled to
the clock which was pulled out of its place against the wall. So the
man had actually looked there, believing that out of chagrin she
might have concealed his papers from him!

"Nothing fell out of your pocket except my letter," she said
earnestly and with a quietness that carried conviction. "I saw
absolutely nothing else on the floor. If I had picked up other
papers, I should have returned them to you, of course."

Mrs. Peabody cleared her throat, usually a sign of coming speech on
the rare occasions when she did open her mouth in her husband's
presence.

"What you lost, Joseph?" she asked eagerly. "Something missing out
o' your pocket?"

"Yes, something out of my pocket!" said her husband savagely. "You
wouldn't know if I told you, but it's an unrecorded deed and worth a
good deal of money. And I'll bet I know who took it--that measly
runaway, Bob Henderson! By gum, he carried the coat up to the house
for me from the barn the day before he lit out. That's where it's
gone. I see his game! He'll try to get money out of me. But I won't
pay him a cent. No sir, I'll go to Washington first and choke the
deed out of his dirty pocket."

"Did Bob go to Washington?" quavered Mrs. Peabody, her mind seizing
on this concrete fact, the one statement she could understand in her
husband's monologue. "How'd you find out, Joseph?"

"Not through Betty," returned Peabody grimly. "She's willing to take
the scoundrel's part against honest folks any time. Jim Turner told
me. Leastways he told me of some old duffer who runs a crazy shop
down there, and he thinks Bob's gone looking him up to find out about
his parents. Just let him try blackmailing me, and he'll learn a
thing or two."

Betty had kept still as long as she could.

"Bob is no thief!" she said bravely. "You ought to be ashamed to
say such a thing about him. I know he didn't take your old deed. What
earthly use would it be to him? Besides, Bob would never touch a
thing that wasn't his!"

"I don't believe he would take anything, Joseph," urged Mrs. Peabody
with perfectly amazing temerity. As a rule she took neither side in a
controversy. "Besides, as the child says, what good would an
unrecorded deed do him? Unless--Joseph, have you bought the Warren
lots?"

"You tend to your housework, and I'll manage my own affairs,"
snapped Peabody, turning a dull brick red, however. "I meant to put
the thing in the safety deposit box over to the bank, and then that
sick cow took my mind completely off it. If Betty didn't take it, Bob
did. It's gone, and they're the only two that could have put hands on
it."

"I tell you that I haven't seen the deed," said Betty firmly. "And I
am equally certain that Bob never took it. He's the soul of honor,
whatever you may think, and he would no more take what wasn't his
than he would lie to you about it."

Peabody caught hold of her right hand suddenly.

"What you carrying?" he demanded suspiciously. "A trunk key? Looks
mighty funny, doesn't it, to be packing up with something pretty
valuable missing? The law would likely give me the right to search
your trunk."

"What a dreadful old man you are!" cried Betty, involuntarily,
shrinking from the sinister face that grinned malevolently into hers.
"You have no right to touch my trunk."

"Well, no call to look like that," muttered Peabody, turning toward
the door. "I knew that other young one took it, and I aim to make it
hot for him."

"Bob didn't take any deed!" stormed Betty to Mrs. Peabody, her
packing forgotten for the moment. "Why does he keep insisting Bob
stole it? And why, oh, why did that poorhouse man have to tell where
Bob had gone?"

Mrs. Peabody's natural curiosity had to be satisfied, and as it was
no longer a secret Betty told her of Lockwood Hale and Bob's
determination to find out more about himself.

"He doesn't want any deed," she finished scornfully. "Can't you make
Mr. Peabody see how foolish such an accusation is?"

Mrs. Peabody leaned against the kitchen table wearily.

"I know what he's thinking," she said dully. "I know more than I
want to know, Betty. Joseph has bought the Warren lots, and that
means he's got 'em for his own price. Old man Warren is in his dotage
and these lots have been surveyed and cut up into building plots on
the stone road over t'other side of Laurel Grove where the trolley's
coming through this spring. Joseph will probably sell 'em for three
times what he's paid for 'em. That's why he doesn't have the deed
recorded; Warren's children will get hold of it, and I doubt if the
sale would hold in court. Everybody knows the old father isn't
competent to handle his property. There was talk of having one of the
sons made his guardian some months ago. Joseph has just talked him
into selling. If he wasn't my husband, I should say the sale was a
plain swindle."




CHAPTER VIII

GOOD-BY TO BRAMBLE FARM


Betty was still mystified.

"What has Bob to do with it?" she urged. "I don't see how the deed
would be of any use to him; he couldn't claim the lots."

"No, he couldn't claim the lots," admitted Joseph Peabody's wife.
"But he could hold the deed and threaten to notify George Warren, if
Joseph didn't pay him a good round sum of money. Mind you, I'm not
saying he would do that, Betty, but he could. That's what Joseph
thinks he means to do."

"Well, I call that very silly," said Betty briskly. "Bob Henderson
isn't a thief or a blackmailer, whatever Mr. Peabody chooses to
think. That deed is probably in another coat pocket this minute, or
else he's lost it over in Glenside."

"I expect that worries him some, too," confided Mrs. Peabody. "He
would hate to have it known that he's bought the Warren lots. But I
guess it would have been better to have had the deed recorded than to
run the risk of losing it and the whole town likely to pick it up on
the street."

Before supper that night Betty had her trunk packed and her simple
belongings gathered up. She knew that Peabody was fully aware of her
intention to leave, but, as her board was paid for nearly a week in
advance, he could make no possible objection. It was sheer
perversity, she decided, that kept him from mentioning the subject to
her.

"I'm going to-morrow, Mr. Peabody," she said pleasantly at the
supper table, having waited till Ethan had gone to the barn to milk.
"What time would be most convenient to take my trunk over to Glenside
or to Hagar's Corners?"

"I'm not going to either place to-morrow," was the composed answer.
"Don't know exactly when I shall be going over again, either. Ethan
and me's got our hands full right here with the late-season
cultivating."

"But I have to get to the station," protested Betty. "I can walk, of
course, but some one will have to take my trunk. You met me at the
station when I came, or rather Bob did, you know. Why aren't you
willing to help me go now that the summer is nearly over?"

"You haven't done me so many favors that I should put myself out for
you," retorted Peabody sourly. "I don't care how you get to the
station, but none of my rigs go off this place to-morrow, that's
flat. And you haven't got that thieving nimble-fingers to plot and
plan with you now. You'll have to manage by yourself."

"What are you going to do, Betty?" asked Mrs. Peabody anxiously,
following the girl to the door after the meal was over. "You're not
going to walk to Glenside to-night to try to get a team to come after
you?"

"No, I'm only going over to Kepplers," replied Betty capably. "I'm
sure one of the boys will drive me over, if not to Glenside, to
Hagar's Corners, where I can get some kind of train for the Junction.
All the through trains stop at Hagar's Corners, don't they? I came
that way. Perhaps that station is better than Glenside, after all."

The walk across the fields tranquillized her, and she was able to
enlist the aid of the Keppler's oldest boy without entering into too
detailed an account of Mr. Peabody's shortcomings. Indeed, the
Kepplers, father and sons, having been the nearest neighbors to
Bramble Farm for eleven years, had a very fair idea of what went on
there.

"Sure, I'll take you, and the trunk, too," promised Fred Keppler
heartily. "Any time you say, Betty. There's a good train for
Pineville, not too many stops, at twelve-three. How about that?"

It was settled that he should come for her about half past ten, and
Betty walked home filled with thoughts of the little home town to
which she would be speeding on the morrow.

"If Uncle Dick knew the things I've had to endure, I'm sure he'd say
that I haven't lost my temper often, considering," she mused. "Is
that something sticking out of the mail box? Why. it is, and a
newspaper. I guess Mr. Peabody forgot to come down to the box to-day."

She opened the box and found the paper was addressed to her. The
familiar wrapper and type told her it was the _Pineville Post_, to
which she had subscribed when she left the town, and, tucking it under
her arm, she went on to the house, intending to read an hour or so
before going to bed.

Lighting the lamp in her room, Betty glanced toward her trunk
mechanically. She had left it locked, but the lid was now ajar. Had
some one been tampering with the lock?

"He's opened it!" she cried to herself, making a hasty examination.
"How did he dare! And look at the mess everything's in!"

Alas for Betty's hour of neat and careful packing! Dainty garments
were tossed about recklessly, her shoes rested on her clean
handkerchiefs, and it was plain that no attempt had been made to
conceal the fact that a heavy hand had thoroughly explored the
contents of the trunk.

"I'm only thankful he didn't break the lock," said Betty, trying to
find a ray of brightness. "Whatever he opened it with, nothing is
broken. I suppose the only thing to do is to take everything out and
do it all over. And to-morrow morning I'll sit on the top till Fred
Keppler comes."

Taking out her clothes and repacking was a tiresome job, and all
thoughts of reading well gone from Betty's mind when the task was
completed and the trunk locked for a second time. With the feeling
that, in view of what the next day might bring, she ought to go to
bed early, she began at once to prepare for bed. Brushing her thick,
dark hair, her eyes fell on the unopened paper.

"I suppose I'll be there to-morrow night," she thought, picking it
up and slitting the wrapper with a convenient nail file.

She opened and smoothed out the first page. The first words that
caught her attention, in large black headlines across four columns,
were:

  GYPSY BAND STRICKEN WITH SMALL-POX:

  WHOLE TOWN QUARANTINED!

Then followed the account of the discovery of illness among a band
of gypsies camped on the outskirts of Pineville, of the diagnosis of
smallpox, and of the strict quarantine immediately put in force. The
issue of the _Post_ was only two days old.

"Well, I never!" gasped Betty, doing some rapid thinking. "I'm glad
it didn't happen after I got there. I might be held up for weeks. I
can't stay here, that's certain. There's nothing to do but drive to
Glenside and take the train for Washington. I guess Fred will be
willing to change his plans."

She decided that she would say nothing to the Peabodys about the
alteration of her traveling schedule, fearing that if Mr. Peabody
heard she was going to Washington he might accuse her of a conspiracy
with Bob in connection with the lost deed.

Bright and early the next morning she was up, her pretty traveling
bag, the gift of her uncle, packed, her room in perfect order. There
was really no one or nothing to say good-by to, for she felt more
pity than affection for Mrs. Peabody, and the Bramble Farm animals
had been too unused to petting to respond readily to her overtures.
Betty, at the breakfast table, had a swift conviction that she would
be leaving with far different feelings if Bob had been there to stay
behind.

Mr. Peabody asked her no questions about her plans and stalked off
as usual to the barn with Ethan when he had finished the meal.

"I declare I'm going to miss you, Betty," said Mrs. Peabody once, in
the middle of the dishwashing, with which Betty insisted on helping.

That was a good deal for her to say, and the girl, who had a natural
longing to be missed, was grateful. And when Fred Keppler drove into
the yard, promptly at half-past ten, and went upstairs for her
trunk--for neither Peabody nor his hired man was in sight--Mrs. Peabody
kissed her warmly and with tears in her eyes.

"Hop right in, Betty," said Fred cordially. "Got a nice day for your
trip, haven't you? All fixed? All right, then."

He gathered up the reins and had turned the horse's head when,
apparently from the clouds, Mr. Peabody appeared on the scene.

"Long as you're going over to Hagar's Corners you won't mind giving
me a lift, will you?" he drawled. "I have an errand over at the
station, and it won't take me a minute. I can come right back with
you. Go on, Fred; I'll sit in here with the trunk and you and Betty
needn't mind me."

Without waiting for an invitation, he swung himself up on top of the
trunk, and smiled pleasantly. He was saving his own horse a long
drive and getting a necessary errand done at the expense of a
neighbor, always a desirable consummation in the Peabody mind.

Fred opened his mouth and closed it wordlessly. His father would
have known what to do, but fifteen-year-old Fred did not know how to
deal with such a display of assurance. There seemed nothing to do but
to take this unwelcome passenger to Hagar's Corners and back.

Betty, for her part, could have cried with vexation. Gone was her
chance of asking Fred to take her to Glenside, and with it the hope
of getting to Washington. She knew that after the noon train at
Hagar's Corners there were no more till four o'clock. She wanted to
say good-by to the Guerins and to cash her uncle's check. No wonder
she was assailed by a strong desire to tumble the satisfied Mr.
Peabody out head over heels.

The drive was taken almost in silence, each of the three busy with
his own thoughts. At the station Betty and her trunk were put down,
and then she had a few minutes to speak to Fred while Mr. Peabody was
talking to the freight agent, who was also the passenger agent, the
telegraph clerk and the janitor.

"Don't you want some money?" whispered Fred hurriedly. "Mother told
me to ask you. And she sent you this."

He thrust into her hands a box of lunch.

"I have a check I want to cash," said Betty nervously. "Will the
station agent do it, do you suppose? It's for fifty dollars. And,
Fred, Pineville is quarantined for smallpox and I want to go to
Washington, but I didn't want Mr. Peabody to know. Hush! Here he
comes now!"

Fred Keppler had what his fond mother called a "good head," and as
Peabody and the agent stopped in the station doorway to continue
their discussion he proceeded to bear out her theory by thrusting a
wad of bills into Betty's hand.

"Money for the calves," he explained. "Just fifty there. Haven't
seen Dad to turn it over to him. Give me the check and it will be all
right. And you ask Dan Gowdy, the agent, about trains. I guess he can
dope out a way to get you to Washington. You still have ten minutes."

"Good-by, and thank you heaps!" cried Betty warmly, shaking his
hand. "I don't know what I should have done without you, Fred!"




CHAPTER IX

NEW FRIENDS


Her hands filled with the bank bills Fred had thrust into them, her
bag under one arm and the lunch box under the other, Betty stood
forlornly on the platform and watched the horse and wagon out of
sight. Mr. Peabody had merely nodded to her by way of farewell, and
Betty felt that if she never saw him again there would be little to
regret. As a matter of fact, she was to meet him again and not under
much more favorable aspects. But of that she was happily ignorant.

The whistling of the lanky young station agent, who was covertly
staring at her under pretense of sweeping up the already neat boards
before the door, roused her. She remembered that she did not want to
go to Pineville.

"Why, I guess I can fix it up for you," said Dan Gowdy cheerfully,
when she had stated her predicament, withholding only the reason for
not telling Mr. Peabody. "Let me see--twelve-three stops at
Centertown. But you don't want to spend the night on the train. Going
from Centertown, you'd get to Washington about ten in the morning."

"I'd rather not sleep on the train," answered Betty timidly, hoping
that she was not unreasonable. Aside from the expense, she was not
used to traveling, and the idea of a night alone on the train for the
first time rather daunted her.

"Well, then--Wait a minute, I've got it!" shouted the agent
enthusiastically. "You buy a ticket up the line to Halperin. That's
quite a town, and the through trains all stop. My brother-in-law's
telegraph operator there, and I'll send him a message to look out for
you, and he and my sister will keep you over night. They've got a
pretty place right in the country--trolley takes you to the door--and
a baby that's named for me and some kid if I do say it. Then in the
morning you can take the seven-forty-five for Washington and get
there at five-fifty-two if it isn't late. How's that?"

"But your sister!" stammered Betty. "She doesn't know me. What will
she say?"

"She'll say you have eyes just like Juliet, the little sister who
died when she was about your age," declared Dan Gowdy gently. "Don't
you fret, Sister, she'll be glad to have you. Now here's your ticket,
and I'll talk to Steve as soon as you're on board the train. That's
her smoke now."

Betty was conscious that there was something else on her mind, but
it was not until she was seated in the train and had had her ticket
punched that she remembered. She had thanked kind Dan Gowdy rather
incoherently, though as warmly as she could, and had only half heard
his explanation that she was taking the 12:01 train up the line
instead of the 12:03 down, and it was no wonder that in the bustle of
boarding the train she had forgotten her intention of telegraphing to
her Uncle Dick. He had given her his address as the Willard Hotel,
and the letter was already six days old.

"But I really think in the morning will be better," decided Betty,
watching the flying landscape. "He wouldn't have given me the address
if he didn't expect to be there for some time. Before I take the
Washington train I'll telegraph him and let him know when to meet me."

The train made three stops before Halperin was reached, and Betty
stepped down to find herself before a pretty, up-to-date station
built of cream-colored brick, with a crowd of stylish summer folk
mingling on the platform with farmers and townspeople. Several
automobiles were backed up waiting for passengers, and there were one
or two old-fashioned hacks. A trolley car was rounding the street
corner, the motorman sounding his bell noisily.

"Betty Gordon, isn't it?" asked a pleasant voice.

A round-faced man was smiling down at her, a young man, Betty
decided, in spite of the white hair. His keen dark eyes were
pleasant, and he held out his hand cordially.

"Dan told me you had cornflowers on your hat," he said quizzically,
"and I, knowing that Dan calls all blue flowers cornflowers, picked
you out right away. Only they are forget-me-nots, aren't they?"

"They're supposed to be larkspur," answered Betty, laughing and
feeling at ease at once. "Perhaps the milliner didn't have a garden."

"Well, anyway, they're blue," said the brother-in-law comfortably.
"Don't suppose Dan told you my name?"

He was guiding her around the station toward the trolley tracks as
he spoke.

"He said the baby was named for him, but he didn't say what your
name was," admitted Betty dimpling.

"Just like him!" grinned her companion. "Dan's so all-fired proud of
that youngster he never lets a chance slip to tell we named him
Daniel Gowdy Brill. Though Dan senior usually forgets to add the
Brill."

"Does--does Mrs. Brill know I'm coming?" ventured Betty.

"She sure does! I telephoned her the minute I heard from Dan, and I
suspect she and the baby are sitting out on the fence now watching
for you to come along. Sorry I can't go with you, but I've just come
on duty. You tell the conductor to let you off at Brill's, and I'll
see you at supper to-night."

He helped her on the car, tipped his hat, and ran back to the
station, leaving Betty with the comfortable feeling that the Brills
were used to company and rather liked it.

She repeated her instructions to the conductor, who nodded silently,
and, after a quarter of an hour's ride, signaled to her that her
destination was reached. They had passed the town limits, and were in
the open country. Betty had noticed several farmhouses, of the
artistic remodeled type, evidently summer homes of the well-to-do, as
the car rattled along.

She saw one of these as she stepped from the trolley car, and also,
under a tree, a young woman holding a beautiful, rosy baby. These two
immediately swooped down upon her.

"I'm so glad you've come!" Mrs. Brill kissed her unaffectedly. "Kiss
Danny, too! Isn't he a nice baby? We waited lunch for you, and if
you're half as starved as we are--"

Still chattering, she led the way into the house. Mrs. Brill was an
elder sister of the Hagar's Corner's agent and very like him in face,
manner, and bright, cheery way of speaking. The house was tastefully
furnished, and a white-capped maid could be seen hovering over the
table as they went upstairs. Betty learned long afterward that Mr.
Brill's father was wealthy and idolized his son's wife, who had given
the younger man the ambition and spur his career had lacked until he
met and married her. It was lovely Rose Gowdy who persuaded Steve
Brill to take the job of telegraph operator, forgetting his
prematurely white hair, and she who encouraged him to work his way to
the top of the railroad business. Rose, and Rose's son, were given
all the credit of that ultimate success by the older Brill.

"I had a little sister once who looked just like you," said Mrs.
Brill, as she watched Betty smooth her hair at the mirror in the
chintz-hung guest room. "Her name was Juliet. Poor old Dan nearly
broke his heart when she died."

"He said something about her," replied Betty shyly. "Oh, look at
that cunning baby! He thinks he can eat his own foot!"

"He will, too, if he doesn't get his bottle soon," said the baby's
mother, rising. "Come, dear, we'll go down. Danny has his bottle in
his wheeler right in the dining-room."

The little maid served them a dainty meal, and the round-eyed baby
fell asleep as they ate and talked, lying in blissful content in a
white-enameled contrivance that was like a crib on four wheels, and
sucking quietly on his bottle.

"Now if you want to lie down, you may," said Mrs. Brill when they
had finished. "I'll be busy for the next couple of hours with two of
my neighbors who are planning a minstrel show for the country club.
They had already planned to come when Steve telephoned. If you're not
tired, perhaps you'll enjoy looking over our farm. Even if you've
spent your summer on one, you may find things to interest you."

Betty was not tired, and she had been longing to explore the belt of
green fields that encircled the old farmhouse. Hatless, but carrying
her sweater over her arm, she went happily out.

There was a small but well-kept poultry yard with some handsome
white leghorns lazily sunning themselves; a gentle-eyed Jersey cow
stood close to the first pair of bars; and a fat, lazy collie snoozed
under a cherry tree but declined to accompany Betty on her
explorations, though she petted and flattered and coaxed him with all
her powers of persuasion. He wagged his tail cordially and beamed
upon her good-naturedly, but as to getting up and walking about so
soon after dinner--well, he begged to be excused.

"You're a lazy thing!" said the girl indignantly, finally giving up
the task as hopeless and climbing the fence into a larger pasture.

Over in one corner of the field she spied something that quickened
her steps with pleasure. A baby colt, long-legged, sleek of head and
altogether "adorable" as Betty would have said, ambled more or less
ungracefully about enjoying the shade of a clump of trees and
sampling the grass at intervals.

"Oh, I do hope you're tame!" whispered Betty softly.

She was fond of animals, and Bramble Farm, with the exception of a
few lambs, had had no young life in its pastures and stables. The
little calves were always sold as early as possible that there might
be more milk for butter, and Betty was fairly aching to pet something.

She walked cautiously up to the colt, who sniffed at her
suspiciously, but stood his ground. He pricked his ears forward and
looked at her inquiringly.

"You dear!" said the girl quietly. "You little beauty! You wouldn't
mind if I patted you, would you?"

She put out one hand and touched the rough side of the little
animal. He stood perfectly still, and she stroked him for a minute or
two, speaking gently to him. Presently he nuzzled her playfully.

"Oh, you darling!" she cried delighted. "Wouldn't I love to take you
with me and have you for a pet! If you wouldn't grow any larger than
you are now, I'd take you everywhere just like a dog."

She had both arms around the colt's neck now, and he seemed to enjoy
being petted. All at once Betty thought she heard hoof-beats on the
ground, and at the same time the colt raised his head and whinnied.

Betty looked up and across the field toward the house. She stood
back from the colt and stared in dismay and astonishment at what she
saw.

Tearing across the ground, headed directly for her, was a fierce
animal with flashing red nostrils, huge mouth open wide and showing
two great rows of strong yellow teeth bared to the gums. Sparks
seemed to fly from the hoofs and a coarse black tail streamed in the
wind.

"Good gracious!" gasped Betty weakly. "That must be the colt's
mother!"

The colt whinnied again in welcome and delight, but Betty felt
rooted to the earth.




CHAPTER X

FELLOW TRAVELERS


It is sometimes said that in moments of danger one's whole life
passes swiftly in review through the mind, but Betty always declared
that she had just a single thought when it seemed that in another
moment she would be trampled under the mare's hoofs; she had not
telegraphed to her uncle and he would not know where she had gone.

The horse continued to cover the ground rapidly, and then, when it
had almost reached the terrified girl, fear lent sudden wings to
Betty's leaden feet. She turned and ran.

Speeding over the field toward the fence at the other end, she could
hear the steady pounding of the mare's hoofs, though she did not dare
to glance over her shoulder. Her thoughts worked busily, trying to
figure out a way to climb over or under the fence, and she had a
lively fear of those terrible teeth nipping her as she tried to
climb. As the fence seemed to her strained vision to rise suddenly
from the ground and come to meet her, a way to safety opened.

Before she began to run she had unconsciously stooped to gather her
sweater from the ground where she had dropped it, and now she turned
and waved the garment frantically in the furious animal's face.
Bewildered and confused, the mare stopped, and, as Betty continued to
flap the sweater, she turned and dashed back to her colt. Weakly the
girl tumbled over the fence and the adventure was over.

"She thought you were going to hurt Pinto," said Mrs. Brill, when
she heard the story. "Goodness, I certainly am glad you had the
presence of mind to shake your sweater at old Phyllis. Wouldn't it
have been dreadful if she had bitten you!"

The next morning, Betty said good-by to the hospitable family who
had been so wonderfully kind to her, and, much refreshed after a
luxurious hot bath and a night's sleep in the pretty guest room, took
the trolley car into town with Mr. Brill, who at the station door
bade her farewell in his capacity of host and two minutes later as
telegraph operator sent her message to Uncle Dick in Washington.

The 7:45 was on time to the minute, and as the long train pulled in
and the porter helped her on, Betty drew a long breath of relief.
Surely there could be no more delays and in a comparatively few hours
she might hope to be with her uncle and know the comfort of telling
him her experiences instead of trusting their recital to letters.

The train had been made up late the night before and many of the
passengers were still sleepy-eyed after restless hours in their
berths. A good many of them were at breakfast in the dining car, and
as there was no parlor car Betty had to take half a section already
occupied by a rather frowsy young woman with two small children.

"We take on a parlor car at Willowvale," the porter assured Betty,
only too sympathetically, for he had been waiting on the woman and
her children since the afternoon before. "I'll see that you get a
chair then, Miss."

Betty settled herself as comfortably as she could and opened her
magazine.

"Read to me?" suggested a little voice, and a sticky hand caressed
her skirt timidly.

"Now don't bother the lady," said the mother, trying to pull the
child away. "My land, if I ever live to get you children to your
grandmother's I'll be thankful! Lottie, stop making scratches on that
window sill!"

Lottie pursed her pretty mouth in a pout and drummed her small heels
discontentedly against the green plush of the seat.

Betty smiled into the rebellious blue eyes and was rewarded by a
sudden, radiant smile. She closed her magazine and found the mother
gazing at her with a look almost as childlike in its friendly
curiosity as her little daughter's.

"You've got a way with children, haven't you?" said the woman
wistfully. "I guess everybody on this train will be glad when we get
off. The children have been perfect torments, and Lottie cried half
the night. We're none of us used to traveling, and they're so mussed
up and dirty I could cry. At home I keep 'em looking as neat as wax.
We're going to see my husband's mother, and I know she'll think I
started with 'em looking like this."

Betty was far older than many girls her age in some things. She was
self-reliant and used to observing for herself, and she had a rich
fund of warm and ready sympathy that was essentially practical. She
saw that the mother of these lively, untidy children was very young,
hardly more than a girl, and worn-out and nervous as a result of
taking a long journey with no help and little traveling experience.
She was probably, and naturally, anxious that her children should
impress their father's mother favorably, and it took little
imagination to understand that in her home the young mother had been
used to praise for her excellent management. Betty, added to her
qualities of leadership and sound judgment, had a decided "knack"
with children. In Pineville she had been a general favorite with the
little ones, and many a mother had secretly marveled at the girl's
ability to control the most headstrong youngster. Now she seized the
opportunity presented to help a fellow-passenger.

"Have you had your breakfast?" she asked. "No? I thought not. Well,
I had mine before I got on the train. If you are willing to trust the
children with me, I'll amuse them while you go into the diner and
have a quiet meal. You'll feel much better then."

"Oh, it's been a nightmare!" confided the young mother with a sudden
rush of feeling. "Nobody ever told me what it would be like to travel
with two children. Lottie upset her milk and Baby spilled her supper
on the floor. And people just glare at me and never offer to help. It
will be heavenly to eat my breakfast without them, but I feel that
I'm imposing on you."

Betty managed to send her off convinced that everything was as it
should be, and to the mother's surprise the children snuggled down
like little mice to listen to the honorable and ancient story of the
Three Bears. By the time a rested and radiant mother came back to
them, for she had stolen a little time in the dressing room and
rearranged her fair hair and adjusted her trim frock, something she
had found it impossible to accomplish with two restless children
clinging to her skirts, Lottie and Baby were firm friends with Miss
Betty.

"I never knew any one as lovely as you are!" The gratitude of the
woman was touching. "I was just about crazy. My husband tipped the
porter, and he did try to look after me, but he didn't know what to
do. Usually there is a maid on this train, they told us, but she was
taken sick, and there wasn't time to get any one to fill her place.
Now don't let the children bother you. They had their breakfast
early, and I can read to them till we get to Willowvale where their
grandmother will meet us."

But Betty had not finished. She loved the feel of soft little arms
about her neck and there was not much connected with a baby's welfare
she did not know about. Many a Pineville baby she had washed and
dressed and fed as correctly as a model baby should be.

"Let me take them one at a time and tidy them up?" she suggested.
"They'll take to it kindly, because I am new and that will lend to
the washing a novelty. If we go in relays, we can't upset the whole
car."

So first with Lottie, and then with Baby, who seemed to be without
other name, Betty went into the dressing-room and there washed pink
and white faces and hands till they shone, and brushed silk locks
till they lay straight and shining. Clean frocks were forthcoming,
and two spick and span babies emerged to beam upon a transformed
world no longer seen through a veil of tears. This new friend could
tell the most wonderful stories, invent delightful games, and sing
dozens of foolish little rhymes in a low sweet voice that disturbed
no one and yet allowed every word to be distinctly understood.

Both children went to sleep during the morning, and then Betty heard
that Mrs. Clenning, as the mother introduced herself, lived in the
West and that this journey to Willowvale was the first she had taken
since the birth of the babies.

"My husband's mother is crazy to see them because they are her only
grandchildren," she explained. "I didn't want to come without Mr.
Clenning, but he couldn't get away for a couple of months. He is to
come after us and take us home. If he didn't, I'm sure I'd live East
the rest of my days, or at least till the children are grown up. I'll
never have the courage to try a long train trip with them again."

Before Willowvale was reached Betty helped Mrs. Clenning get her
wraps and bags together and tied the babies into bewitching white
bonnets with long fluted strings. The porter came for the bags, but
Betty carried the younger child to the car door and handed her down
to the mother, who had gone first with Lottie. She saw a tall,
stately, white-haired woman, dressed all in white from her shoes to
her hat, gather all three into her arms, and then went back to her
seat satisfied that the mother's troubles were over.

"Parlor car's ready, Miss," announced the porter, coming up to her.
"Shall I take you on in?"

Betty followed him, to be established comfortably on the shady side
of the car, with the window adjusted at the most comfortable height.
She did not hear the porter's comment to the conductor when he passed
him in the vestibule of the parlor car.

"That girl in seat fourteen, she's one perfect little lady," said
the dusky porter earnestly. "You jest observe her when you takes her
ticket. 'Member that lady with the two children what racketed all day
and all night? Well, she done fix those two kids up till you wouldn't
know 'em, and cheered their mother up, too. And all jest as pretty
and like a lady. That mighty fine lady in the red hat (I give her a
seat on the sunny side of the car a-purpose) wouldn't do nothing
yesterday when I axted her to hold a glass of milk while I went to
get a extra pillow. Said she wasn't going to be nursemaid to no
stranger's brats!"

So Betty was zealously looked after by the whole train crew, for the
story had spread, and the siege of Clenning had been a protracted one
with a corresponding fervency of gratitude for release; and at six
o'clock that night the attentive porter handed her down the steps to
the platform of the beautiful Union Station in Washington.

She had only her light traveling bag to carry, so she followed the
crowd through the gates, walking slowly and scanning the faces
anxiously in order that she might not pass her uncle. She did not
wish to go through the station out on the plaza, lest she make it
more difficult for him to find her, and she was keenly disappointed
that he had not been at the gate, for the train was half an hour late
and she had confidently expected him to be waiting. She took up her
stand near the door of the waiting room and scanned the eddying
circles of travelers that passed and repassed her.

"Something must have delayed him," she thought uneasily. "He
couldn't miss me even in a crowd, because he is so careful. I hope he
got the telegram."

She had turned to compare her wrist-watch with the station clock
when a voice at her back said half-doubtfully, "Betty?"




CHAPTER XI

A SERIOUS MIX-UP


"You are Betty, aren't you?" the girlish voice insisted, and this
time Betty identified it as belonging to a girl a year or two older
than herself who stood smiling uncertainly at her.

"Yes, of course I'm Betty," said Betty Gordon smiling.

The face of her questioner cleared.

"All right, girls," she called, beckoning to two others who stood a
little way off. "She's Betty. I was sure I hadn't make a mistake."

Betty found herself surrounded by three laughing faces, beaming with
good-will and cordiality.

"We must introduce ourselves," said the girl who had first spoken to
her. "This is Louise," pointing to a gray-eyed miss apparently about
Betty's age. "This is Esther." A girl with long yellow braids and
pretty even white teeth bobbed a shy acknowledgment. "And of course
I'm Roberta, Bobby for short."

"And if we don't hurry, we'll be late for dinner," suggested the
girl who had been called Louise. "You know Carter isn't as patient
as he once was; he hates to have to wait."

Bobby thrust her arm through Betty's protectingly.

"Come on, Betty," she said comfortably. "Never mind about your trunk
check. Carter will drive down after it early in the morning."

Betty's bewildered mind was vaguely appreciative of the wide sweep
of open plaza which lay before them as they came out on the other
side of the station, but before she could say a word she was gently
bundled into a handsome automobile, a girl on either side of her and
one opposite, and the grim-faced, silver-haired old chauffeur,
evidently slightly intolerant of the laughter and high spirits of his
young passengers, had started to thread his way through the lane of
taxicabs and private cars.

Betty was intensely puzzled, to put it mildly. Her uncle had
mentioned no girls in his letters to her, and even supposing that she
had missed some letters, it was hardly possible that he should not
have let fall an explanatory word or two from time to time.

"I thought Uncle Dick would come down to meet me," she said, voicing
her surprise at last.

"Oh, poor dear, his heart is almost broken to think he has to stay
cooped up in the house," answered Bobby, who seemed to be the general
spokesman. "But how stupid of us--of course you don't know that he
hurt his foot!"

"Is he hurt?" Betty half rose from her seat in alarm. "Is he badly
injured? When did it happen?"

Bobby pulled the excited girl down beside her.

"You see it happened only yesterday," explained Louise, finding her
voice with a rush. "You'd better believe we were frightened when they
brought him to the house in the ambulance. His foot has some little
bones broken in it, the doctor says, but he'll be all right in a
month or so. He has to hobble around on crutches till the bones knit."

"But it isn't serious, so don't look like that," urged Bobby. "Why,
Betty, your lips are positively white. We're so thankful it was his
foot and not his head--that would have been something to worry about."

"How--how did it happen?" gasped Betty, anxious and worried in spite
of these assurances. "Was he in an accident?"

"He was the whole accident," announced Bobby cheerfully. "You see
he's completely wrapped up in these new buildings they're putting up
on the outskirts. We'll take you out to see 'em while you're here and
perhaps you'll understand the construction, which is more than I do.
Anyway, the whole firm and every workman is absorbed in the
experiment, and they're burnt as red as the bricks from working
outdoors all day."

"Uncle Dick does love to be outdoors," murmured Betty.

"He sure does," agreed Bobby. "Well, nothing would do yesterday but
that he must climb up on the roof of one they've just started and
take a peek at the chimney. I guess it needed looking after, for the
whole thing tumbled over on him, coming down full-weight on his right
foot. Forcet, the foreman, had an awful time getting him down from
the roof, and instead of telephoning for the car, some nervous person
sent for the ambulance and scared us all into fits."

Betty blinked again. No mention of building houses had been made in
Uncle Dick's letters to her.

"Did he get my telegram?" she asked, leaning forward to look at a
monument they were passing.

"A little before noon," replied Bobby. "Louise and Esther and I had
such a violent argument as to which of us should come to meet you
that we didn't even dare draw lots; it seemed safer for us all to
come along."

Esther, who sat opposite Betty, had noticed her interest in the
Washington Monument.

"We're going to take you sightseeing to-morrow," she promised.
"Aren't we, Bobby? And I don't see why we don't go home by way of
Fort Myer. It doesn't take any longer, and dinner isn't till seven,
you know."

"All right." Bobby leaned forward and spoke to the chauffeur. "Take
us round by Fort Myer, please, Carter," she directed.

The car turned sharply, and in a few minutes they were rattling over
an old bridge.

"We live out in the country, Betty, I warn you," said the voluble
Bobby. "But it has its compensations. You'll like it."

Betty, a stranger to Washington, decided that the Willard must be a
country hotel. It would be like Uncle Dick, she knew, to shun the
heart of the city and establish himself somewhere where he could see
green fields the first thing every morning.

"What is Fort Myer?" she asked with lively curiosity, as the car
began to climb a steep grade. "Is that where they had training camps
during the war?"

"Right," said Bobby. "It's an army post, you know. See, here are
some of the officers' houses. I only hope we live here when Louise
and I are eighteen--they give the most heavenly dances and parties."

Betty looked with interest at the neat houses they were passing. The
names of the officers were conspicuously tacked on the doorsteps, and
there was a general air of orderliness and military spic and spanness
about the very gravel roads. Occasionally a dust-colored car shot
past them filled with men in uniform.

"Do you ride?" asked Betty suddenly. "Uncle Dick has always wanted
me to learn, but I've never had a good chance."

"Well, you can begin to-morrow morning," Bobby informed her. "We've
three ponies that are fine under the saddle. Betty, I do wish you'd
make up your mind to live in Washington this winter. There's no
reason in the world why you shouldn't, and we were talking it over
last night, making plans for you."

"Why! that's entirely as Uncle Dick says," returned Betty,
surprised. "I haven't any say in the matter."

Bobby shot a triumphant glance toward the other girls.

"He said he hadn't much right to dictate, but I told him I knew
better," she said with satisfaction. "He wants you as much as we do,
and that's considerable, you know."

Again a wave of doubt swept over Betty. Uncle Dick had said he had
not much right to dictate! When he was her only living relative!

"Uncle hasn't a fever or anything, has he?" she asked apprehensively.
"I mean the injury to his foot hasn't, it didn't--" she floundered.

"Oh, that old hurt to his head never amounted to anything," declared
Bobby with convincing carelessness. "No, indeed, he's perfectly well
except for the crutches, and the doctor says keeping him indoors for
a few days will give him a much-needed rest."

Betty recalled the accident in which her uncle had been stunned when
he had slipped down a bank into an excavation made along a road on
which they had been driving. Bobby evidently referred to that old
injury.

"Now you can begin to watch for the house," said the silent Esther,
as Carter swung the car around another curve in the beautiful road.
"I don't see why I couldn't have been named Virginia!"

"Esther has a personal grievance because she's the only one of us
born in the South, and she had to be named for an aunt like the rest
of us," laughed Bobby. "Every tenth girl you meet down here seems to
be named Virginia."

"But was she born in Virginia?" asked Betty. "Where did you live
then?"

Bobby stared. Then she laughed.

"Oh, I see," she said. "We lived at Fairfields. Of course you know
that. But, like so many friends, you have always thought of us as
living in Washington. We're in Virginia, Betty, didn't you know that?"

"No." Betty's puzzlement was plainly written on her face.

"When we crossed the bridge, we left the District of Columbia,"
explained Bobby. "Of course we're very close to the line, but still
we are not in Washington."

"There's the house!" exclaimed Louise. "I wonder if mother got back
from shopping. I don't see her on the porch."

Betty saw a beautiful white house, dazzlingly white against a
background of dark trees, with a broad lawn in front circled by a
wide white driveway. A terraced garden at the side with a red brick
walk was arranged with wicker chairs and tables and a couple of
swings protected with gay striped awnings. It was a typical Southern
mansion in perfect order, and Betty reveled in its architectural
perfections even while she told herself that it did not look in the
slightest like a hotel. What was it Bobby had called her home?
"Fairfields"--that was it; and she, Betty, wanted to go to the
Willard. Had they made a mistake and brought her to the wrong place?

There was no time to ask for explanations, however. The girls swept
her out of the car and up the low steps through the beautiful
doorway. A well-trained man servant closed the door noiselessly, and
the three bore Betty across the wide hall into a room lined with
books and boasting three or four built-in window seats, in one of
which a gentleman was reading.

"We found her! Here she is!" shouted the irrepressible Bobby. "Don't
tell us we can't pick a girl named Betty out of a crowd!"

The gentleman closed his book, and, steadying himself with a cane
lying near by, rose slowly. There was no recognition in the gaze he
fastened on Betty, and she for her part hung back, staring wildly.

"You're not Uncle Dick!" she gasped accusingly.




CHAPTER XII

STRAIGHTENING THINGS OUT


Betty's speech was shock number one. Another quickly followed.

The gentleman tugged quizzically at his short gray mustache.

"And you," he announced quietly, "are not my niece, Betty Littell!"

Esther and Louise stared, round-eyed, while Bobby collapsed
dramatically on a convenient couch.

"Have we kidnapped anybody?" she asked, a bit hysterically. "Good
gracious, Dad, don't tell me I've forcibly run off with a girl?
Haven't you made a mistake? She must be Betty--she said so."

"My darlings, I'm sorry to be late," said a new voice, a rich, sweet
contralto, and a stout woman with a kindly, florid face swept through
the doorway. "Why, what is the matter?" she demanded hurriedly,
confronting the tense group.

"Momsie!" exclaimed Bobby, hurling herself upon the newcomer. "Oh,
Momsie, isn't this Betty Littell? We went to meet her and she said
her name was Betty, and all the way home she talked about Uncle Dick,
and now she says dad isn't her uncle! I'm afraid I've made a mess of
things."

"Yes, I think you have," said Betty, with blazing cheeks. "I came to
Washington to meet my uncle, Mr. Richard Gordon, who is stopping at
the Willard. Of course my name is Betty. I'm Betty Gordon, and he's
my Uncle Dick. And goodness only knows what he is doing now--he'll be
about crazy if he came to meet me."

Bobby began to laugh uncontrollably.

"I never heard of such a thing in my life!" she giggled, wiping her
eyes. "Dad's name is Richard Littell, and we've been expecting our
cousin Betty Littell to arrive to-day from Vermont for a long visit.
We haven't seen her since she was six years old, but I took a chance
on recognizing her. And then there was the name! How could I guess
there would be two Bettys looking for two Uncle Dicks! Don't be mad,
Betty; you can see a mix-up like that wouldn't happen twice in a life
time."

"She isn't mad," interposed Mr. Littell, lowering himself carefully
to the window seat, for he had been standing all this time and his
foot began to pain again. "After she knows you a little better,
Bobby, she will expect this sort of denouement to follow whatever you
undertake. I say we ought to have some dinner, Mother, and then talk
at the table."

"Of course, of course," agreed motherly Mrs. Littell. "The poor
child must be famished. Take Betty--you don't mind if I call you
Betty, do you, dear?--up to your room, Bobby, and when you come down
dinner will be served."

"But my uncle!" urged Betty. "He will be so worried. And the other
girl--where do you suppose she is?"

"By George, the child has more sense than I have," said Mr. Littell
energetically. "I'd give a fortune if Bobby had half as level a head.
Our Betty is probably having hysterics in the station if she hasn't
taken the next train back to Vermont."

His keen eyes twinkled appreciatively at Betty, and she knew that
she liked him and also sensed instinctively that his eldest daughter
was very like him.

"Why, Father, how you do talk!" reproved Mrs. Littell comfortably.
"I'll call up the station while the girls are upstairs and then Betty
shall call the Willard, or you do it for her, and then perhaps we can
eat dinner before the souffle is quite ruined."

The girls took Betty upstairs to a luxurious suite of rooms they
shared, and when she had bathed her face and hands and brushed her
hair, they came down to find that Mr. Littell had called up the Union
Station and discovered that because of a freight wreck the Vermont
express had been delayed and would not be in before nine o'clock that
night.

"So our Betty is probably having a comfortable dinner on the train,"
he announced. "Now just a minute, and I'll have the Willard for the
other Betty. We'll tell your uncle you are safe and that we'll bring
you into Washington to-night."

In a few minutes he had the connection, and they heard him ask for
Mr. Richard Gordon. His mobile face changed as the clerk answered,
and Betty, watching, knew that he had disconcerting news. He turned
to them, covering the mouthpiece with his hand.

"Mr. Gordon left early this morning for Oklahoma," he said. "He left
an address for mail, and there's a telegram which came after he left.
It was sent from Halperin and was received at eleven-thirty this
morning."

"That's the one I sent!" answered Betty. "And Uncle Dick's gone to
Oklahoma! What on earth shall I do?"

"Do!" repeated Mr. and Mrs. Littell in concert. "Why, stay right
here with us, of course! Do you suppose we'd let a young girl like
you knock around alone in a city? We'll be glad to have you stay as
long as you will, and you mustn't be uncomfortable another second.
When you hear from your uncle there'll be plenty of time to make
other plans."

Betty did not try to express her gratitude to these new kind
friends, for she knew that she could never say one-half the thanks
she felt toward them. They were cordiality itself, and did everything
in their power to make her feel at home. An excellent dinner was
served in the charming dining-room with a mixture of formality and
simple home courtesy that was as unusual as it was delightful, and in
this atmosphere of good breeding and tact, Betty bloomed like a
little rose.

"A charming girl, whoever she is," said Mr. Littell to his wife, as
he smoked his cigar after dinner and the girls drew Betty to the
piano. "She has plenty of spirit, but lacks Bobby's boisterousness.
It will be a good thing for the girls to have some one like her,
self-reliant and quiet and yet with decided snap, to chum with."

"I like the idea of five girls in the house," beamed Mrs. Littell,
who was the soul of hospitality and fairly idolized her three
daughters. Whatever discipline they had came from their father. "And
now I think I had better go to the station, after our Betty, don't
you?"

"Oh, Mother!" came in concert from the piano, where Bobby was
rattling off a lively waltz. "We all want to go. Please? There's
plenty of room in the car."

Mrs. Littell looked undecided.

"One of you may go with your mother," said Mr. Littell decisively.
"I think it had better be Louise. Now, there is no use in arguing.
One girl is enough. Betty will be tired after traveling all night and
all day, and she will be in no mood for talking and carrying on. I'll
tell Carter to bring the car around, Mother."

Bobby pouted for a few moments after her mother and sister had gone,
but her good-nature was easily restored and she and Betty and Esther
were deep in an exchange of confidences when Mrs. Littell returned
bringing the missing Betty with her.

"Now stand up for a minute, you two Bettys," commanded Bobby, when
greetings had been exchanged and explanations made. "I want to see if
I made such a dreadful mistake in taking Betty Gordon for Betty
Littell."

The two girls stood side by side, and though they both had dark eyes
and hair, there the resemblance ceased. Betty Littell was a dumpling
of a girl with curly hair, a snub nose and round face. She looked the
picture of good-nature, and her plumpness suggested a fondness for
sweets that subsequent acquaintance with her fully sustained.

Betty Gordon had grown tall through the summer, and she was of a
slender, wiry build that hinted of a fondness for outdoor life. Her
heavy straight hair was wrapped around her well-shaped little head in
braids, and her exquisite little hands and feet, so far her one claim
to beauty, though later promises lay in her glowing face, gave her,
as Louise afterward confided to her mother, "an air like an Indian
princess."

"No, you don't look much alike," conceded Bobby, after a prolonged
scrutiny. "But Betty Gordon looks the way I thought Betty Littell
would look, so I don't see that I am to blame."

"Trust Bobby to excuse herself from a scrape," chuckled her father.
"By the way, how are you going to arrange about names? Two Bettys in
the family will involve complications."

"I think we'll have to call Betty Littell, 'Libbie'" suggested Mrs.
Littell, smiling. "That was your mother's name at home, always, Betty."

"Yes, I know it; and that's why they called me Betty," replied the
Littell girl. "Two names, the same names, I mean, do make confusion.
I'm willing to be called Libbie, Aunt Rachel, if you let me have a
little time to get used to it. If I don't answer right away, you'll
understand that I'm listening for 'Betty.'"

"Well, Mother, I think at least two of these girls need sleep,"
announced Mr. Littell. "Betty Gordon looks as if she couldn't keep
her eyes open another moment, and Betty Littell has yawned twice. I
should say we all might retire--it's after eleven."

"Goodness, so it is," said his wife hastily. "Time does fly so when
you're talking. Come, girls, if you are going sightseeing to-morrow,
you'll need a good night's rest."

There were three bedrooms and a private bath at the disposal of the
girls, and separate beds in all the rooms. Betty Gordon shared a room
with Bobby, Louise and Betty Littell had the one adjoining, and
Esther slept alone in the third room, which was also connected with
the others.

Long after the other girls were asleep Betty lay awake, thinking
over the happenings of the day. Finally she worked around to the
suggested change in names.

"They must expect me to stay if they plan to avoid confusion of
names," she thought. "I must talk to Mr. Littell in the morning and
ask him if it's really all right. I feel as if it were an imposition
for me, a perfect stranger, to accept their hospitality like this."

In the morning she was up and dressed before the rest, fortunately
having a fresh blouse in her bag so that, although she had nothing
but her suit skirt, she looked well-groomed and dainty. Betty Littell
was also without her trunk, though Bobby promised that both trunks
should be brought from the station that morning.

"I'd like to speak to your father a minute," said Betty, when she
was dressed.

Bobby, on the floor tying her shoes, blew her a kiss.

"You'll find him on the terrace probably," she said confidently. "Go
ahead, dear, but it won't do you any good. We're determined to keep
you to play with us."

So the astute Bobby had guessed what she wanted to say!
Nevertheless, Betty was determined to carry out her resolution. She
went slowly down the wide staircase and stepped out through double
screen doors on to the bricked terrace. Sure enough, there sat Mr.
Littell, smoking comfortably and reading his morning paper.




CHAPTER XIII

WASHINGTON MONUMENT


"You're up early!" the gentleman greeted Betty cordially. "Guess
you're ahead of even Esther, who usually leads the van. Sleep well?
That's good," as she nodded. "No troubles this bright morning?"

Betty gave him a grateful glance.

"I can't help it," she said bravely. "You know how I feel, coming
here like this--you don't know me--"

"No-o," drawled Mr. Littell, pulling forward a gay-cushioned chair
and motioning for her to sit down. ("Can't have any manners when your
foot is smashed," he explained in an aside.) "No, Betty, it's true we
don't know you. But mother and I think we know a nice girl when we
see her, and we're glad to have you stay with us just as long as you
can feel comfortable and at home. If I were you, I'd just bury these
uneasy feelings you speak of. Fact is, I'll give you two good reasons
why you should make us a little visit. One is that if we had had the
pleasure of your acquaintance you would have had a regular letter
from mother weeks ago, asking you to come and spend the summer with
us. The second is that I know how your uncle would feel to think of
you alone in the city or the country. Guess how I'd take it if one of
my own daughters was waiting for word from me and no one made things
pleasant for her. Won't you shake hands and make a bargain with me
that you'll try to see our side of it, your uncle's and mine, and
then just plan to have a happy time with the girls until we can reach
him in the West?"

Betty placed her small hand in the larger one held out to receive
it, and smiled back at Mr. Littell. He had a smile very few people
could resist.

"That's better," he said with satisfaction. "Now we're friends. And,
remember, I'm always ready to give advice or listen. That's what
fathers and uncles are for, you know. And I'd like to have you look
on me as a second Uncle Dick."

Thus encouraged, Betty briefly outlined for him her story, touching
lightly on her experiences at Bramble Farm, but going into detail
about Bob Henderson, her uncle, and her pleasant recollections of
Pineville.

By the time she had finished, the four girls had joined them on the
terrace and presently a table was brought out and spread with a
cloth, and, Mrs. Littell following the maid with a silver coffee urn,
breakfast was served.

"The girls will want to go into town to-day, I suppose," said the
motherly lady, selecting the brownest muffin for Betty and signaling
her husband to see that the maid served her an extra portion of
omelet. "I have some shopping to do, so I'll go in with them in the
car. But I absolutely refuse to 'do' the Monument again."

"Poor mother!" laughed Bobby. "She hates to ride in an elevator, and
yet I know by actual count she's gone up in the Monument a dozen
times."

"I suppose every one who comes to Washington wants to go
sightseeing," said Betty Littell, or, as she must begin to be called
now, Libbie, "I know how it is in our little town at home. There's
just one monument--erected to some Revolutionary hero--and I get
fairly sick of reading the inscription to all the visiting aunts and
uncles."

"Well, I like to go around," declared the energetic Bobby. "But just
once I had an overdose. We had a solemn and serious young theological
student who made notes of everything he saw. He was devoted to
walking, and one of his favorite maxims was never to ride when he
could walk. He dragged me up every one of those nine hundred steps in
the Washington Monument and down again, and I was in bed for two days."

"Wait till you see the steps, and you'll understand," said Louise to
Libbie and Betty. "If you try to walk down you're apt to get awfully
dizzy."

After breakfast Carter brought the car around, and Mr. Littell
hobbled to the door to see them off.

"Betty wants to send a telegram to her uncle," he said in an aside
to his wife, while she stood at the long glass in the hall adjusting
her veil. "Better help her, for she'll feel that she is doing
something. If Gordon is in the oil regions, as I think from what she
tells me he is, there isn't much chance of a telegram reaching him
any quicker than a letter. However, there's no use in dampening her
hopes."

"Now we'll drop you at the Monument," planned Mrs. Littell, as the
car bore them down the driveway. "You can walk from there to that
pretty tea-room--what is its name, Bobby?--can't you?"

"The Dora-Rose, you mean, Mother," supplied Bobby. "Of course we can
walk. But Carter is taking the longest way to the Monument."

"We're going to the station first," answered her mother. "Betty
wants to send her uncle a telegram, and Carter is going to leave
directions to have the trunks sent up to the house. You have your
baggage checks, haven't you, girls?"

They produced them, and Carter slipped them into his pocket. Betty
had leisure and opportunity to enjoy the beauty of the handsome
building as they approached it this perfect morning, and she could
not help exclaiming.

"Yes, it is fine, every one says so," admitted Bobby, with the
carelessness of one to whom it was an old story. "Finer, daddy says,
than the big terminals in New York."

Libbie had the advantage of being the only one of the girls who had
been to New York.

"This has lots more ground around it," she pronounced critically.
"Course in a city like New York, they need the land for other
buildings. But you just ought to see the Pennsylvania Station there!"

"All right, take your word for it," said Bobby. "Where do we go to
send a telegram, Momsie?"

Mrs. Littell smiled.

"Betty and I are all who are necessary for that little errand," she
said firmly. "The rest of you stay right in the car."

Carter opened the door for them and then went in search of the
baggage man. Betty and Mrs. Littell found the telegraph window and in
a few minutes a message was speeding out to Richard Gordon, Flame
City, Oklahoma, telling him that his niece was in Washington, giving
her address and asking what he wished her to do.

"I'll write him a letter to-night," promised Mrs. Littell when this
was accomplished. "Then he'll know that you are in safe hands. You
must write to him, too, dear. Flame City may consist of one shack and
a hundred oil wells and be twenty miles from a post-office, you know."

Carter reported that the trunks were already on their way to
Fairfields, and now the car was turned toward the gleaming Monument
that seemed to be visible from every part of the city, Betty, her
mind relieved by the sending of the telegram, abandoned herself to
the joys of sightseeing. Here she was, young, well and strong, in a
luxurious car, surrounded by friends, and driving through one of the
most beautiful cities in the United States. Any girl who, under those
circumstances, could remain a prey to doubts and gloom, would indeed
be a confirmed misanthrope.

The car was stopped at one of the concrete walks leading to the base
of the Monument, and with final instructions as to the time and place
they were to meet her, Mrs. Littell drove away.

"Why, there's a crowd there!" cried Libbie in wonder.

"Waiting to be taken up," explained Louise. "Come on, we'll have to
stand in line."

The line of waiting people extended half way around the Monument.
The girls took their places, and when the crowd streamed out and they
were permitted to go inside, Betty and Libbie, the two strangers,
understood the reason for the delay. The elevator seemed huge, but it
was quickly filled, and when the gates were closed the car began to
mount very slowly.

"We'd be sick and dizzy if they went up as fast as they do in
department stores and office buildings," said Bobby. "It takes about
fifteen minutes to reach the top. Watch, and you'll see lots of
interesting things on the floors we pass."

Betty was wondering how Bobby had ever survived the climb up the
stairs and the trip down again with the enthusiastic theological
student, when a cry somewhere in the back of the car startled her.

"What's the matter?" demanded the elevator operator, without turning
his head.

"John isn't here!" declared a hysterical feminine voice. "Oh, can't
you stop the car and go down and get him? He pushed me in, and I
thought he was right behind me. Aren't you going back?"

"Can't, Madam," was the calm answer. "Have to finish the trip. You
can go right back with the next load."

"Oh, goodness gracious," moaned the voice. "What'll I do? If I go
back I may miss him. If I wait at the top it will be half an hour.
Suppose he walks up? Maybe I'd better start to walk down to meet him."

Bobby stifled a giggle with difficulty.

"Bride and groom," she whispered to Betty. "Washington's full of
'em. Guess the poor groom was lost in the shuffle. Is she pretty--can
you see?"

Betty tried to look back in the car, though the press of passengers
standing all about her made it difficult. The bride was easily
identified because she was openly crying. She was an exceedingly
pretty girl, modishly gowned and apparently not more than twenty
years old.

"We'll get hold of her and persuade her to wait," planned Bobby.
"I'll show her the sights to amuse her while we're waiting for the
next elevator load to come up. Here we are at the top."

A crowd was waiting to descend, and as they walked from the
elevator, the bride meekly following, Bobby plucked her sleeve.

"Excuse me," she said bluntly, but with a certain charm that was her
own, "I couldn't help hearing what you were saying. Your husband
missed the elevator, didn't he?"

The bride blushed and nodded.

"Well, don't try to walk down," advised Bobby. "I did it once, and
was in bed for two days. He'll come up with the next load. No one
ever walks up unless they are crazy--or going to theological
seminary. Your husband isn't a minister, is he?"

"Oh, no, he's a lawyer," the bride managed to say.

"All right," approved Bobby, noting with satisfaction that the
elevator gate had closed. "Come round with us and see the sights, and
then when your husband comes up you can tell him all the news. This
is Betty Gordon, Libbie Littell and Louise, Esther and Bobby Littell,
all at your service."

"I'm Mrs. Hale," said the bride, stumbling a little over the name
and yet pronouncing it with obvious pride.




CHAPTER XIV

LIBBIE IS ROMANTIC


The girls, marshaled by Bobby, made a tour of the windows, and
though Betty was fascinated by the views of the city spread out
before her and bought post cards to send to the Pineville friends and
those she knew in Glenside and Laurel Grove, her mind was running
continuously on young Mrs. Hale's announcement.

"She couldn't be the old bookstore man's wife," she speculated, her
eyes fixed on the Potomac while Bobby cheerfully tangled up history
and geography in a valiant effort to instruct her guests. "Lockwood
Hale was an old man, Bob said. He didn't say he had a son, but I
wonder----Oh, Bobby, the Jesuit fathers didn't sail down the Potomac,
did they?"

"Well, it was some river," retorted Bobby. "Anyway, Miss, you didn't
seem to be listening to a word I said. What were you thinking about
in such a brown study?"

Betty made a little face, but she had no intention of revealing her
thoughts. She wanted to find out about the bookshop quietly, and if
possible get the address. Always providing that Mrs. Hale was related
to the man who had shown such an interest in Bob Henderson's
almshouse record.

"Of course Hale is an ordinary enough name," she mused. "And yet
there is just a chance that it may be the same."

The girls were planning to take the next car down, and yet when it
came up they lingered diplomatically to catch a glimpse of the
bridegroom. "John" proved to be a good-looking young man, not
extraordinary in any way, but with a likeable open face and square
young shoulders that Libbie, who startled them all by turning
poetical late that night, declared were "built for manly burdens."

Louise, Esther and Bobby were the last to squeeze into the car,
Libbie, the prudent, having ducked earlier. As Betty turned to follow
them, the gate closed.

"Car full!" said the operator.

"Oh, Betty!" Bobby's wail came to her as the car began to disappear.
"We'll wait for you," came the parting message before it dropped from
sight.

Mrs. Hale laughed musically.

"Now you know something of how I felt," she said merrily. "May I
present my husband? John, those five girls have been so nice to me.
And now you'll go round with us, won't you?"

But Betty knew better than that.

"I'm going to write some of my post cards," she said. "But I would
love to ask you a question before you go. Do you know a man in
Washington who keeps a bookshop? His name is Lockwood Hale."

Mr. and Mrs. Hale exchanged glances.

"Know him?" repeated the young man. "Why, I should think we did!
He's my great-uncle."

"I'm very anxious to see him to ask about a friend of mine,"
explained Betty. "Mr. Hale thought he might be able to tell him
something of his parents who died when he was a baby. As soon as I
heard your name I hoped you could tell me where to find the bookstore."

"Yes, uncle is a wizard on old family records," admitted the nephew.
"Sometimes I think that is why he hates to part with a book. He keeps
a secondhand bookshop, you know, and he's positively insulting to
customers who try to buy any of the books. The old boy is really
queer in his head, but there's nothing to be afraid of. He wouldn't
hurt a flea, would he, Elinor?"

Mrs. Hale said doubtfully, no, she supposed not.

"Elinor didn't have a very good impression of him," laughed her
husband. "We're on our wedding trip, you know,"--he blushed
slightly--"and mother made us promise we'd stop in to see the old man.
He hasn't seen me since I wore knickerbockers, and we had a great time
making him understand who we were. Then he said that he hoped we
liked Washington, and went back to his reading."

"And the shop is so dirty!" shuddered the bride. "I don't think she
ought to go to such a place alone, John."

"I won't," promised Betty hastily. "If you'll let me have the
address, I'll be ever so grateful and it may be a great help to my
friend."

Young Mr. Hale wrote down the street and number on the back of the
brand-new visiting card his wife pulled from her brand-new purse, and
Betty thanked them warmly and turned to her card writing, leaving
them free to enjoy each other and the view to their hearts' content.
She had directed post cards to a dozen friends before the elevator
returned, and this time both she and the bridal couple made sure that
they were among the first to step in.

Betty felt of the little slip in her purse several times during the
afternoon, inwardly glowing with satisfaction. If she could find Bob
Henderson in Washington through the old bookseller, or learn
something definite of the lad, she would find it easier to wait for
word from her uncle.

After luncheon, which was calculated to please healthy appetites of
five girls to a nicety, they went into several of the large shops
with Mrs. Littell, and then, because it had begun to rain and did not
promise pleasant weather for driving, they went to a moving picture
show.

"Had a full day?" asked Mr. Littell at dinner that night. "Libbie,
what did you see?"

Libbie's answer provoked a gust of laughter. She was so essentially
a matter-of-fact little personage in appearance and manner that when
she opened her red mouth and announced, "A bride and groom!" the
effect was startling.

That started Bobby, and she told the story of the lost John, told it
as her father would have, for neither Bobby nor Mr. Littell were at
all inclined toward sentimentality.

"Well, Betty," Mr. Littell beckoned to her afterward when they were
all in the pleasant living-room across the hall, "think you're going
to like Washington, even if it is overrun with brides and grooms?"

"It's lovely," Betty assured him fervently. "We've had the most
perfect day. And, Mr. Littell, what do you think--I've found out
something important already."

She had told him about Bob that morning, and he was interested at
once when she narrated what the bride and groom had told her of old
Lockwood Hale.

"Why, I know where his shop is. Everybody in Washington does," said
Mr. Littell when she had finished. "He has lots of rare books mixed
in with worthless trash. Funny I didn't take in you meant that Hale
when you spoke of him. I suppose you'll want to go there to-morrow
Carter will take you in the car, and you'd better have one of the
girls go with you. Bobby is all right--she may be scatter-brained but
she doesn't talk."

For some reason none of the girls was sleepy that night, and after
going upstairs they all assembled in Bobby and Betty's room to talk.
Libbie could not keep her mind off the bride.

"I wonder how I'd look in a lace veil," she said, seizing the fluted
muslin bedspread and draping it over her head. "It must be lovely to
be a bride!"

"You've been reading too many silly books," scolded Bobby. "Anyway,
Libbie, you're too fat to look nice in a veil. Better get thin before
you're old enough to be married, or else you'll have to wear a
traveling suit."

Libbie eyed her scornfully and continued to parade up and down in
her draperies.

"Betty would look pretty in a veil," said Louise suddenly. "Come on,
girls, let's stage a wedding. Libbie won't sleep all night if she
doesn't have some romantic outlet. I'll be the father."

She seized a pillow and stuffed it in the front of her dressing gown
so that it made a very respectable corpulency.

"I'll be the mother!" Esther began to pin up her hair, a dignity to
which she secretly aspired.

"I'm your bridesmaid, Libbie," announced Betty, catching up the
bride's train and beginning to hum the wedding march under her breath.

"If you _will_ be silly idiots, I'm the minister," said Bobby,
mounting the bed and leaning over the foot rail as if it were a pulpit.

The bride stopped short, nearly tripping up the devoted bridesmaid.

"I don't think you should make fun of ministers," she said, looking
disapprovingly at her cousin. "It's almost wicked."

"I'd like to know how it's any more wicked than to pretend a
wedding," retorted Bobby wrathfully. "Weddings are very solemn,
sacred, serious affairs. Mother always cries when she goes to one."

Betty began to laugh. She laughed so hard that she had to sit down
on the floor, and the more the two girls glared at each other, the
harder she laughed.

"I don't see what's so funny," resented Bobby, beginning to snicker,
too. "For goodness sake, don't have hysterics, Betty. Mother will
hear you and come rapping on the door in a minute."

"I just thought of something." The convulsed Betty made a heroic
effort to control her laughter and failed completely. "Oh, girls,"
she cried, wiping her eyes, "here you are bickering about the bride
and the minister, and not one of us thought of the bridegroom. We
left him out!"

Louise and Bobby rolled over on the bed and had their laugh out.
Libbie collapsed on the floor, and Esther leaned against the bureau,
laughing till she cried.

"They say the bridegroom isn't important at a wedding, but I never
heard of ignoring him altogether," gasped Bobby, and then they were
off again.

They made so much noise that Mrs. Littell tapped on the door to ask
why they were not in bed, and when Bobby told her the joke, she had
to sit down and laugh, too.

"I'll send you up some sponge cake and milk if you'll promise to go
right to sleep after that," she told them, kissing each one good
night all over again. "Libbie shall at least have the wedding cake,
if she can't have a wedding."




CHAPTER XV

OFF TO INVESTIGATE


Drip! drip! drip!

Betty listened sleepily, and then, as she raised herself on one
elbow to hear better, she knew the noise was made by the rain.

"If that isn't too provoking!" Bobby sat up with an indignant jerk
and surveyed Betty across the little table at the head of the beds.
"I thought we'd all go down to Mount Vernon to-day, and now it's gone
and rained and spoiled it all. Oh, dear! I don't think I'll get up";
and she curled down in a dejected heap under the white spread.

"Well, I'm going to get up," announced Betty decidedly, springing
out of bed with her accustomed energy. "Rainy days are just as much
fun as sunny ones, and there's something I have to do to-day, weather
or no weather."

"She's a dear," said Louise warmly, smiling as the sound of Betty's
carolling came to them above the sound of running water in the
bathroom. "Mother says she likes her more and more every day. I wish
her uncle would never write to her and she'd just go on living with
us all the time."

"And go to school with us in the fall. That would be nice," agreed
Bobby reflectively. "But, of course, Betty's heart would be broken if
she never heard from her uncle. However, we'll be as nice to her as
we can, and then maybe she will want to stay with us anyway, even if
he does send for her."

"What are you two plotting?" asked Betty gaily, emerging warm and
rosy from her vigorous tubbing. "Do you know, I've just remembered
that I promised to show Libbie how to make mile-a-minute lace before
breakfast? I hope there is time."

"What on earth do you want to make lace for?" demanded the practical
Bobby, as her cousin appeared in the doorway, rubbing sleepy eyes.
"It's too early to begin on Christmas presents."

Libbie was not at all confused in her ideas, and she had a very
clear reason for wishing to add this accomplishment to her rather
limited list.

"It's for my hope-chest," she informed Bobby with dignity, and not
even the shout of laughter which greeted this statement could ruffle
her. "You may think it's funny," she observed serenely, "but I have
six towels and three aprons made and put away all ready."

"My aunt!" sighed Bobby inelegantly, shaking her head. "You believe
in starting young, don't you? Why, I'm fourteen, and I've never given
a thought to a hope-chest."

Here Esther, the early riser of the family, created a diversion by
coming in fully dressed and announcing that Mammy Lou was willing to
teach as many girls as cared to come after breakfast how to make
beaten biscuit.

"Take Libbie," giggled Bobby, whose sense of humor was easily
tickled. "She's collecting stuff for her hope chest and I should
think biscuit recipes would be just the thing. Do you want to learn
to cook, Betty? Esther has a kitchen hobby and rides it almost to
death."

"I do not!" retorted Esther indignantly. "Do I, Louise? Mother loved
to cook when she was a girl, and she says she likes to see me fussing
in the kitchen."

Betty was showing Libbie how to hold her crochet hook, and now she
looked up from her pupil.

"Why, I'd love to learn to make those wonderful biscuits Mammy Lou
makes," she said slowly, "but I really have to go into Washington to-day.
That is, if it will not upset any one's plans? I can easily walk
to the trolley line, and I won't be gone longer than a couple of
hours."

A trolley line ran about half a mile from the house, and to Betty
who had frequently walked ten miles a day while at Bramble Farm, this
distance seemed negligible.

"Let me go with you, Betty?" coaxed Bobby. "Carter will take us in
the machine. I won't bother you, and if you have personal business to
attend to, I'll wait for you in the library or some place. Cooking
and making lace drives me wild, and if you leave me at home as likely
as not I'll pick a quarrel with some one before the morning is over."

"Worse than that, she'll insist on singing while I'm trying to
practice," said Louise. "I'm three or four days behind with my
violin, and a rainy morning is a grand time to catch up. Do take her
with you, Betty."

"Why, goodness, she will be taking me," insisted Betty. "Of course
you know I'll love to have you, Bobby. As a matter of fact, I wanted
to ask you to go with me because it is a strange place and your
father said not to go alone. Only I didn't want to disturb any plans
you might have made for to-day. I'll tell you about it on the way,"
she added noting the look of growing curiosity on Bobby's face.

After breakfast the girls scattered to their chosen occupations, and
Mrs. Littell settled herself to read to her husband on the glass
enclosed piazza that extended half way across the back of the house.
The car was brought round for Betty and Bobby and, commissioned to do
several small errands in town, they set off.

"Now where are we going?" demanded Bobby bouncing around on the seat
cushions more like a girl of seven than fourteen. "Do tell me, for
I'm simply devoured with curiosity."

So Betty briefly outlined for her a little of Bob's history and of
what she knew Lockwood Hale had told the poorhouse master. She also
explained how she had obtained the old bookshop man's address from
the bride they had met in the Monument the day before.

The rain came down steadily, and the country road was already muddy,
showing that it had stormed the greater part of the night. Carter was
a careful driver, and the luxurious limousine had been substituted
for the touring car so that the girls were protected and very
comfortable. Quite suddenly Carter brought the car to a stop on a
lonely stretch of road just above a sharp turn.

"Goodness, I hope he hasn't a puncture," said Bobby. "I was so
interested in listening to you I never heard anything. What's wrong,
Carter?" she called.

"There's a little dog in the road, Miss Bobby," said Carter slowly
and distinctly, as he always spoke. Bobby had once declared that she
did not believe a fire would shake Carter from his drawling speech.
"A puppy, I guess you'd call it. I'll have to move it to one side
before we can drive past, because it is in the middle of the road."

Bobby leaned out to look.

"It must be hurt!" she cried. "Bring it in here, quick, Carter. Why,
it's just a tiny puppy, Betty," she added; "a black and white one."

Carter, mingled pain and reproach in his face, brought the dog to
them, holding it gingerly away from him so as not to soil his coat.

"It's very muddy, Miss Bobby," he said disapprovingly. "Your mother
won't like them nice gray cushions all stained up."

"Well, couldn't you lend me your handkerchief, Carter?" suggested
Bobby gently. "I'll wipe him off. There now, he's all right. My
handkerchief's so small it wouldn't have done one of his paws."

Carter, minus his handkerchief, started the car and they rounded the
curve. The puppy seemed to be all right except that he was wet and
shivering, and Bobby and Betty had decided that he was very young but
otherwise in perfect health when the car stopped again.

"There's another one of 'em, Miss Bobby," groaned Carter. "You don't
want this one, do you?"

The girls thrust out their heads. Sure enough, another black and
white puppy lay abandoned in the roadway.

"Certainly, we'll pick it up," said Bobby indignantly. "Do you
suppose we're going to go past a dog and let it die in the rain?
Bring it here, please, Carter."

The old man got down stiffly and picked up the dog. This time he
handed over a second handkerchief with a ludicrous air of
"take-it-and-ruin-it."

"That's the last handkerchief I have with me, Miss Bobby," he
announced feelingly, watching his young mistress mopping water and
mud from the rescued puppy.

"Well, there won't be any more puppies, Carter," Bobby assured him
cheerfully.

But they had not gone twenty rods when they found another, and,
after that, a few rods further on, a fourth.

"Here's where we use our own handkerchiefs," giggled Bobby. "And
what are we going to do with a car full of dogs?"

The problem was solved, however, before they crossed the bridge into
Washington. On the hill leading to the bridge they overtook a small
colored boy weeping bitterly. Bobby signaled Carter to stop, and
leaning out asked the child what the matter was.

"I done lost my dawgs!" he sobbed. "We-all is moving, and I had 'em
in a basket with a burlap bottom. I done tol mammy that burlap was
rotten." He held up the basket for them to see the hole in the cloth
tacked across the bottom. "I was going to sell them dawgs for fifty
cents apiece when they was bigger," he finished with a fresh burst of
grief.

His joy when the girls showed him the puppies and explained how they
had found them was correspondingly noisy. He had an old gingham apron
with him, and into this the dogs were unceremoniously bundled and
securely knotted. Betty and Bobby each gave him a shining ten-cent
piece, and a blissful boy went whistling over the bridge, his world
changed to sunshine in a few brief minutes.

The car threaded a side street, turned twice, and brought up before
a quaint old house with a basement shop tucked away under a bulging
bay-window.

"This is Hale's bookshop, Miss," said Carter respectfully to Betty,




CHAPTER XVI

WHAT HALE HAD TO TELL


The door of the bookstore opened with a loose old-fashioned latch,
and one fell down two steps without warning into a long, narrow room
lined with books. Betty went first, and Bobby, stumbling, would have
fallen if she had not caught her.

"Gracious! I'm a little bit scared, aren't you?" Bobby whispered.
"It seems like such a spooky place."

It was certainly very quiet in the shop, and for a few moments Betty
thought they must be alone. Then some one stirred, and, looking down
the room, they saw an old man bent over a book open on a table near a
dusty window. He wore big horn spectacles and was evidently extremely
nearsighted, for he kept his face so near the book that his nose
almost touched the pages.

"That must be Mr. Hale," said Betty. "I wonder if it's all right to
interrupt him?"

"I should say the only way to make him understand you're here, would
be to go up and take that book away," rejoined Bobby.

"He can't be very anxious to sell anything, or he'd pay more
attention to his store," giggled Betty.

"I'll wait here," said Bobby hastily, as Betty moved toward the rear
of the store. "I'd probably say the wrong thing anyway. Let me see,
I'll be reading this fat brown book. They all look alike to me, but
this may be thrilling in spots."

Betty approached the motionless old man, whose lean brown forefinger
traced the curious black characters in the book before him so slowly
that it did not seem to budge at all.

"I beg your pardon?" she said tentatively.

No response.

"I want to ask you----" Betty began again, a little breathlessly.
"I want to ask you about a boy named Bob Henderson."

"Name's Hale," said the old man, without looking up and speaking in
a cracked, hoarse voice. "Lockwood Hale, dealer in new and secondhand
books. Just look around on the tables and you'll likely come across
what you want. I'll wrap it for you when you find it. Just now I'm
busy."

Betty looked desperately at Bobby, who was listening over the top of
her book, and stifled a desire to laugh.

"I don't want a book," she insisted gently. "I want to ask you a
question. About Bob Henderson. You know you were interested in the
records of the Oliver County almshouse, and you thought you might
know something of his people."

The old man pushed his spectacles up on his forehead fretfully and
regarded the girl impatiently from a pair of near-sighted blue eyes.

"The books weren't worth anything," he told her seriously. "I spent
near a day going over 'em, and there wasn't a volume worth bringing
back with me. Folks get the idea in their heads that a book's worth
money just because it is old. 'Tain't so--I could fill my tables and
shelves with old trash and still not have any stock. Jim Turner don't
know a valuable book from a turnip."

Mr. Hale gave every indication of returning to the absorbing volume
before him, and Betty plunged in hastily with another question.

"You know a boy named Bob Henderson, don't you?" she urged.

"Yes, he was in here some time last week," answered Hale calmly.
"Was it Wednesday, or Tuesday--that load of old almanacs was
delivered that same afternoon."

"Well, I'm a friend of his." Betty almost stuttered in her eagerness
to explain before the old man should be lost again in his book. "He
worked on the farm where I spent the summer, and he told me about you
and how anxious he was to see you and find out about his people. I've
been anxious, too, to learn if he reached Washington and whether he
is here now. Do you know?"

Now that the shopkeeper's mind was fairly detached from his printed
page he seemed to be more interested in his caller, and though he did
not offer to get Betty a chair, he looked about him vaguely as though
he might be seeking a place for her to sit.

"I don't mind standing. I mustn't stay long," she said hurriedly,
afraid to let him fix his attention on outside objects. "Didn't Bob
Henderson say where he was going? Did he mention anything about
leaving Washington?"

"Well, now let me see," considered the old man. "Bob Henderson? Oh,
yes, I recollect now how he looked--a manly lad with a frank face.
Yes, yes, his mother was Faith Henderson, born a Saunders. That's
what caught my eye on the almshouse record book. Years ago I traced
the Saunders line for a fine young lady who was marrying here in
Washington. She wanted a coat of arms, and she was entitled to one,
too. But there was a break in the line, one branch ending suddenly
with the birth of Faith Saunders, daughter of Robert and Grace. I
never forget a name, so when I read the almshouse record and saw the
name of this lad's mother there I knew I had my chart complete. Yes,
the boy was interested in what I could tell him."

Betty, too, was interested and glad to know that Bob had succeeded
in finding the old bookseller and learning from him what he had to
tell. But if Bob was still in Washington, she wanted to see him. He
could doubtless tell her what to do in case she did not hear from her
uncle within a few days--and Betty was growing exceedingly anxious as
no answer came in reply to her telegram. And above all, she wanted to
see an old friend. The Littells were kindness itself to her, but she
craved a familiar face, some one to whom she could say, "Do you
remember?"

"Didn't Bob say where he was going?" she urged again.

"Going?" Mr. Hale repeated the question placidly. "Oh, I believe he
went to Oklahoma."

Oklahoma! Betty had a sudden wild conviction that her thoughts had
been so centered on that one locality that she was beginning to lose
her mind and imagine that every one repeated the word to her.

"Did you--did you say Oklahoma?" she ventured. "Why, how funny! I
have an uncle out there in the oil fields. At least we think he is in
the oil fields," she added, a sudden look of worry flashing into her
eyes. "It seems so funny that Bob should go away off there."

The old man peered up at her shrewdly.

"Aye, aye, funny it may be," he croaked. "But suppose I should tell
you I advised the lad to go there? Would that seem funny, eh?"

Betty stared in complete bewilderment.

"Oh, it isn't always in the story books, sometimes it happens to
real boys," he nodded exultantly. "Suppose I told you, in strictest
confidence, young lady, for I think you're a true friend to him, that
he has relatives out there? His mother's two sisters, both of 'em
living on the old homestead? Neither of 'em married and without near
kith or kin so far as they know? Suppose I tell you that the old
farm, as I locate it, is in the oil section? Suppose the lad is
entitled to his mother's interest in the place? Eh? Suppose I tell
you that?"

He made a question of each point, and emitted a dry cackle after
every assertion.

"I told the lad to go out there, and if he had any trouble proving
who he was to come back here to me," said Hale importantly. "I can
help him straighten out the tangles. I've untied many a knot for
families more tangled up than this. So he may be back, he may be
back. Drop in any day, and I'll tell you whatever I know."

Betty thanked him warmly and he followed the girls to the door,
repeating that he would be glad to tell them everything he knew.

They were going to one of the large shops to do a few errands for
Mrs. Littell, and since their visit to the bookstore had taken so
long they agreed to separate and each do one or two commissions and
then meet at the door within half an hour.

Betty's mind was busy with the astonishing revelations Lockwood Hale
had made, and as she deftly matched wool for a sweater, she turned
the information over in her mind.

"I don't believe Bob has gone so far West at all," she said to
herself firmly. "He wouldn't have money enough, I'm sure. I suppose
he has written to me, but my mail will go to the farm, of course, and
Mr. Peabody would be the last person to forward it. I must write the
postmaster to hold and redirect my mail--when I know where I am to be."

Although she had promised herself not to worry, Betty was becoming
very anxious to hear from her uncle. She had written to the Benders
in Laurel Grove and to Norma Guerin at Glenside, explaining her
situation and asking them to let her know as soon as the quarantine
in Pineville should be lifted. She knew that she could visit friends
there indefinitely. But that did not much lighten the burden. Anxiety
for her uncle and growing fear that she might never again hear from
him, it had already been so long a time since his last letter, at
times oppressed her.

Their chopping finished, she and Bobby were reunited and were glad
to enter the car and drive quietly home to luncheon. It was still
raining, and they found the other girls impatient for their return.

"We know all about beaten biscuit," boasted Esther. "And I stirred
up a gold cake every bit myself."

"Practising all done," reported Louise. "And I'm just aching for a
good lively game. No wedding stuff, Libbie, I warn you. I can see a
romantic gleam in your eye."

Libbie said nothing then, but after lunch when they were debating
what to do, she had a suggestion.

"Let's play hide-and-go-seek," she said enthusiastically.

"Well, I didn't know you had that much sense," approved Bobby, who
was blunt almost to a fault but undoubtedly fond of her younger
cousin. "Come on, girls, we'll have one more good game before the
family begin to hint I'm too old for such hoydenish tricks. We'll go
up to the attic and make as much noise as we can."




CHAPTER XVII

MORE SIGHTSEEING


Libbie waited till they were safely in the attic before she followed
up her suggestion.

"I read the loveliest story last summer," she said dreamily. "It was
about a bride--"

A shout of laughter from the listening girls interrupted her.

"I knew there would be a bride in it somewhere," rippled Bobby.
"Now, Libbie, once and for all, this is hide-and-go-seek, not a mock
wedding."

"You might let me finish," protested Libbie. "I only meant to say
this story was about a bride who ran away from her wedding guests for
fun and hid in a great carved chest; the chest had a spring lock and
it closed tight when she pulled it down. Her husband and all the
guests hunted and hunted, and they never found her. Years and years
after, when they opened the chest, there were only some bones and the
wedding dress and veil."

"And you call that a lovely story!" Bobby's scorn was immeasurable.
"Well, I think it's gruesome. And what kind of housecleaning did they
have in those days? My mother opens every chest and trunk and box in
the house at least twice a year."

The game started merrily, and, forewarned by Libbie's story, the
girls knew exactly where to find her when she hid from them and
unerringly pulled her out of every chest into which she hopefully
squeezed her plump self.

"You never should have mentioned 'chest' to us," laughed Betty, when
Libbie was "it" for the third time. "We know your line of reasoning
now, you see."

Libbie good-naturedly began her counting, and Betty looked about for
a good place to hide. The attic was long and wide and a splendid
place to play. It was rather too well lighted for hide-and-seek, but
the trunks and boxes arranged neatly around the walls offered a fair
chance to escape detection. A peculiar fan-shaped box near a window
attracted Betty's attention, apparently being a built-in box.

"I'll hide there," she resolved, running lightly over to it.

Louise and Esther and Bobby were already stowed away in various
corners, and Betty slipped into the box noiselessly. Libbie ceased
counting.

The three Littell girls reached "home" without being detected, and
then perched merrily on an old trunk to watch Libbie prowl about
after Betty. A five-minute search failed to reveal her, and Libby
gave up.

"All safe, you may come in!" they called in unison.

No Betty appeared, and they shouted again.

"Well, if that isn't queer!" Louise looked at Bobby in doubt. "Where
do you suppose she is hiding?"

Bobby, a furrow of anxiety between her eyes, searched the attic with
level glances, her sisters and cousin watching her apprehensively.

"Something must have happened to her," Louise was beginning, when
Bobby gave a cry and raced for the door.

"I'll bet I know where she went," she flung over her shoulder.
"Haven't time--to stop--don't bother me----" She flew down the
stairs, the others after her at top speed.

Down, down, down, through the third, second and first floors, the
four girls fled like a whirlwind, down, always following flying
Bobby, to the laundry in the basement where modern electric equipment
made washing clothes a scientific process.

Bobby brought up her mad flight before a tall cupboard in one
corner, turning the catch on the door, opened it and out
tumbled--Betty!

"Are you hurt?" demanded Bobby, helping her to her feet. "Oh, Betty,
darling, do say you're all right! It's a wonder you weren't
suffocated or didn't break any bones."

"I'm all right," said Betty, smoothing out her skirts. "But I'm
still a bit dazed. It was such a sudden drop. What have I done that I
shouldn't, Bobby?"

Libbie, too, was bewildered, and stared at the disheveled Betty with
puzzled wonder.

"Why, my dear child," explained Bobby, with a funny maternal manner,
"you fell down the laundry shoot. It opens into the attic for good
ventilation. I'm glad there were some soiled clothes at the bottom
for you to land on, otherwise you might have had a bad bump. Sure
you're all right?"

"Yes, indeed," insisted Betty. "I thought I was climbing into a box
and went in feet first without looking. Instead of hitting the floor,
I slid gently on and on. I hadn't any breath to scream with I went so
fast. Anyway, there wasn't time to scream. I just sat here for a time
after I landed. And I was wondering where I was and how I could get
out when you opened the door for me."

That ended the game for the day, and the rest of the afternoon the
girls were content to spend quietly, Betty in writing a long letter
to Mrs. Arnold, one of her mother's old friends who had moved to
California, and the others with books and sewing.

The next morning was fair and sunny, and before breakfast Bobby had
it planned that they should spend the day at Mount Vernon. Of course
Betty and Libbie were very anxious to see the famous place, and the
three sisters were glad to have the opportunity to take them for the
first time.

"It's never the same again," explained Louise, obligingly tying
Esther's hair-bow for her. "There's a wonderful thrill you get when
you see the things that really were Washington's and were handled by
him that never comes again. Though we love to go there and never tire
of looking at the rooms."

"What a chatter-box you are, child!" expostulated her mother, who
had come up to tell them breakfast was ready. Indeed the gong had
sounded fully fifteen minutes before. "How nice you look, all of you!
I'll be proud to take five girls to Mount Vernon. We're going to-day,
aren't we?"

Dear Mrs. Littell! Betty already loved her dearly, as indeed did
every member of the household. She was so unaffected, so affectionate
and generous, and she allowed money to change her simple, happy
nature not at all. The Littells had not always been wealthy, and the
mistress of the beautiful mansion did not hesitate to tell of the
days when she had done all of her own housework and taken care of two
babies.

Soon after breakfast the party started, the plan to go by motor
being abandoned in favor of the trip down the river. It was decided
that Carter should come down later with the car and bring a basket
luncheon, taking them home in the afternoon.

Mount Vernon is sixteen miles below Washington, and the sail down
the Potomac was delightful in the cool of the morning, and Betty
thought she had never seen anything more beautiful than the deep
greens of the trees and grass on either bank. By common consent the
boatload of chattering people became silent as they came in sight of
Mount Vernon, and as the glimmer of the house showed white between
the trees. Betty's heart contracted suddenly. Louise, who was
watching her, squeezed her arm sympathetically.

"I know how you feel," she whispered. "Mother told me that the first
time she went abroad and dad took her to see the Colosseum she cried.
You're not crying, are you, Betty?"

Betty shook her head, but her eyelashes were suspiciously damp.

Libbie was staring in unaffected enjoyment at the scene before her
and fairly dancing with impatience to be off the boat.

"I do want to see Martha Washington's things," she confided, as they
went ashore. "Her ivory fan and her dishes and the lovely colonial
mahogany furniture."

"George Washington's swords for mine," announced Bobby inelegantly.
"I've seen 'em every time I've been here, and I'd give anything to
have one to hang in my room."

"Bobby should have been a boy," remarked Mrs. Littell indulgently.
"You're mother's only son, aren't you, dear?"

"Well, my name is as near as I'll ever come to it," mourned Bobby.
"However, I manage to have a pretty good time if I am only a girl."

Mrs. Littell led them first to the tomb of Washington. The plain
brick building was directly at the head of the path leading from the
landing, and a reverent group stood, the men with bared heads, for a
few moments before the resting place of the Father of his Country.

High above the river, overlooking the land he loved, stands the
Mount Vernon mansion. From the tomb the Littell party went directly
to the house.

Each of the girls, although interested in the whole, showed her
personality distinctly in her choice of special relics.

It was Betty who lingered longest in the library, fascinated by the
autographed letters of Washington, his tripod used in surveying, and
his family Bible. Bobby had to be torn bodily from the room which
contained the four swords. Esther spent her happiest hour in the old
kitchen, admiring the huge fireplace and the andirons and turnspit.

Louise and Mrs. Littell were able to go into raptures over the old
furniture in Martha Washington's bedroom and sitting room, though
they, of course, had seen it all many times before.

Mrs. Littell herself had a collection of antique furniture of which
she was justly proud, and mahogany furniture was sure of her
intelligent appreciation. Strange to say, Libbie remained cool toward
the very things she had voiced a desire to see, and in the middle of
the morning they missed her.

They were on their way to the barn Washington's father had built,
and Betty volunteered to run back and see if the missing girl had
stayed behind in the house.




CHAPTER XVIII

BETTY UNDERSTANDS


Betty hurried back and began a hasty inspection of the rooms. She
recollected seeing Libbie upstairs at the door of Washington's room
the last time she had definitely noticed her, and she ran upstairs to
see if she might not be there.

No Libbie was in any of the rooms.

Downstairs she searched hurriedly, peeping under people's elbows,
trying not to annoy others and yet to make a thorough hunt in a short
time so as not to keep the others waiting. Then in the music room, or
East Parlor, as it is often called, she found the truant, gazing with
rapt eyes at the quaint old harpsichord which had belonged to Nellie
Custis.

"Every one is waiting for you," announced Betty, pulling her gently
by the sleeve. "Come on, Libbie, we're all going. We've seen the
whole house."

Libbie followed in a sort of daze, and when they rejoined the others
she seemed to be still in a brown study.

"For goodness sake," prodded Bobby impatiently, "what were you doing
back there? We nearly went off and left you. Where did you find her,
Betty?"

"I was in the music room," announced Libbie with dignity. "I wanted
to see the harpsichord. Say, girls, did you know Washington gave that
to Nellie Custis when she was married? He wore his uniform when he
gave her away, and--"

"Well, for pity's sake!" Bobby's disgust was ludicrous. "Trust
Libbie to dig up a romance wherever she goes. What else did you find
connected with weddings, Lib?"

Libbie was inclined to be ruffled, but Mrs. Littell soothed the
troubled waters by telling them that the old barn, which they had
reached by this time, was built in 1733 by Washington's father and
that the bricks were supposed to have been imported from England.

The beautiful old formal garden further mellowed their tempers, for
it was impossible to say sharp things walking along the very paths
which George Washington had often trod and between the rows of box
brushed by the silken skirts of Mrs. Washington. Where her rose
bushes used to be are planted others, and Mrs. Littell assured the
girls that it was one of the great pleasures of the First Lady of the
Land to gather rose leaves for her potpourri jars and to make a
perfumed unguent for which she was famous among her friends.

"She was a wonderful housekeeper," added Mrs. Littell, smiling at
Libbie, whose momentary resentment had quickly faded, "and a very
fine manager. We are told that she was thoroughly domestic in her
tastes and that she made her husband ideally happy."

Presently Carter came with a hamper of luncheon and their appetites
did full justice to Mammy Lou's dainties. Betty wondered, sitting on
the grass, the Potomac flowing lazily several feet below, whether she
was dreaming and might not wake up to find herself at Bramble Farm
with Mr. Peabody scolding vigorously because something had not gone
to suit him. She often had this odd feeling that her present
happiness could not be real.

This, too, brought the thought of her uncle to her mind, and again
she wondered if she would ever hear from him--if something dreadful
had not happened to him, leaving her almost as much alone in the
world as Bob Henderson. She shivered a little, then resolutely threw
herself into the chatter of the other girls and soon forgot all but
the present pleasure and excitement.

After rambling about the grounds another hour or so, the party from
Fairfield was ready to go, and they all found it restful to lean back
in the comfortable car and spin back to the city.

"If you're not too tired I think we might drive down Pennsylvania
Avenue," suggested Mrs. Littell. "Our guests haven't seen the White
House yet, have they?"

Neither Betty nor Libbie had, and as the car turned into the famous
thoroughfare both girls sat up alertly so as not to miss a single
sight of interest. Carter slowed down as they approached a high iron
fence, and at the first glimpse of the white mansion separated from
the fence and street by a wide stretch of lawn, Libbie shouted
joyfully.

"The White House!"

"Well, you needn't tell everybody," cautioned Bobby. "Think of the
weddings they've held in there, Libbie!"

"I imagine any one who has ever seen a picture of the White House
recognizes it instantly," said Betty, fearing a resumption of
cousinly hostilities. "How beautiful the grounds are."

"You must go through it some day soon," said Mrs. Littell. "And now
we'll drive to the Capitol. Day after to-morrow would be a good time
for you to take the girls to the Capitol, Bobby."

The Capitol reminded Libbie of a pin tray she had at home, and awoke
recollection in Betty's mind of a bronze plaque that had been one of
Mrs. Arnold's treasures in the stiff little parlor of the Pineville
house. All good Americans know the White House and the Capitol long
before they make a pilgrimage to Washington.

On their arrival at Fairfields they found Mr. Littell playing
solitaire, and something in his undisguised relief at seeing them
made Betty wonder if time did not hang heavily on his hands.

After dinner Bobby proposed that they turn on the phonograph and
have a little dance among themselves.

"Oh, that will be fine!" cried Betty.

"Then you can dance?"

"A little--mother taught me."

So the girls danced and had a good time generally for an hour or
more, with Mr. and Mrs. Littell looking on. Then Betty sank down on
the arm of Mr. Littell's chair.

"I've been thinking of something," she half whispered. "Do you like
to play checkers? If you do, I know how."

Maybe Mr. Littell understood that she was doing it largely to keep
him company. But he said nothing, and they played checkers for nearly
two hours. Betty was a fairly good player and managed to land several
victories.

"With a little more practice you'll make a very good player,"
declared Mr. Littell. "I appreciate your staying to play with a
cripple like me," he added gratefully. "Does your Uncle Dick play?"

"I don't really know," replied the girl, and now her face clouded
for an instant. Oh, why didn't she hear from Uncle Dick?

The next few days were filled with sightseeing trips. Betty was kept
too busy to have much time to worry, which was fortunate, for no word
came from her uncle and no word reached her from Bob Henderson. The
Guerins and the Benders wrote to her, and each letter mentioned the
fact that Bob had sent a postal from Washington, but that no later
word had come from him.

"I met Peabody on the road yesterday," ran a postscript to Norma
Guerin's letter, written by her doctor father. "He hinted darkly that
Bob had done something that might land him in jail, but I couldn't
force out of him what fearful thing Bob had done. I hope the lad
hasn't been rash, for Peabody never forgives a wrong, real or fancied."

Betty knew that the farmer's action had to do with the unrecorded
deed, but she did not feel that she should make any disclosures in
that connection. Of Bob's innocence she was sure, and time would
certainly clear him of any implication.

The girls visited the Capitol, seeing the great bronze doors that
are nineteen feet high and weight ten tons. Betty was fascinated by
the eight panels, and studied them till the others threatened to
leave her there over night and call for her in the morning. Then she
consented to make the tour of the three buildings. But the historical
paintings again held her spellbound. When she reached the Senate
chamber, which was empty, except for a page or two, the Senate not
being in session, she dropped into a gallery seat and tried to
imagine the famous scenes enacted there. They spent the better part
of a day at the Capitol, and saw practically everything in the
buildings. They were so tired that night that Libbie went to sleep
over her dessert, and Betty dreamed all night of defending the city
with a shotgun from the great gilded dome. But she and Libbie agreed
that they would not have missed it for anything.




CHAPTER XIX

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING


"That's twice you've made a wrong play, Betty," observed Mr.
Littell. "What lies heavy on your mind this evening?"

Betty blushed, and attempted to put her mind more on the game. She
was playing checkers with Mr. Littell, whose injured foot still kept
him a prisoner most of the time, and she had played badly all the
evening, she knew. Truth to tell, she was thinking about her uncle
and wondering over and over why she did not hear from him.

After the rubber was played and the other girls who had been around
the piano, singing, had gone out to get something to eat, for the
maids had the evening off, Betty spoke to her host.

"I suppose you think I'm foolish," she ventured; "but I am really
worried about Uncle Dick now. He has never answered the telegram and
the two letters I've written. His Philadelphia lawyer writes that he
is waiting to hear from him. He seems to have dropped out of the
world. Do you think he may be sick in some hospital and not able to
communicate with us?"

"That's a possibility," admitted Mr. Littell soberly. "But I tell
you honestly, Betty, and not simply to relieve your mind, that I
consider it a very remote one. Business men, especially men who
travel a great deal, as you tell me your uncle does, seldom are
without somewhere on their person, their names and addresses, and
directions about what is to be done in case of sickness or accident.
I never travel without such a card. Ten to one, if your uncle were
ill or injured, his lawyer would have been notified immediately."

A weight of anxiety slipped from Betty's heart, for she immediately
recognized the sound common sense in this argument. Still, something
else was troubling her.

"Don't you think," she began again bravely, "that I had better go to
Pineville? The quarantine is lifted, I hear, and the Bensingers will
take me in till I can hear from Uncle Dick. You and Mrs. Littell and
the girls have been so lovely to me, but--but--" her voice trailed off.

Mr. Littell leaned back in his chair and lit a fresh cigar.

"Well, now of course," he said slowly, "if you feel that you want to
go to Pineville, we really have no right to say anything. But if I
were you, I'd stay right here. Your uncle may be intending to come
back to Washington. In any case, he will address his letter to you
here. Of that much we are certain. You'll hear more quickly if you
don't move about. Besides, there is that Henderson lad. I'm counting
on making his acquaintance. He's likely to bob up any day--though I
didn't mean to pun. If you want my advice, Betty, it is to stay here
quietly with us and wait as patiently as you can. We like to have
you, you know that. You're not a stranger, but a friend."

He went on to explain to her in his quiet, even, matter-of-fact way,
that to the disturbed girl was inexpressibly soothing, his belief
that her uncle was on an exploration trip for oil and might easily
find a month's accumulation of mail awaiting him on his return.

"It's only here, in the heart of civilization, that we think we
can't live without four mails a day," Mr. Littell concluded. "I've
been out of touch with a post-office for three weeks at a time
myself, and our sailors, you know, often go much longer without
letters."

On one particularly lovely morning the four girls, with Mrs.
Littell, started off on the pleasant mission of seeing the White
House. Betty's and Libbie's acquaintance with it was confined solely
to the glimpses they had had from the street, but Louise and Bobby
had attended several New Year's receptions and had shaken hands with
the President.

The party spent a delightful morning, visiting the famous East Room,
admiring the full length portraits of George and Martha Washington,
about which latter the story is told that Mrs. Dolly Madison cut it
from its frame to save it from the approaching enemy in 1814. They
were also fortunate to find a custodian taking sightseers through the
other official apartments so that they saw more than the casual
visitor does in one visit. They visited in turn, the Green Room, the
Red Room, and the Blue Room, saw the state dining-room with its
magnificent shining table about which it was easy to imagine famous
guests seated, and enjoyed a peep into the conservatory at the end of
the corridor. They did not go up to the executive offices on the
second floor, knowing that probably a crowd was before them and that
an opportunity to see the President on the streets of the city was
likely to present itself.

"Well, I shouldn't want to live there," sighed Betty, as they came
down the steps, "It is very grand and very stately, but not much like
a home. I suppose, though, the private rooms of the President and his
family are cozy, if one could see them."

"Beyond a doubt," agreed Mrs. Littell.

They lunched at one of the large hotels, and afterward Mrs. Littell
had a club engagement. The girls, she announced, might spend the
afternoon as they chose, and she would pick them all up at five
o'clock with Carter and the car.

"Esther and I want to see 'The Heart of June,'" announced Libbie,
who found romance enough to satisfy her in the motion-pictures.

Louise was interested, too; but Betty had promised to take some
papers for Mr. Littell and see that they reached an architect in one
of the nearby office buildings. Bobby elected to go with her, and
they decided that, that errand accomplished, they might do a little
shopping and meet the others at the theater door at five o'clock.

"Mr. Waters won't be in till three o'clock," announced the freckle-faced
office boy who met them in the outer office of the architect's suite.

"Then we'll have to come back," decided Betty, glancing at her
watch. "It is just two now."

"You can leave anything with me," said the boy politely. "I'll see
that he gets it as soon as he comes in."

"Yes, do, Betty," urged Bobby. "Dad would say it was all right to
leave that envelope of papers. They're not terribly important."

"We can do our shopping and then come back," insisted Betty, to the
evident disgust of Bobby and the hardly less concealed impatience of
the office boy.

"Why wouldn't you leave 'em?" demanded Bobby, when they were once
more in the street.

"Dad hasn't any secret service stuff, I'm sure of that. Now we have
to come all the way back here again, and that means hurrying through
our shopping."

"You needn't come," said Betty mildly. "Your father asked me to give
those papers personally to Mr. Waters. He didn't say they were
important; I don't know that they are. But if I say I am going to
give an envelope personally to any one, I don't intend to give that
envelope to a third person if there's nothing in it more valuable
than--hair nets!"

The window they were passing suggested the comparison, and Bobby
laughed good-naturedly and forebore to argue further. Promptly at
three o'clock she and Betty entered the elevator in the office
building and were whirled up to the fifth floor to find Mr. Waters in
his private office.

"Mr. Littell telephoned half an hour ago," he told them, taking the
envelope and running over the papers with a practised eye as he
talked. "He hoped to catch you before you left here. I believe he
wants to speak to his daughter. There's a booth right there, Miss
Bobby."

Bobby had a brief conversation with her father and came out in a few
minutes in evident haste.

"He wants us to do a couple more errands, Betty," she announced.
"We'll have to hurry, for it's after three."

The architect had written a receipt for the papers, and Bobby now
hurried Betty off, explaining as they went that they must take a car
to Octagon House.

Octagon House proved to be the headquarters for the American
Institute of Architects, and Bobby's errand had to do with one of the
offices. Betty admired the fine woodwork and the handsome design of
the house while waiting for her companion, and in less than fifteen
minutes they were back on the street car bound for "the tallest
office building in Washington," as Bobby described it.

"Dad wants an architectural magazine that's out of print, and he
thinks I can get it there," she said. "Afterward, if we have time,
we'll go to the top of the building. The root is arranged so that you
can step out, and they say the view is really splendid. Not so
extensive as from the Monument, of course, but not so reduced,
either. I've always wanted to get up on the roof and see what I could
see."

Finding the office her father had specified did not prove as easy a
task as Bobby had anticipated, and she said frankly that if she had
been alone she would have given up and taken another day for the
search.

"But if you can keep a promise down to the last dot of the last
letter, far be it from me to fall short," she remarked. "Oh, Betty,
do you see any office that looks like Sherwood and David on this
board?"

At last they found it under another name, which, as Bobby rather
tactlessly told the elevator boy, was not her idea of efficiency. The
copy of the magazine Mr. Littell especially wanted was wrapped up and
placed safely in Bobby's hands.

"And now," declared that young person gaily, "as the reward of
virtue, let's go up on the roof. It is after four, but we'll have
time if we don't dawdle. We can get from here to the theater in
fifteen minutes."

They started for the elevator, and as a car came up and the gates
opened a boy got off. He would have brushed by without looking up,
but Betty saw him at once.

"Bob!" she cried in amazement "Why, Bob Henderson!"




CHAPTER XX

MUTUAL CONFIDENCES


"Betty! Oh, Betty! _Betty!_" Bob Henderson's familiar, friendly
voice rose to a perfect crescendo of delight, and several passengers
in the elevator smiled in sympathy.

Bobby Littell, who had entered the car, backed out hastily and the
gate closed.

"Bobby, this is Bob Henderson," Betty performed a hasty
introduction. "And, Bob, this is Roberta Littell, always called Bobby."

The latter held out an instant cordial hand to Bob.

"I know about you," she proclaimed frankly. "Betty thinks you are
fine. We ought to be good friends, because our names are almost alike."

"I must talk to you, Bob," said Betty hurriedly. "Where are you
going? Have you heard from Bramble Farm or Uncle Dick? How long have
you been in Washington? Did you get out to Oklahoma?"

Bobby laughed and touched Betty on the arm.

"There's a seat over by the elevator," she suggested. "Why don't you
sit there and talk? I'll come back and get you at a quarter to five--I
want to get some new hair-ribbons for Esther."

"But you wanted to go up on the roof!" protested Betty, longing to
talk to Bob and yet mindful of Bobby's first plans.

"Plenty of other days for that," was the careless response. "See you
quarter to, remember. Good-by, Bob--though I'll see you again, of
course."

She disappeared into a down elevator, and Betty and Bob sat down on
the oak settle in the corridor.

"Wasn't it lucky we met you!" exclaimed Betty, getting a good look
at the boy for the first time. "Seems to me you're thinner, Bob. Are
you all right?"

"Couldn't be better!" he assured her, but she noticed there were
rings under his eyes and that his hands, white enough now in contrast
to the tan which still showed at his wrists, were perceptibly
thinner. "Fact is, I work in this building, Betty. Kind of junior
clerk for a man on the fourth floor, substituting while his clerks
are away on vacation. Hale got me the place."

Betty told him of her interview with the old bookshop man, and Bob
listened intently.

"So that's how you heard about Oklahoma," he commented. "You could
have knocked me down with a feather when you said it. I guess Hale
forgot I was working here--he really is dreadfully absent-minded--or
else he thought you weren't to be trusted with so important a secret.
He's as queer as they make 'em, but he was very good to me; couldn't
seem to take enough pains to trace out what he knew of my mother's
people."

Bob went on to explain that his money had given out and that he had
to work in order to get together enough to pay his fare out to the
West and also to board himself and pay for some new clothes. Betty
guessed that he was scrimping closely to save his wages, though she
did not then suspect what she afterward learned to be true, that he
was trying to live on two meals a day, and those none too bountiful.
Bob had a healthy boy's appetite, and it took determination for him
to go without the extra meal, but he had the grit to stick it out.

"When Bobby comes back you must go with us and meet Mrs. Littell,"
observed Betty. "She'll want to take you home to dinner. Oh, Bob,
they are the loveliest people!"

Bob shifted his foot so that the patch on one shoe was hidden.

"I'll go with you to meet her on one condition," he said firmly. "I
won't go to dinner anywhere to-night--that's flat, Betty. My collar
isn't clean. And who are the Littells?"

That led to long explanations, of course, and Betty told in detail
how she had left Bramble Farm, of the mix-up at the Union Station,
and her subsequent friendship with the hospitable family. She also
told him of Mr. Gordon's sudden trip to Oklahoma and his almost
inexplicable silence, but kept to herself her worry over this silence
and as to her own future if it continued. She gave him the latest
news of the Benders and the Guerins and handed over the two letters
from these friends she happened to have in her purse that he might
read and enjoy them at his leisure. In short, Betty poured out much
of the pent-up excitement and doubt and conjecture of the last few
weeks to Bob, who was as hungry to hear as she was to tell it.

"They certainly are fine to you!" he exclaimed, referring to the
Littells. "There isn't another family in Washington, probably, who
would have been as kind to you. I think you'll hear from your uncle
soon, Betty. Lots of times these oil wells, you know, are miles from
a railroad or a post-office. You take that Mr. Littell's advice--he
sounds as if he had a heap of common sense. And whatever they've done
to you, you're looking great, Betty. Pretty, and stylish and--and
different, somehow."

Betty blushed becomingly. She had brightened up amazingly during her
stay in Washington, despite her anxiety about her uncle and, lately,
Bob, The serene and happy life the whole household led under the roof
of "Fairfields" had a great deal to do with this transformation, for
the bickering and pettiness of the daily life at Bramble Farm had
worn Betty's nerves insensibly. She tried to say something of this to
Bob.

"I know," he nodded. "And, Betty, what do you think? I met the old
miser right here in Washington!"

Instinctively Betty glanced behind her.

"You didn't!" she gasped. "Where? Did he--was he angry?"

"Sure! He was raving," replied Bob cheerfully. "What do you think he
accused me of this time? Stealing an unrecorded deed! Did you know
anything about that, Betty?"

Betty described the incident of her delayed letter and told of the
morning she had picked it from the floor and hung up Mr. Peabody's
coat.

"He insists you took it, but I never believed it for one moment,"
she said earnestly. "I'm sure Mrs. Peabody doesn't either; and I
didn't think Mr. Peabody really thought you took it. You know how he
flies into a temper and accuses any one. But if he came down to
Washington and said pointblank to you that you took it, it looks as
if he thought you did, doesn't it?"

"You wouldn't have any doubts if you had heard him," Bob said
grimly. "He had me by the coat collar and nearly shook my teeth
loose. Perhaps he expected to shake the deed out of my pocket. What
on earth does he think I could do with his old deed, anyhow?"

Betty explained the transaction of the lots as Mrs. Peabody had
explained it to her, and Bob understood that the farmer, basing his
reasoning on his own probable conduct under similar conditions,
suspected him of intended blackmail.

"How did you get away from him?" asked Betty presently. "Where did
he shake you? Couldn't you call a policeman?"

"He wanted a policeman," said Bob, chuckling. "He walked me about
two blocks, hunting for a cop. Then a crowd collected and I decided
it was better to wriggle out, and I did, leaving the only coat I
owned in his hands. But I never go out without looking up and down
the street first. I don't want to be arrested, even if I didn't steal
anything. Besides, with Peabody, I have a feeling that he might be
able to prove whatever he wanted to prove."

"You've bought a new suit," said Betty irrelevantly. "You don't
suppose Mr. Peabody will stay in Washington, hunting for you, do you?"

"If he doesn't have to pay too much for board he will," said Bob.
"That deed evidently means a lot to him. I wish I could find it, if
only to send him back to the farm. I'll bet a cookie it's in some of
his coat pockets this minute, and he hanging down here to nab me.
Sure, I bought a new suit--had to, before I could get a job. By the
way, Betty, if you need some cash--" He patted his pocket invitingly.

"Oh, I have enough," Betty assured him hastily. "I'd feel better if
the Littells would only let me spend a little money. Why, what's this?"

For Bob had put a small white envelope into her reluctant hands.

"That's the loan," he said gravely. "I've carried it just like that
for days, ready to give you the first time I saw you. You're a great
little pal, Betty. If it hadn't been for you, I never should have got
to Washington."

Betty put the money away in her purse, conscious that it meant self-denial
on the lad's part, but knowing that she would hurt his pride irreparably
did she refuse to take it.

"Have you written to Mr. Bender?" she prodded gently. "You promised
to, Bob."

The police recorder had taken a warm interest in Bob, and Betty knew
from his wife's letters that he was anxious to hear from him.

"I will write," promised Bob. "I'm tired at night, Betty, and that's
the truth. I never seem to get enough sleep. But I will write,
perhaps this Sunday."

"Well, folks, all talked out?" called Bobby's gay voice, and she
came smilingly up to them. "Betty, mother and the girls are
downstairs in the car. I met them on the way and they know all about
our meeting with Bob. Mother wants him to come home to dinner."

Bob replied that while he appreciated Mrs. Littell's kindness, he
could not come that night, and, as he followed Bobby to the elevator,
gave Betty a significant glare which, correctly interpreted, read:
"Don't forget what I told you!"

Mrs. Littell took to Bob at once, and the bevy of girls, simple and
friendly and delightfully free from selfconsciousness, adopted him at
once as Betty's friend and theirs. When the mother found that he
could not be persuaded to come home with them that night--and Betty
loyally supported him, mindful of the collar--she would not be
satisfied until she had arranged for him to spend the next Saturday
afternoon and Sunday with them at "Fairfields," promising to send the
car in for him at noon, so that he might have lunch with them.

"Betty hasn't tried her riding habit on once," said Mrs. Littell
when Bob had promised to come. "Perhaps when you come out the girls
will find time to give her, her delayed riding lesson. They've been
doing Washington pretty thoroughly."

This reminded Betty of Bobby's plan to visit the roof of the office
building, and Bob had the same thought.

"Couldn't you all come in to-morrow morning and let me take you up
on the roof?" he asked them. "The view is really worth while, and I'm
up there anyway half the morning looking after my employer's
experiments. He is head of a dye house, and is always trying the
effect of sunlight on new shades."

So it was decided that the girls should come in again in the
morning. Then they drove away home, and Bob went on his errand.
Luckily he had been told that he need not return to the office that
afternoon after its completion, or he might have found himself
involved in a maze of explanations and excuses for his lengthy absence.




CHAPTER XXI

THE ACCIDENT


"I'd like to live up here!" It was Esther who spoke so enthusiastically,
as she stood, with Bob Henderson and the four girls, on the roof of the
building proudly pointed out as the tallest in Washington.

A soft breeze was blowing, and it was a cloudless day so that the
city was clearly spread before them.

"Wouldn't I like to go up in an airplane!" exclaimed Betty. "See,
they're flying over the Navy Yard now. I'd give anything to know how
it feels to fly."

"If you go much nearer that edge you'll know how it feels all
right," Bob warned her. "Come down here and I'll show you our drying
racks. Perhaps that will keep your mind off airplanes."

The wooden racks held lengths of silk and cloth, weighted at the
ends to keep them from blowing away. The materials were dyed in
crude, vivid colors, and Bob explained that they were brought from
the factory after being dipped so that his employer might personally
observe the changes they underwent after exposure to strong sunlight.

"We only take orders and send out salesmen from the office
downstairs," he said. "The factory is near Georgetown and employs
about two hundred hands."

After they had made the circuit of the roof, picking out familiar
landmarks and wrangling lazily over distances and geographical
boundaries, they were ready to go down. Bob must return to work, and
the girls had planned a trip to the Bureau of Engraving and Printing.

"I tell you I was glad our office wasn't on the top floor this
morning," Bob casually remarked as they stood waiting for the
elevator. "Something was the matter, and everybody had to walk up.
The fourth floor was plenty far enough up for us then."

"Mother always says we don't appreciate conveniences till we have to
do without them," said Bobby. "Here comes the car."

The grinning negro boy who operated the elevator smiled a wide smile
as they filed into his car.

"You-all get a nice view?" he asked sociably.

They assured him that they had, and he seemed pleased, but his red
light glowing at that moment, he gave all his attention to stopping
at the next floor. Two women got on and, at the next floor, two men.

The gate had just closed after this last stop, and Betty had opened
her mouth to tell Bobby that her hat was tipped crookedly when with a
sickening speed the car began to drop!

"We's slipping! I can't stop her! Oh, good gracious, the brakes or
nothin' don't work!" The frenzied wail of the negro who was working
valiantly at his levers gave the first intimation of danger.

Betty saw Bob spring to his aid, saw Esther sink in a miserable
little white heap to the floor, Bobby put her hands up to her eyes as
if to shut out the light, and Louise mechanically try to defend
herself from the strangle hold of the woman who stood next to her. It
seemed minutes to Betty that the car was falling, and she watched the
others' behavior with a curious, semi-detached interest that was
oddly impersonal. One of the men passengers began to claw at the gate
frantically and the other kept muttering under his breath, softly and
steadily, biting off his words crisply and quite unconscious of what
he was saying. The woman who had clutched Louise was silent at first,
but her companion instantly screamed, and in a fraction of a second
she, too, was screaming.

Now Betty had never heard the sound of women in terror, and she was
unprepared for the wild anguish of those shrill voices.

The experience was terrifying, but it was all over very swiftly. The
mechanism jammed between the third and second floors and the elevator
came to a stop with a suddenness that jarred the teeth of the
passengers. It had begun to fall after leaving the seventh floor.

For a moment every one stared at every one else stupidly. Bobby
Littell was the first to find her voice.

"Well, I guess we're all here," she observed matter-of-factly.
"Esther, are you hurt?"

"No-o, I think not," said Esther slowly. "Wasn't it awful! Let's get
out of here, quick."

A hasty investigation proved that no one was injured, and as one of
the men said, shaken nerves could not be allowed to count.

"That was a narrow escape, a mighty narrow escape!" said the other
man. "I fully expected to be smashed in the wreck of the car when it
struck the concrete well."

"I'll never ride in another elevator, never!" ejaculated the woman
who had seized Louise. "Why, I'll dream of this for weeks to come."

The girls said nothing, though their lips were white and Betty's
knees were trembling. She was rather angry that she should feel this
loss of control after everything was over, but it was natural.

"How do we get out?" Bob addressed the operator briskly. "Can you
open the doors? Come on now, nothing is going to hurt you--the danger
is over."

The poor darky was actually gray with fright, and his face was
bruised where he had been thrown against the grating when the car
stopped.

"I doan know how you-all kin get out, Boss," he said tremulously.
"We's stuck between the floors."

"Hello! Hello you, down there! Anybody hurt?" a friendly bellow came
down to them from the grating of the floor above.

A crowd had collected on each floor, having heard the screams, and
all these people now ran downstairs to get as close to the stranded
car as they could. They collected about the gate on the third floor,
and many from the street, hearing that there had been an accident,
crowded around the shaft on the second floor. They were advised that
no one was hurt and what was needed was a way of escape from the
brass cage.

"Knock a hole in the roof," some one advised cheerfully. "You can
crawl out on the top of the car and then shinny your way up to us. Or
we'll let down a rope to you."

"What'll we knock a hole in the roof with?" demanded Bob, and when
offers were made to drop an axe down to him he had difficulty in
calming the woman who had so nearly strangled Louise, and who had
visions of being accidently decapitated.

"I cain't get the doors open," announced the darky, after tinkering
vainly with them. "I reckon the lock's done got jammed. If I could
get 'em open the lil girl under the seat could shinny up the wall and
that would be one out, 'tannyrate."

Attention thus focused upon her, Libbie crawled from under the seat
where she had dived, following an ostrich-like impulse to hide her
head from coming danger. Her confusion was increased by the tactless
comment of the operator who, seeing her "full view" for the first
time, exclaimed:

"Lawsy, Missie, you couldn't shinny up no wall. You is too fat."

Many suggestions were forthcoming, all of them impractical, and the
already frayed nerves of the passengers began to show evidence of
reaching the snapping point. Bob's employer was among those who had
gathered in the corridor, and he decidedly favored the axe idea.

The plan to chop their way out gained in favor, and a boy had been
dispatched for one of the fire axes when the woman who had grasped
Louise created a diversion by going into hysterics and declaring that
she would not have them dropping axes on her head. Her companion
tried in vain to soothe her, but she was in a highly nervous state
and it was impossible to explain or reason with her. She began to
scream again, and this was more than those imprisoned in the car with
her could be expected to stand.

"That settles it--call off the axe!" shouted the older man,
exchanging a desperate glance with Bob. "If this goes on much longer
we'll be floated out on a river of salt tears. It's all right, Madam,
they are not going to send any axes down."

The women continued to sob violently for a time, but at last they
got her quieted and were free to consider other ways and means of
escape.

Pat Kelly, the genial engineer of the building, was sent down to the
basement to see what he could do with the refractory machinery, for
although the elevator people had been telephoned to, their men had not
yet put in an appearance. Pat's contribution was to create a horrible
din by hammering on every pipe he came to, stopping at three-minute
intervals to yell, "Can ye be moving now?"

"Call that man off!" shouted the younger of the two men passengers.
"What do you think this is--a boiler factory? About all the good
he'll do will be to dislodge the car, and we'll fall the rest of the
way."

This was a bad suggestion, and only by hard work were two more cases
of hysterics averted.

"I think what we need is a drink of water," declared Betty timidly.
"Do you think they could get some down to us? And, Bob, why don't
they send for the fire department?"

"I suppose because we are not on fire," answered Bob seriously.
"What good could the firemen do?"

"Oh, I don't know," said Betty vaguely. "Only in Pineville the
firemen get people out of all sorts of scrapes. They can climb you
know, and they have long ladders and ropes----"

"By George, the girl is right!" The elder man looked at Betty
admiringly. "Hey, some of you who want to help! Go and 'phone the
fire department. And say, send us down some water--we're dry as dust
after this rumpus."

Half of the waiting crowd scattered to telephone to the fire
department and the other half ran for the water coolers. Their zeal
outstripped their judgment in this latter service, and the result was
an icy stream of water that poured into the car.




CHAPTER XXII

BEING RESCUED


The water struck the lady given to hysterics, and she promptly
opened her mouth and shrieked again.

"We're drowning!" she cried, her terrified mind picturing a broken
water pipe. "I tell you, we're drowning!"

"And I tell you we're not!" Betty stifled a desire to laugh as one
of the men contradicted her. "Some idiot--"

The crash of the water cooler against the top of the car as it
slipped from the hands of the person holding it interrupted his
assurance and weakened it hopelessly. A chorus of shrieks arose from
those in the car.

"Well, there's your drink, Betty," grinned Bob, assisting the girls
to crowd on to the one seat, for the floor was soaked with ice-cold
water. "And here come your firemen--maybe they'll have better luck."

Some of the firemen went to the third floor and others obeyed orders
to stay on the second.

"I'd say knock 'er down," said the grizzled old fire chief after a
careful inspection of the wedged car. "We'll fix it up to break the
fall. And, anyway, a drop from the third to the basement would not be
dangerous."

But the occupants of the elevator protested vigorously against this
plan. They made it quite clear that they had had all the "drop" they
wanted for that day, and some of them intimated that they preferred
to spend the night there rather than be experimented with.

"Women is like that," they heard the fire chief confide sadly to his
lieutenant. "You can't reason with 'em. Well, we'll have to dope out
another scheme."

After a consultation, it was proposed, via the chiefs voice which
had a carrying quality that was famous throughout the city, to let a
ladder down from the third floor, have a fireman chop a hole in the
top of the car, and assist the prisoners up the ladder to safety.

This plan met with the approval of all but the two rather prim and
elderly women who flatly refused to walk up a ladder, even to get out
of their present unpleasant predicament.

"Well, then, you'll have to stay here," announced the fire chief
disgustedly. "The others are willing, and we can't hang around here
all day. If there was a fire you wouldn't be consulted. A fireman
would have you up or down a ladder before you could open your mouth
to object. I ain't used to arguing with anybody."

"There's another way that might work, chief," suggested his aide.
"If we can fix ropes and rig up a windlass, we can maybe hoist the
car up to the level of the gate."

It was decided to try this plan, but the wily chief first extracted
a promise from every one in the car that if the scheme failed, they
would submit to a ladder rescue.

"'Cause I ain't saying this will work, and I don't aim to cook up a
different plan every minute till you're all suited," he declared,
with commendable precaution. "You all agree to the ladder if this
ain't a go?"

An unanimous chorus assured him that they did.

It took some time to arrange the ropes, but at last, creakingly and
slowly, the car began to make its ascent.

"Bless the Lord!" ejaculated the darky operator fervently, "I done
guess our troubles is ovah!"

He changed his mind in a minute when it was discovered that the car
gates were jammed. There the eleven imprisoned passengers stood, on a
level with the third floor, a crowd gathered in the corridor as far
as the eye could see, a thin iron grating separating them from escape.

"I don't know but I'd just as lief stay here as to face that mob,"
murmured Bob, but some one heard him.

"You're among friends, bub," a man called. "Keep up a stout heart."

There was a general laugh, and some one was dispatched to get a
file. Ten minutes' work with this, and the stubborn catch was filed
through, the gates slid back and those behind them found themselves
once more on good solid mosaic tiling.

Bob's employer came up to him, and was presented to the girls. He
was a pleasant, prosperous-looking man, middle-aged, and evidently
fond of Bob. He immediately offered him the rest of the day off,
insisting that after such an experience he should rest quietly for a
few hours.

"By the way," he remarked _sotto voce_, "those two young men over
there at the head of the stairs are newspaper reporters. One has a
camera. I imagine they want to get a story on your morning's
sensations."

Bob had not yet met Mr. Littell, but he had a lively idea of what
that gentleman might say should he find his daughters' pictures
spread over the first page of the evening papers, accompanied by a
more or less accurate analysis of their emotions during the trying
period through which they had just passed.

"Whisk us into your office, can't you, Mr. Derby?" he urged,
"They're stopping people as they go down; they'll take no notice of
us if we go on up to the fourth floor."

The crowd, satisfied that no one had been killed or was likely to
be, had drifted down the staircase, the two alert youths questioning
each one in an effort to get the stories of those who had been in the
stalled car. The negro operator had already furnished enough copy for
a half-column of thrills.

Mr. Derby managed to usher the girls and Bob upstairs to his office
without exciting suspicion, and once there the question of how to get
to the street was considered. There were still enough people in the
corridors to make a quick run down impossible, and the elevator was,
of course, out of commission.

"I'll tell you," said Mr. Derby suddenly. "Go down the fire escape
to the second floor and get in at the hall window. It's always open.
I'll have to wait here for Anderson, Bob. He had an appointment at
eleven, but telephoned he was delayed. But perhaps the nerves of the
young ladies are not equal to a climb down the fire escape? In that
case you could all remain here and I'll have lunch sent in."

The girls, however, ridiculed the idea of nervousness. And indeed,
with the elasticity of youth, they had already dismissed the accident
from their minds except as an exciting story to tell at home that
afternoon or evening.

"I'll go first," said Bob, stepping out on the fire escape. "All
there is to do is to take it easy, don't hurry, and don't push.
There's only two flights, so you can't get dizzy."

"Isn't this a lark!" chuckled Bobby, as she and Betty waited for the
younger girls to go first after Bob. "I never had so much fun in my
life. What's Bob stopping for?"

Bob was working with the window directly over the fire escape on the
second floor. The girls caught up with him before he turned with a
flushed face.

"The blame thing's locked," he announced. "Isn't that the worst
luck! It's a rule of the building that all hall windows be left open
unless there's a storm. Well, I suppose we might as well go back.
There's no window on the first floor."

"We could climb in there," suggested Betty, pointing to another
window, half-opened. "See, Bob, I can reach it easily."

She drew herself up before Bob could stop her, and, raising the
window as high as it would go, scrambled over the sill.

"It's fine--come on in," she laughed back at the others. "Cunning
office and no one in it. I suppose the owner has gone out to see us
rescued."

Bob lifted up Libbie, who was the shortest, and, one after the
other, the girls climbed in, Bob following last.

It was a finely furnished office and one Bob had never been in,
though he had a speaking acquaintance with many of the tenants in the
building. A pair of tiny scales and a little heap of yellow dust lay
on the highly polished mahogany desk.

The door into the corridor was partly open, and as they had to pass
the desk to reach the door, it was natural that the group should draw
nearer and glance curiously at the pair of scales.

"No nearer are you to come!" snapped a sharp voice with the
precision of a foreigner who is not sure enough of his English to
speak hurriedly. "I warn you not to put a finger out."

Libbie squawked outright in terror, and the others fell back a step.
A little man with very black eyes stood facing them, and at them he
was leveling a small, businesslike looking revolver. The door had
closed noiselessly, and he had evidently been behind it.

"I saw you all to enter," he informed them sternly. "I, of all in
the building, remembered that it is in excitement that sneak thieves
do their best work. Mr. Matthews is trusting, but I--I stood on
guard. It is well. You are not to move while I telephone to the
police."

"Look here," said Bob determinedly, almost overwhelmed with his
responsibility and blaming himself for having placed the girls in
such an awkward position. "We're no thieves. You can telephone
upstairs to Mr. Derby and he'll vouch for us."

"I know no Mr. Derby," said the little man stubbornly. "Why should
you pick out a jeweler's office and creep in through the window?
Answer me that! Are there not stairs?"

"Well we wanted to avoid some--er--men," blurted Bob.

"Yah--already the police seek you!" triumphed their captor. "Well,
they will not have long to seek."

"They were not the police." Betty found her voice and spoke
earnestly. "They were reporters, and we didn't want to be
interviewed. We came down the fire escape from the fourth floor, and
found the hall window locked. This window was open, and we crawled
in, intending to get out into the hall. That is the absolute truth."




CHAPTER XXIII

ANOTHER RESCUE


The black eyes of the little man suddenly disappeared. They were so
bright and glistening that their disappearance was noticeable. He had
closed them tight and was laughing!

As suddenly as he had laughed, his mirth stopped, and he stared
sternly at the anxious Betty.

"You expect me to believe that?" he asked incredulously.

"It is true," she said quietly.

"True--bah!" The vehemence of his tone quite startled her. "True!
When all you had to do to reach the first floor--had access to the
street been your object--was to let down the folding flight to the
ground."

Betty's jaw dropped. She and Bob looked at each other helplessly.

"We--we never thought of that!" she faltered.

It was true. In her excitement she had not noticed the folding
flight of steps that let down to the ground in an emergency, and for
protection against sneak thieves was always drawn up except during
fire drills. Bob had been equally careless. As for the Littell girls,
like docile sheep, they had never thought to question their leaders.

Still keeping the revolver pointed at them, the little man took down
the telephone receiver.

"Bob!" whispered Betty. "Oh, Bob, this is dreadful! What will Mrs.
Littell say? And those reporters! If they get hold of this, the
elevator story will be nothing."

Bobby and Louise and Esther and Libbie stood in a forlorn group,
their gaze fixed trustingly on Bob and Betty, whom they trusted to
get them out of this scrape somehow.

As for Bob, he was handicapped by numbers. He could easily have
planned a way to get himself and one girl out of the room, but to
hope to spirit away five substantial maidens under the black eyes
fastened unwaveringly upon him, was too great a problem for quick
solution. He did not fear trouble in establishing their innocence,
but the notoriety accompanying such an episode could not be otherwise
than distinctly unpleasant.

"I suppose that's gold dust in the tray," thought Bob wretchedly.
"Of all the poor luck, to pick out an office with gold dust floating
around as free as air! Why didn't the dub lock it up in his safe?"

The little man was having trouble to get "Central." He jiggled the
hook frantically in flat defiance of all telephone rules, and he
shouted loudly into the transmitter, as though enough noise could
rouse the number he sought.

Just at this moment the outer door opened and a man entered. He was
a man of middle age with a closely clipped gray moustache and kindly
gray eyes. It was Mr. Matthews, the owner of the business.

The little man, seeing him, flung the receiver into the hook with a
bang and poured forth a volley of French, emphasized by wild gestures.

After listening for a few moments, Mr. Matthews turned a wondering
gaze on the group of subdued looking young people. His expression
soon turned to one of amusement.

After a word or two in French to the little man, evidently of thanks
for his zeal, he said to Bob and the girls:

"Won't you please tell me your side of the story? I find it hard to
believe that you have set forth to rob and steal."

The tale came out with a rush, Bob, Betty, and Bobby taking turns or
all talking together, the others, fortunately, being content to let
the three tell the story.

Mr. Matthews was sympathetic and apologetic, but he was also amused,
and he laughed heartily. It seemed he knew Mr. Littell. The "robber
band," as Bobby afterwards named them, laughed with him; in fact, in
their relief, laughing till the tears came. The black-eyed man,
meanwhile, left the room, still, evidently, suspicious of them.

"Monsieur Brissot," explained Mr. Matthews, "is a Belgian diamond
cutter who has just come to this country. He seems to be suspicious
of everybody, and, I fear, does not always use judgment in his
handling of such matters. I am grateful, however, for the interest he
takes in my business, and trust you young people will overlook his
excess of zeal."

Mr. Matthews showed them to the door, and as by this time the
reporters were well away intent on other affairs, they went out of
the building in the regular way-a more seemly way than scuttling down
fire escapes and breaking into jewelry shops, so Betty declared.

"Well, good gracious!" observed Bobby, when they were once outside.
"If this hasn't been an exciting morning! First we get nearly killed,
then we're rescued, and next we're almost arrested."

They boarded a street car and went to the Bureau of Engraving and
Printing, where they spent an interesting afternoon touring the
immense plant, the best equipped of its kind in the world.

The recital of their adventures at the dinner table that night
provoked mingled merriment and concern.

"Never mind, it will teach 'em self-reliance," Mr. Littell insisted,
when his wife protested that the girls would have to be more closely
chaperoned on subsequent trips. "Falling into scrapes is the finest
lesson-book ever opened to the heedless."

Sunday morning the girls and Mrs. Littell motored to Washington and
attended services in one of the fine old churches. There they had an
excellent opportunity to observe the President of the United States
and his wife, who, as Libbie said disappointedly at dinner that day,
"looked just like anybody."

"I hope you didn't expect them to get up and make a speech?" teased
her uncle. "However, I'm glad you saw them, my dear. A country where
the head of the government 'looks just like anybody' and goes to
church as simply and reverently as any one else is the finest in the
world."

Early in the new week Bobby announced that it was their duty,
meaning the girl contingent, to go into the city and pay a call upon
a friend of the Littells' who was staying with an aunt at one of the
large hotels. They had met them at church, and a tentative promise
had been given, which Bobby was determined should be kept.

"If it wasn't for me this family would have no manners," she
scolded. "Now, I don't like Ruth Gladys Royal a bit better than you
do, Louise; but I hope I know what is the right thing to do."

Mrs. Littell, who was hopelessly unfashionable as far as conventions
that were merely polite went, announced serenely that she was going
to her sewing circle and that if the girls chose they might go
calling. Her engagement stood.

"Mother thinks Ruth Royal is snobbish," commented Bobby, as her
mother serenely departed for the little sewing circle of the country
church in which she maintained a keen interest and which she
virtually supported. "As far as that goes, I think she is. But Louise
told her we'd come and call on her, and I think a promise ought to be
kept."

"Well, I'll go with you if Betty will," said Louise. "I don't see
why you pick out a perfectly lovely afternoon to martyr us all in,
but if it must be done, let's get it over with. Esther and Libbie
have wheedled dad into taking them to the movies, and I suppose we
can go in the car with them."

The three ascended the stairs to put on their best bibs and tuckers
and came down again to find Mr. Littell and the other two girls
joyously arranged on the back seat, with Carter having hard work to
keep from smiling at their jokes and quips.

"How elegant we look," jeered Mr. Littell, whose injured foot was
still stiff but who began to talk about returning to his office. "I
don't suppose you could be persuaded to go to see 'The Rose-Pink
Curtains' with us, and have a sundae afterward?"

Bobby shook her head sternly.

"Don't tempt us when we're having a hard time to do our duty," she
admonished. "We have to go to see Ruth Royal; honestly we do. But
we'll meet you for the sundae; won't we, girls?"

It was arranged that they should meet at quarter to five, and then
the three callers were set down before the ornate hotel entrance.
Just off the lobby was a pretty, richly furnished parlor where they
decided to wait while they were being announced.

"Let's hope she isn't in," suggested the irrepressible Louise. "Then
we'd still have time to see 'The Rose-Pink Curtains.'"

Betty sat nearest the door and from her seat she could see a section
of the lobby and one of the elevators. The boy who had taken their
names came back in a few minutes with the information that Miss Royal
and her aunt were out.

"The clerk says they left word at the desk that they expect to be
back about half-past seven to-night."

"All right, that excuses us," declared Bobby cheerfully, hardly
waiting till the boy had left the room. "Come on, girls, we'll go to
the movies. Betty, for mercy's sake, what are you staring at?"

Betty had risen and was peering through the velvet portieres. She
turned and put a finger to her lips, then drew Bobby close to her.

"Look out there in the corridor, over by the desk," she whispered.
"See that man who is shouting at the clerk?"

"I hear him," admitted Bobby, screwing up her eyes and peeping
through the curtains. "What do you suppose he is arguing about?"

"That," announced Betty, unintentionally dramatic, "is Joseph
Peabody!"

The girls had heard about Joseph Peabody, a little from Betty, and
more from Bob, who had spoken freely to their father. They knew about
his miserly nature and they were acquainted with the fact that he
believed Bob had stolen something that did not belong to him. The
real story of the unrecorded deed both Bob and Betty had told only to
Mr. Littell. It was characteristic of Bobby's loyal nature that her
first thought should be for Betty.

"You don't suppose he is down here after you, do you?" she
whispered, clutching Betty by the elbow in a sudden panic. "Oh,
Betty, suppose he wanted to drag you back to Bramble Farm?"

Betty had to laugh, in spite of the anxiety she was feeling.

"He has no authority over me," she explained. "Besides, he would
have no earthly use for me if my board wasn't paid in advance." Her
face clouded involuntarily as the thought of her missing uncle thus
came to her mind. "No," she went on, "I'm terribly afraid that he is
here looking for Bob. You know he threatened to have him arrested
that time Bob managed to escape him. I wonder if I can't get to a
'phone booth without being seen and telephone to Bob or Mr. Derby."

Louise rather impatiently pushed her sister aside that she might
take a peep at the unconscious Mr. Peabody. As she put her eye to the
crack between the curtains she uttered a little shriek that she tried
to stifle with her hand.

"Betty!" she cried so shrilly that those in the lobby must have
heard her if the harsh call of a siren outside had not sounded
opportunely. "Betty, here comes Bob!"

Sure enough, in through the revolving door, neatly dressed and
looking every inch the intelligent young junior clerk, came Bob
Henderson, his eyes glued to a letter he had taken from his pocket.

Betty would have given even her hope of a letter from Oklahoma to
have been able to call a warning. Instead, she had to stand
helplessly by and watch the lad walk directly to the desk, where he
put a question to the clerk. Instantly Joseph Peabody whirled and had
the boy by the collar.

"Got you at last, you young imp!" he chortled gleefully. "This time
I don't calculate to let go of you till I land you where you're
going--behind the bars. That is, unless you hand over what you've got
of mine!"

Several people turned to stare curiously, and Betty sympathized
acutely with the crimson-faced Bob, who was protesting hotly that he
had nothing belonging to Peabody.

"You stay here," she ordered Louise and Bobby. "There's no need of
you mixing in this. I'm going to see if I can help Bob."

She sped across the hall to the desk, followed by her two faithful
shadows, who were determined to stand loyally by.

"Well, I swan, if it isn't Betty!" ejaculated the farmer when he
caught sight of her.




CHAPTER XXIV

BOB IS CLEARED


"Betty, you stay out of this," commanded Bob sternly. "If there's
going to be a scene, two actors will be a-plenty. You go away and
take the girls with you."

The clerk who had been regarding them curiously over his ledger now
took a hand.

"If this argument is likely to be prolonged," he suggested
sarcastically, "I'd advise you either to go up to your room, Mr.
Peabody, or into that card room there. That's deserted in the day
time."

"Yes, come on in here," said Betty, anxious to get away from the
gaze of the other guests. She led the way into the card room which
opened off the lobby and was preferable to making a public journey in
the elevator. "Close the door, Louise."

Mr. Peabody kept his hold on Bob's collar and from time to time he
shook him vigorously, whether with the idea of shaking the
stubbornness out of him or merely to indicate that he held the whip
hand, Betty was undecided.

"You can let go of Bob," she said heatedly, as soon as they were in
the room with the door shut. "He isn't going to run away."

"I'll see that he doesn't," was the grim reply. "You hand over that
deed, young man, or I'll call a policeman in two minutes."

"I tell you I haven't got it!" protested Bob desperately. "I never
saw the thing. What would I be doing with a paper of yours? I haven't
got it, and that's all there is to it."

"Of course he hasn't!" For the life of her Betty could not keep
still, though perhaps caution dictated that she hold her tongue. "I
know he hasn't that deed, Mr. Peabody. And having him arrested won't
give you what he hasn't got."

"How do you know he hasn't got it?" demanded the farmer. "Deeds
don't walk off and hide themselves, young lady. Bob happens to know
why I want that deed. And if he doesn't produce it, and that mighty
quick, he'll find himself where they can shake the truth out of him
with no fooling."

Bobby sprang to her feet from the leather chair where she had curled
up to listen to the proceedings.

"I'll telephone my father," she cried. "He'll help Bob to sue you
for false arrest. If you have some one arrested and it is found he
didn't do what you said he did, he can sue you for damages. I've
heard my father say so. Don't you care, Bob, Daddy will find a way to
beat this horrid old man."

An unpleasant smile spread over the mean, shriveled face.

"Is that so?" queried Joseph Peabody. "Well, I don't know who you
are, Miss, but you need a lesson on how to keep a civil tongue in
your head. All the fine friends Mister Bob has picked up in
Washington won't stand by him long when they find out he's a
poorhouse rat and a runaway at that. There'll be some explaining for
you to do before the almshouse authorities are satisfied, young man."

Betty's anger flamed as the familiar odious phrase fell from the
farmer's lips, and added to her anger was the crystallized fear that
had been haunting her for weeks. She did not know whether Bob could
really be returned to the poor-house or whether it was another trick
of Peabody's, but she feared the worst and dreaded it.

"You try to return Bob to the poorhouse!" she cried, her cheeks
blazing, her hands clenched. She took a step toward Peabody and he
fell back, dragging Bob with him so that a chair stood between them
and the furious girl. "You try to return Bob to the poorhouse, and
I'll tell every one what I know about that deed," flared Betty. "I
know all about the Warren lots and the kind of sale you forced
through. You--you--" to her distress and amazement, Betty burst into
tears.

"Don't cry, dear," whispered Bobby, putting her arm around her.
"Daddy won't let them do anything to Bob. You see if he does."

Joseph Peabody was apparently impervious to verbal assaults and tears.

"Once more I ask you," he shook Bob violently, "are you going to
hand over that paper? Yes, or no?"

"I tell you I haven't got it," said Bob doggedly. "Shaking my teeth
out won't help me get a paper I never saw in my life. As for having
me arrested, you keep up this racket much longer and the hotel
authorities will send for the police on their own responsibility."

Peabody picked up his hat.

"All right, you come along with me," he said sourly. "You won't go
before a soft-headed police recorder this time, either. You'll find
out what it means to face a real judge."

He was marching Bob toward the door when a sharp rap sounded.
Louise, nearest the door, had the presence of mind to open it. A
bellboy stood there with a telegram on a tray.

"Telegram for Mr. Joseph Peabody," he announced impassively, his
alert eyes darting about the room from which such angry voices had
been coming for the last quarter of an hour.

"All right--give it here." The farmer snatched the yellow envelope
and shut the door in the boy's face without making a motion to tip him.

His back against the door, to prevent Bob's escape, Joseph Peabody
slit the envelope and read the message. The others saw his jaw drop
and a slow, painful flush creep over his face and neck.

"I'm called back to Bramble Farm right away," he mumbled, refusing
to meet their gaze. "Being hurried, and having so much to tend to,
I'm willing to drop the matter of having you arrested, Bob. But let
this be a lesson to you, to hoe a straight row."

Bob stared at the man stupidly, frankly bewildered. But Betty's
quick wit solved the sudden change of front. She had seen how quickly
Peabody folded up the telegram when he had read it.

"Isn't that a message from Mrs. Peabody?" she demanded crisply. "And
doesn't she say she's found the deed? Where was it--in one of your
coat pockets?"

The farmer was taken by surprise, and the truth was shocked out of
him.

"She's found it under the seat in the old market wagon," he blurted.
"I recollect I put it there for safe-keeping, meaning to take it over
to the deposit box the next day. Well, I've wasted more time an'
money in Washington than I like to think of. Got to go home and make
up for it."

Without another word or glance, without the shadow of an apology to
Bob, he swung out of the room and strode over to the desk. In a
moment they heard his harsh voice demanding the amount of his bill.

Bob looked at Betty, who stared back. Louise and Bobby were equally
silent. Then Betty snickered, and the tension was broken. Peal after
peal of laughter rang out, and they dropped helplessly into chairs
and laughed till they could laugh no longer.

"Oh, dear!" Betty sat up, wiping her eyes. "Did you ever see
anything like that? He never said good-by, or admitted that he'd made
a mistake, or--or anything! What do you suppose people in the hotel
must think of him?"

That reminded Bobby of the girl they had come to see and who was
really responsible for their visit to the hotel.

"The first kind thing Ruth Royal ever did for me," she declared
frankly. "I wouldn't have missed seeing Mr. Peabody for worlds."

"How did you ever happen to come here, Bob?" asked Betty, who had
been wondering about this ever since she had seen Bob walk right into
the one man he most wished to avoid.

"I brought a letter from Mr. Derby for one of the guests stopping
here," explained Bob. "That reminds me, I haven't delivered it yet.
Peabody threw me off the track. I'll turn it in, and then I'll have
to hurry back to the office; they'll think I've been run over for
sure."

He went off, promising again to see them on Saturday, and the girls,
feeling too upset to settle down to the quietness of a motion picture
house, went out to walk up and down in the sunshine of Pennsylvania
Avenue until it was time to meet Mr. Littell and Libbie and Esther.

Of course they had much to tell them, and Mr. Littell in particular
was a most appreciative listener. He was genuinely fond of Bob and
interested in him, and he got quite purple with wrath when he learned
of the indignity he had suffered at the hands of the ill-bred farmer.

"Then he went off and never had the grace to ask the lad's pardon!"
sputtered the builder when Betty reached the end of her recital. "I
wish I had him by the collar--just for three minutes. Perhaps I
wouldn't drive a little of the fear of justice into his narrow mind!"

They had lingered over their ice-cream, and although Carter drove at
a good speed, they found that unless they hurried they would be late
for dinner. It was one of Mrs. Littell's few unbreakable rules that
the girls must change into simple, light frocks for the evening meal,
and they went directly upstairs to take off their street clothes.

When they came down dinner had been announced and they went directly
to the table. They had so much to tell Mrs. Littell and she was so
interested that it was not until they were leaving the table that she
remembered what she had meant to ask Betty as soon as the girl came in.

"Betty, darling," she said comfortably, "you found your letter on
the hall table all right, didn't you?"

"Why, I never thought to look for mail," returned Betty in surprise.
"No, Mrs. Littell, I didn't stop in the hall. Was there a letter for
me?"

Mrs. Littell nodded and swept her family across the hall into the
living-room, saying something to her husband in a low voice. Betty
hurried to the console table where the mail was always laid on a
beaten silver tray. The solitary letter lying there was addressed to
her. And the postmark, she saw as she picked it up, was a town in
Oklahoma!




CHAPTER XXV

FUTURE PLANS


Betty's first impulse was to run up to her room and close the door.
Then she sat down on the edge of the bed and tore open the envelope
eagerly. She read the half dozen closely written sheets through
twice, thrust them back into the envelope, and ran down to tell the
Littells the good news.

"I've heard from Uncle Dick!" she cried radiantly, facing them as
they turned at her entrance. Betty's vivid personality often betrayed
her mood without a word, and to-night she was vibrant with happiness
so that she fairly glowed. "He has just got back to Flame City, where
he found the telegram and my letters. And he wants me to come out to
him, as he expects to be there for the next few months. He's been on
a long prospecting trip, and he can't get East till his company sends
out another representative. You may read the letter!"

She thrust it into Mr. Littell's hands and buried her head on Mrs.
Littell's broad shoulder.

"I'm so happy!" she choked, while the motherly hands smoothed her
hair understandingly.

"It's been so long, and I was afraid he might have died--like my
mother. I don't think I could stand it if Uncle Dick should die--he's
the only one who belongs to me."

"Why, Betty, child!" Mrs. Littell gathered her into her lap and
rocked her gently as though she had been a little child. "You're
nervous and unstrung. We ought to have taken better care of you and
not let this waiting wear you out so."

"If you're going to cry, Betty, so'll I," promised Bobby, putting an
awkward arm around Betty's neck. Bobby was as undemonstrative as a
boy and rarely kissed any one. "What in the wide world are we going
to do without you?"

Betty sat up and pushed the damp hair from her forehead. The four
girls were regarding her dolorously.

"I won't stay forever," she assured them. "Uncle Dick doesn't intend
to live out there, you know. The company he represents will likely
send him East this very winter."

"Well, that's a mighty interesting letter," commented Mr. Littell,
folding up the missive and returning it to Betty. "Though you're
going to leave a hole in this household, Sister, when you set sail.
You see, he's been out of sight and hearing of trains and post-offices
for a long time. I'd like to be able to lose myself in the
desert or a wilderness for a month or two. Think of having no
telephone bell to answer!"

The next morning a letter came to Mr. Littell from Mr. Gordon,
thanking him warmly for his kindness to Betty, containing the
assurance of the writer's lasting gratitude, and asking him if he and
his wife would oversee her preparations for the journey, help her
engage a berth, and start her on her way. A generous check was
enclosed, and Mrs. Littell and the girls immediately set about
helping Betty do the necessary shopping, while Mr. Littell engaged
her reservations on the Western Limited. She had decided to leave the
following Wednesday, and when Bob came out to spend the week-end, he
immediately announced his intention of going too.

"I figure out Flame City is the nearest station to my aunt's old
place. I have enough money saved now, and there's no reason why I
should stay on here. Hurrah for Oklahoma!"

The preparations went forward merrily after that, and Wednesday
found Betty on the Western Limited, bound for Flame City. What
happened to her there and her experience in the great oil fields will
be told in another volume to be called, "Betty Gordon in the Land of
Oil; or, The Farm That Was Worth a Fortune."

Bobby insisted that they make the week-end at Fairfields a farewell
celebration to be remembered, and the six young people managed to get
the maximum of enjoyment out of every hour. Bob had been brought out
to Saturday luncheon, and as soon as he had heard about the Oklahoma
trip and announced his own plans, Louise insisted that Betty was to
have a lesson in riding.

"Of course you'll want to ride out West," she said. "They all do in
pictures. Come on out to the barn, and we'll get the ponies out."

A stable boy brought out a gentle, coal-black pony, and Betty
mounted him trustingly.

"Why, it's lovely!" cried Betty, enjoying the sensation to the full.
"He goes like a rocking chair, bless his heart! I'm sure I can learn
to ride."

"Of course you can!" Bobby encouraged her swiftly. "You must try him
at a slow canter in a minute. Here comes Esther with the camera."

A picture of Betty was taken, and then the lesson was resumed. At
the close of the afternoon Bobby announced that Betty was in a fair
way to become a good horsewoman.

Mr. and Mrs. Littell took them into Washington to the theater that
night, and to make up the hours of lost sleep all the young people
slept late the next morning.

Instead of going into Washington to church, they all went to the
little country church that Mrs. Littell attended and loved, and after
the service they spent a quiet, pleasant day about the house and
grounds of Fairfields.

That evening the five girls and Bob gathered on the spacious white
steps of the house to watch the beautiful Virginia sunset.

"Let's promise each other," suggested Betty, her pretty face serious
and thoughtful, "to meet five years from now, wherever we may be, and
compare notes. We'll be almost grown up then and know what we're
going to be."

"No matter how often we meet, or how seldom, five years from to-day
we'll promise to come together," agreed Bobby. "Here's my seal."

She put out her hand and the hands of the six interlocked in a tower.

"To our close friendship," murmured Betty, as they unclasped.

Then, the sun having set, they went into the glow and welcome of the
lighted lamps.




THE END










End of Project Gutenberg's Betty Gordon in Washington, by Alice B. Emerson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON ***

***** This file should be named 6853.txt or 6853.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/8/5/6853/

Produced by Avinash Kothare, Tom Allen, Charles Franks and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
