Project Gutenberg's Check-list of the Birds of Kansas, by Harrison B Tordoff

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Check-list of the Birds of Kansas

Author: Harrison B Tordoff

Release Date: November 24, 2010 [EBook #34429]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHECK-LIST OF THE BIRDS OF KANSAS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









  ==================================================================
                  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
                      MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

            Volume 8, No. 5, pp. 307-359, 1 figure in text
  ----------------------    March 10, 1956    ----------------------


                  Check-list of the Birds of Kansas

                                  BY
                         HARRISON B. TORDOFF


                         UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                               LAWRENCE
                                 1956




     UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

        Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
                           Robert W. Wilson

                Volume 8, No. 5, pp. 307-359, 1 figure
                       Published March 10, 1956


                         UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                           Lawrence, Kansas


                              PRINTED BY
                   FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
                            TOPEKA, KANSAS
                                 1956

                               25-9006




                  CHECK-LIST OF THE BIRDS OF KANSAS

                                  By
                         Harrison B. Tordoff


Kansas was one of the first states for which a detailed book on birds
was published (N. S. Goss, "History of the Birds of Kansas," Topeka,
Kansas, 1891). Ornithological progress in Kansas in recent years,
however, has not kept pace with work in many other states. As a result,
knowledge of the birds of Kansas today is not sufficiently detailed to
make possible a modern, definitive report. One purpose of this
check-list is to show gaps in our information on birds of the state.
Each student of birds can contribute importantly by keeping accurate
records of nesting, distribution, and migration of any species in Kansas
and by making these records available through publication in appropriate
journals. The Museum of Natural History at the University of Kansas
solicits records and specimens which contribute to our knowledge of
birds in Kansas. Files and collections at the Museum are available to
any qualified person for study.

The last state-wide list of birds was prepared by W. S. Long (Trans.
Kansas Acad. Sci., 43, 1940:433-456). This list and the unpublished
thesis from which the list was abstracted have been of great value in
preparing the present report. Many other persons have contributed and
among these the names of the following must be mentioned because of the
value of their contributions: Ivan L. Boyd, L. B. Carson, Arthur L.
Goodrich, Jr., Richard Graber, Jean Graber, Harold C. Hedges, R. F.
Miller, John M. Porter, and Marvin D. Schwilling.

Full standing in this check-list has been given only to species for
which at least one specimen from Kansas has been examined by some
qualified student. Exceptions to this admittedly arbitrary rule have
been made in three cases, Trumpeter Swan, Turkey, and Carolina Paroquet,
because there is no reason to doubt that each of these three species
once occurred in Kansas and because opportunity for obtaining specimens
from Kansas has been lost through disappearance of the species from the
state. Other species reported from the state but not authenticated by
specimens have been relegated to the Hypothetical List and their names
and my remarks concerning these birds are enclosed in brackets. This
procedure is intended to encourage collection of such species; it is not
intended necessarily to indicate doubt of a record. In the case of a
carefully identified but uncollected accidental, opportunity for
obtaining a specimen may not exist again for a long period. This is
unfortunate but emphasizes the need for judicious collecting.

A total of 375 species (or 459 species and subspecies), of which four
are introduced, is included in this check-list. Additionally, 15 species
are discussed in the Hypothetical List. An asterisk (*) preceding an
account indicates positive evidence of breeding in Kansas of the species
so marked. The total of species known to have bred at least once in the
state is 173. Nomenclature in this list follows the American
Ornithologists' Union "Check-List of North American Birds" (1931, 4th
edition) and its supplements. Species on the Hypothetical List are
included in their current taxonomic position in the main list.


_Gavia immer_ (Brünnich). Common Loon. Uncommon transient throughout
state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Gavia stellata_ (Pontoppidan). Red-throated Loon. Rare transient. One
specimen: female (Univ. Michigan Mus. Zool. 65778), Marais des Cygnes
River, near Ottawa, Franklin County, October 20, 1925, Captain Joe R.
White. Several sight records from Shawnee and Johnson counties within
past 10 years.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Colymbus grisegena._ Red-necked Grebe. Rare transient. One specimen:
female (KU 7697), Kansas River east of Lawrence, Douglas County, October
29, 1910, Logan I. Evans.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. g. holböllii_ (Reinhardt).


_Colymbus auritus._ Horned Grebe. Rare transient. Two authentic
specimens: Manhattan, Riley County, September 30, 1878; male (KU 27465),
2-1/2 miles north of Lawrence, Douglas County, November 16, 1945, E. C.
Olson and Ralph L. Montell. Several sight records, from eastern,
central, and western Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. a. cornutus_ Gmelin.


_Colymbus caspicus._ Eared Grebe. Regular transient throughout state;
more common than Horned Grebe.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. californicus_ (Heermann).


_Aechmophorus occidentalis_ (Lawrence). Western Grebe. Rare transient,
perhaps more common in west but status poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Podilymbus podiceps._ Pied-billed Grebe. Common transient and
irregular summer resident, rare winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. p. podiceps_ (Linnaeus).


_Pelecanus erythrorhynchos_ Gmelin. White Pelican. Common transient
throughout state. Occasional individuals, probably sick or wounded,
remain beyond normal migration periods in spring and fall.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Pelecanus occidentalis._ Brown Pelican. Accidental. One specimen:
adult, sex not determined (KU 10468), Parker, Linn County, June, 1916,
found dead by G. G. McConnell. One seen at Wichita, Sedgwick County, by
R. H. Sullivan, April 25, 1910.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. o. carolinensis_ Gmelin.


* _Phalacrocorax auritus._ Double-crested Cormorant. Regular transient,
in small to moderate numbers. One nesting record: several nests, eggs,
and small young seen, Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, August, 1951,
Otto Tiemeier.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. a. auritus_ (Lesson).


_Phalacrocorax olivaceus._ Mexican Cormorant. Accidental. One record:
specimen taken 4 miles south of Lawrence, Douglas County, April 2, 1872.
Present location unknown but specimen identified by S. F. Baird and R.
Ridgway.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. o. mexicanus_ (Brandt).


_Anhinga anhinga._ Water-turkey. Accidental. Several specimens and sight
observations are on record but most are prior to 1900. Several records
and one specimen at Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, since 1928 (Frank
Robl). In recent years, some reported Water-turkeys have proved to be
cormorants.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. a. leucogaster_ (Vieillot).


_Fregata magnificens._ Man-o'-war-bird. Accidental. One record: specimen
(present location unknown) taken on the North Fork of the Solomon River,
Osborne County, August 16, 1880, by Frank Lewis.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. m. rothschildi_ Mathews.


* _Ardea herodias._ Great Blue Heron. Common transient and summer
resident nesting in widely scattered colonies.

    Subspecies in Kansas: three reported, _A. h. herodias_ Linnaeus in
    northeast, _A. h. wardi_ Ridgway in southeast, and _A. h.
    treganzai_ Court in west, but status of these poorly known because
    of lack of sufficient breeding specimens.


_Casmerodius albus._ American Egret. Regular postbreeding summer
visitant; occasional spring and summer resident. No definite nesting
record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. a. egretta_ (Gmelin).


* _Leucophoyx thula._ Snowy Egret. Regular postbreeding summer visitant;
rare and local summer resident; occasional in spring. One nesting
record: two nests found, summer, 1952, 6 miles north and 4-1/2 miles
west of Garden City, Finney County, Marvin D. Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. t. thula_ (Molina).


_Hydranassa tricolor._ Louisiana Heron. Accidental. Two records:
specimen taken at Lake Inman, McPherson County, August 9, 1934, by R. E.
Mohler and Richard H. Schmidt; one seen, 1-1/2 miles south of Iatan
Marsh, Atchison County (near Iatan, Missouri), September 12, 1948, first
reported by R. F. Miller and Mr. and Mrs. Ivan L. Boyd, seen by several
other observers.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. t. ruficollis_ (Gosse).


* _Florida caerulea._ Little Blue Heron. Regular postbreeding summer
visitant; rare and local summer resident; occasional in spring. Usually
more common than Snowy Egret. One nesting record: one nest found,
summer, 1952, 6 miles north and 4-1/2 miles west of Garden City, Finney
County, Marvin D. Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. c. caerulea_ (Linnaeus).


* _Butorides virescens._ Green Heron. Common transient and summer
resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. v. virescens_ (Linnaeus).


* _Nycticorax nycticorax._ Black-crowned Night Heron. Transient and
summer resident, breeding in scattered colonies.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _N. n. hoactli_ (Gmelin).


* _Nyctanassa violacea._ Yellow-crowned Night Heron. Summer resident
throughout state, rare in north; numbers perhaps augmented in late
summer by postbreeding stragglers.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _N. v. violacea_ (Linnaeus).


* _Botaurus lentiginosus_ (Rackett). American Bittern. Common transient;
summer resident locally. Two definite nesting records: nest with 4 newly
hatched young (male collected, KU 30468), 1/2 mile east and 2 miles
south of Welda, Anderson County, June 9, 1951, Maurice F. Baker; nest
with eggs, 6 miles north and 3-1/2 miles west of Kalvesta, Finney
County, summer, 1952, Raymond Erkic (_fide_ Marvin D. Schwilling).

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Ixobrychus exilis._ Least Bittern. Transient and irregular summer
resident. Two nests found at Lake Quivira, Johnson County, June 3, 1949,
Harold C. Hedges; on June 28, one of the nests contained 4 eggs, on July
10 this nest was empty. No other definite nesting records.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _I. e. exilis_ (Gmelin).



_Mycteria americana_ Linnaeus. Wood Ibis. Accidental. Several sight
records and one specimen: male (KU 9489), 5 miles north-*east of
Goodland, Sherman County, October 4, 1913, Willis Feaster.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Plegadis mexicana_ (Gmelin). White-faced Glossy Ibis. Irregular
transient and summer visitant; more common in west. One definite nesting
record: photograph of downy young ("Kansas Fish and Game," vol. 9, no.
3, Jan. 1952, p. 7) taken at Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, presumably
in summer of 1951, by L. O. Nossaman. Frank Robl has seen individuals in
summer in Cheyenne Bottoms on many occasions. Reports of Eastern Glossy
Ibis (_Plegadis falcinellus_) in Kansas probably are based on dark-faced
immatures of the present species, although the eastern species has been
taken in Oklahoma.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Ajaia ajaja_ (Linnaeus). Roseate Spoonbill. Accidental. One authentic
specimen (present location not known): male, near Douglass, on Four-Mile
Creek, Butler County, March 20, 1899, taken by Dr. R. Matthews,
identification verified by Jerold Volk and Wilfred Goodman.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Phoenicopterus ruber_ Linnaeus. Flamingo. Accidental. Two birds seen in
autumn, 1928, at Little Salt Marsh, Stafford County, one of which was
killed on opening day of duck season and now (1955) is mounted at Kansas
Forestry, Fish, and Game Commission headquarters at Pratt.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Olor columbianus_ (Ord). Whistling Swan. Transient and winter resident,
formerly common, now rare. Many specimens are on record; at least four
were taken in winter.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Olor buccinator_ (Richardson). Trumpeter Swan. Formerly occasional
migrant, no longer occurs in Kansas. All specimens from Kansas alleged
to be of this species are actually Whistling Swans. The early sight
records seem valid, however, and the species should remain on the state
list.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Branta canadensis._ Canada Goose. Common transient; some winter in
suitable places. This species was found nesting along the Missouri River
near Atchison by early explorers. Modern breeding records probably
pertain to captives or their descendants.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. c. moffitti_ Aldrich, _B. c.
    leucopareia_ (Brandt), _B. c. minima_ Ridgway, and _B. c.
    hutchinsi_ (Richardson) have been collected in Kansas.
    Additionally, subspecies _interior_ Todd and _parvipes_ (Cassin)
    probably pass through the state but no specimens have been saved.
    Canada Geese of widely varying size are regularly seen in
    migration.


_Branta bernicla._ Brant. Accidental. Several sight records and one
specimen: unsexed bird (KU 7490), Leavenworth County, November 15, 1879,
A. Lange. Some hunters refer to immature Blue Geese as "brant." Orville
O. Rice saw 4 brant 2 miles north of Burlington, near the Neosho River,
Coffey County, March 24, 1955, that appeared to be Black Brant, _Branta
nigricans_ (Lawrence).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. b. hrota_ (Müller).


_Anser albifrons._ White-fronted Goose. Regular transient throughout
state, more common in central and western parts.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. a. frontalis_ Baird.


_Chen hyperborea._ Snow Goose. Common transient throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. h. hyperborea_ (Pallas).


_Chen caerulescens_ (Linnaeus). Blue Goose. Common transient in east,
less common in central and western parts of state. In east, this species
predominates in early spring migration whereas the Snow Goose is most
numerous later. Hybrids between the two are regularly seen.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Chen rossii_ (Cassin). Ross Goose. One reported at Wyandotte County
Lake, November 22, 1951, by John Bishop. Placed in Hypothetical List in
absence of a specimen.]


_Dendrocygna bicolor._ Fulvous Tree-duck. Accidental. Frank Robl
carefully examined and identified three specimens killed in 1929 or
1930, in Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County. None saved. Specimens
collected also in nearby areas of Missouri.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. b. helva_ Wetmore and Peters, on
    geographical grounds.


* _Anas platyrhynchos._ Mallard. Abundant transient, regular winter
resident, irregular and local summer resident. Modern breeding
distribution poorly known but several nests found in widely scattered
areas in past years. Nests regularly in Kearny, Finney, and Barton
counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. p. platyrhynchos_ Linnaeus.


_Anas rubripes_ Brewster. Black Duck. Regular but rare or uncommon
transient and winter resident in east and central (Cheyenne Bottoms,
Barton County) sections.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Anas fulvigula._ Mottled Duck. Accidental. Four specimens allegedly of
this species have been reported. Of these, two are actually Mallards,
one is a Gadwall, and one, female, Neosho Falls, Woodson County, March
11, 1876, Goss, is a Mottled Duck.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. f. maculosa_ Sennett.


_Anas strepera_ Linnaeus. Gadwall. Transient and occasional winter
resident throughout state. Rare summer resident but no satisfactory
nesting record reported.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Anas acuta_ Linnaeus. Pintail. Abundant transient throughout state,
irregular winter resident, local summer resident nesting in recent years
in Barton, Finney, Meade, and Leavenworth counties, but summer
distribution poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Anas carolinensis_ Gmelin. Green-winged Teal. Common transient, rare
winter resident (records from Meade County and Kansas City).

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Anas discors_ Linnaeus. Blue-winged Teal. Common transient, locally
common summer resident.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Anas cyanoptera._ Cinnamon Teal. Rare transient in east, uncommon or
fairly common transient in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. c. septentrionalis_ Snyder and Lumsden.


* _Spatula clypeata_ (Linnaeus). Shoveller. Common transient throughout
state. Frank Robl found a female with young in Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton
County, in approximately 1930. Nest with eggs found 1-1/2 miles south of
Friend, Finney County, in spring, 1952, Marvin D. Schwilling.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Mareca penelope_ (Linnaeus). European Widgeon. Carl and David Holmes
reported a pair at Lake Shawnee, Shawnee County, April 16, 1954. Placed
on Hypothetical List until a specimen is taken.]


_Mareca americana_ (Gmelin). Baldpate. Common transient throughout
state, rare winter resident.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Aix sponsa_ (Linnaeus). Wood Duck. Transient, rare in west to locally
common in extreme east. Summer resident in eastern part of state;
breeding distribution poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Aythya americana_ (Eyton). Redhead. Fairly common transient and
occasional winter resident throughout state. Frank Robl found a nesting
pair in Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, in 1928 (approximate). The
adults were neither captives nor cripples.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Aythya collaris_ (Donovan). Ring-necked Duck. Fairly common transient
throughout state, rare winter resident.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Aythya valisineria_ (Wilson). Canvas-back. Fairly common transient and
occasional winter resident throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Aythya marila._ Greater Scaup Duck. Rare transient, status poorly
known. Several sight records, one in winter. Floyd T. Amsden, a
competent sportsman and amateur ornithologist of Wichita, identified 3
male specimens killed 3 miles north and 1 mile east of Sharon, Barber
County, on October 27 (2) and November 3 (1), 1951. Frank Robl has seen
specimens killed in Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County. Every effort should
be made to preserve specimens from Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. m. nearctica_ Stejneger, on geographical
    grounds.


_Aythya affinis_ (Eyton). Lesser Scaup Duck. Common transient throughout
state. A few records of wintering and summering (non-*breeding)
individuals.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Bucephala clangula._ Golden-eye. Uncommon transient and winter
resident. Specimens from Kansas alleged to be the Barrow Golden-eye
(_Bucephala islandica_) all are of the present species.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. c. americana_ (Bonaparte).


_Bucephala albeola_ (Linnaeus). Buffle-head. Fairly common transient and
occasional winter resident throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Clangula hyemalis_ (Linnaeus). Old-squaw. Rare transient and winter
visitant. At least five specimens taken (but only two or three
preserved) and numerous sight records, from widely separated parts of
state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Somateria mollissima._ Eider. Accidental. One record: immature male (KU
3620), Kansas River near Lecompton, Douglas County, November 3, 1891, A.
L. Wiedman.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. m. v. nigra_ Bonaparte (identification
    checked by A. Wetmore).


_Somateria spectabilis_ (Linnaeus). King Eider. Accidental. One record:
immature male (KU 27487), Kansas River 1 mile east of Lawrence, Douglas
County, November 27, 1947, R. L. Montell.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Melanitta deglandi._ White-winged Scoter. Rare transient. Nine
specimens from Douglas and Leavenworth counties, taken from 1927 to
1938; several sight records from eastern Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. d. deglandi_ (Bonaparte).


_Melanitta perspicillata_ (Linnaeus). Surf Scoter. Rare transient. Eight
known specimens (three of which are now in University of Kansas
collection), all taken in autumn, seven in Douglas County, one in
Sedgwick County; several sight records from eastern Kansas.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Oidemia nigra._ Common Scoter. Accidental. The two preserved specimens
from Kansas supposedly of this species are actually Surf Scoters. L. B.
Carson, however, identified an adult male Common Scoter killed by a
hunter at Horton Lake, Brown County, in the early 1930's. Others have
been seen by reliable field observers. Every effort should be made to
secure specimens from Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _O. n. americana_ Swainson, on geographical
    grounds.


* _Oxyura jamaicensis._ Ruddy Duck. Common transient throughout state,
rare winter resident. One breeding record: Frank Robl saw an adult
female with one small young at Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, in
approximately 1929.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _O. j. rubida_ (Wilson).


_Lophodytes cucullatus_ (Linnaeus). Hooded Merganser. Uncommon transient
and winter resident throughout state. Probably nests occasionally (two
specimens at KU taken in east in June), but no proof of this available.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Mergus merganser._ American Merganser. Common transient and winter
resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. m. americanus_ Cassin.


_Mergus serrator._ Red-breasted Merganser. Uncommon transient throughout
state; probably also rare winter resident but records lacking. This
species is more common than Hooded Merganser in west, less common than
Hooded in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. s. serrator_ Linnaeus.


* _Cathartes aura._ Turkey Vulture. Common transient throughout state;
common summer resident west at least to Clark County. Breeding
distribution in west poorly known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. a. teter_ Friedmann.


_Coragyps atratus_ (Meyer). Black Vulture. Once occurred in southeast,
but no record since 1885. Goss quotes Dr. George Lisle ("a close
observer") as finding this species common and breeding at Chetopa,
Labette County, on the Oklahoma line, prior to 1883. Lisle found a nest
with two eggs in 1858. Goss also reports one killed by Watson at Ellis,
Ellis County, on March 27, 1885, but the location of the specimen is
unknown. The species may still occur in southeastern Kansas.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Elanoïdes forficatus._ Swallow-tailed Kite. Formerly summer resident
in at least eastern half of state. Last specimen from Kansas taken by
Dr. G. C. Rinker at Hamilton, Greenwood County, May 17, 1914.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _E. f. forficatus_ (Linnaeus).


* _Ictinia misisippiensis_ (Wilson). Mississippi Kite. Common summer
resident in south-central Kansas, east to Harvey, north to Barton, and
west to Kearny counties. Occasional records from Douglas (nested once),
Johnson, Greenwood, and Hamilton counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Accipiter gentilis._ Goshawk. Rare and irregular winter visitor in
east. Status in west unknown.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. g. atricapillus_ (Wilson).


* _Accipiter striatus._ Sharp-shinned Hawk. Transient and winter
resident throughout state; less common in east. Status in summer poorly
known; one nest found in Cloud County, July 11, 1938, J. M. Porter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. s. velox_ (Wilson).


* _Accipiter cooperii_ (Bonaparte). Cooper Hawk. Resident throughout
state but nesting records only from the eastern half, west to Cloud
County.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Buteo jamaicensis._ Red-tailed Hawk. Abundant transient and winter
resident in east; in High Plains of west, largely restricted to river
bottoms in winter. Common summer resident in east; status in summer in
west poorly known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. j. borealis_ (Gmelin) is the breeding
    bird of eastern Kansas. _B. j. calurus_ Cassin probably nests in
    west but no specimens available. _B. j. borealis_, _B. j.
    calurus_, _B. j. kriderii_ Hoopes, and _B. j. harlani_ (Audubon),
    the latter considered here as conspecific with _jamaicensis_, all
    occur as transients and winter residents. More specimens needed to
    establish details of distribution of various subspecies.


* _Buteo lineatus._ Red-shouldered Hawk. Uncommon transient and summer
resident and irregular winter resident in eastern Kansas. Breeding
records from Leavenworth and Woodson counties; doubtless breeds in other
eastern counties but definite evidence lacking.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. l. lineatus_ (Gmelin).


* _Buteo platypterus._ Broad-winged Hawk. Fairly common transient and
local summer resident in eastern Kansas. Breeding records only from
Douglas, Leavenworth, and Johnson counties, where species nests
regularly.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. p. platypterus_ (Vieillot).


* _Buteo swainsoni_ Bonaparte. Swainson Hawk. Abundant transient in
west, fairly common in east. Nests commonly throughout western
two-thirds of state and at least occasionally in eastern portion.
Supposed winter records should be substantiated by specimens.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Buteo lagopus._ Rough-legged Hawk. Winter resident, fairly common in
east to common in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. l. s. johannis_ (Gmelin).


* _Buteo regalis_ (Gray). Ferruginous Rough-leg. Common transient and
winter resident in west, rare in east. Rare summer resident in west. Two
nesting records: nest with four young, south fork of Smoky Hill River,
near Wallace, May 27, 1883, Goss; nest with three young, west of Russell
Springs, Logan County, May 29, 1954, Marvin D. Schwilling.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Parabuteo unicinctus._ Harris Hawk. Accidental. Two records: male,
Wichita, Sedgwick County, December 14, 1918, LeRoy Snyder; female (KU
10752), 7-1/2 miles southwest of Lawrence, Douglas County, December 25,
1918, Fred Hastie.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. u. harrisi_ (Audubon).


* _Aquila chrysaëtos._ Golden Eagle. Formerly common resident throughout
state. Now common in winter in west to rare in east. One positive
nesting record: a pair nested for several years (prior to 1891) in
southeastern Comanche County on a high gypsum ledge, Goss.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. c. canadensis_ (Linnaeus).


_Haliaeetus leucocephalus._ Bald Eagle. Rare transient and winter
resident in east; fairly common winter resident in west, where large
numbers may gather to roost.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. l. alascanus_ Townsend. Previous
    students refer all Bald Eagles from the state to _H. l.
    leucocephalus_ (Linnaeus) but specimens in the K. U. collection,
    all taken in winter, are large (three females, wing, 645, 655, 680
    mm.) and are clearly of the northern subspecies.


_Circus cyaneus._ Marsh Hawk. Resident, common in winter, less common
and local in summer.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. hudsonius_ (Linnaeus).


_Pandion haliaetus._ Osprey. Occurs irregularly throughout state but
less frequently in west. Most records in spring and autumn but a few at
other seasons. No definite nesting record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. h. carolinensis_ (Gmelin).


_Falco rusticolus._ Gyrfalcon. Accidental. One specimen: Manhattan,
Riley County, December 1, 1880, A. L. Runyan (specimen at Kansas State
College).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. r. obsoletus_ Gmelin.


_Falco mexicanus_ Schlegel. Prairie Falcon. Rare summer and fairly
common winter resident in west; occasional transient and winter resident
in east. No satisfactory breeding records.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Falco peregrinus._ Duck Hawk. Rare transient and winter resident,
probably more common in west. Formerly nested but no nesting record
since before 1900.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. p. anatum_ Bonaparte.


_Falco columbarius._ Pigeon Hawk. Uncommon transient and rare winter
resident in east; more common in migration in west but status there in
winter not known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. c. columbarius_ Linnaeus is most
    frequent in eastern part, west to Reno County; _F. c.
    richardsonii_ Ridgway is the common subspecies in west, occasional
    in east; _F. c. bendirei_ Swann is known in Kansas from one
    specimen (KU 4425) from Ellis County, October, 1875, taken by Dr.
    L. Watson (identified by James L. Peters).


* _Falco sparverius._ Sparrow Hawk. Common resident and transient
throughout state (but status in winter in northwest not known).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. s. sparverius_ Linnaeus.


_Bonasa umbellus._ Ruffed Grouse. Formerly common resident in eastern
part; now probably extirpated in state but observers in extreme east
should watch for it. One authentic specimen (KU 31944), southeastern
Kansas, between 1885 and 1910, Alexander J. C. Roese. No definite
nesting record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. u. umbellus_ (Linnaeus).


* _Tympanuchus cupido._ Greater Prairie Chicken. Resident, but highly
local; absent in southwestern quarter of state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. c. pinnatus_ (Brewster).


* _Tympanuchus pallidicinctus_ (Ridgway). Lesser Prairie Chicken.
Resident, but local, in southwestern quarter of state, north to Hamilton
and Finney counties and east to Pawnee and Barber counties. A few old
records east to Anderson and Neosho counties in winter.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Pedioecetes phasianellus._ Sharp-tailed Grouse. Formerly resident in
western part of state; scattered old records from eastern localities.
Now extirpated, or nearly so, in Kansas; observers in northwestern
counties should watch for it. No definite nesting record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. p. jamesi_ Lincoln.


* _Colinus virginianus._ Bob-white. Resident, common in east, less
common and local in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. v. virginianus_ (Linnaeus) in east,
    intergrading through central part with _C. v. taylori_ Lincoln in
    west.


* _Callipepla squamata._ Scaled Quail. Locally common resident in
southwest, formerly north to Wallace County but now primarily south of
Arkansas River, eastern limit not known. Breeding records from Hamilton,
Kearny, Finney, Stanton, Morton, Stevens, and Clark counties, Marvin D.
Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. s. pallida_ Brewster.


* _Phasianus colchicus_ Linnaeus. Ring-necked Pheasant. Introduced.
Common in western two-thirds, gradually invading east where a few are
now found in most counties.

    Origin of North American stock obscure; no subspecies now
    recognized here.


_Meleagris gallopavo._ Turkey. Formerly common resident, west along
streams at least to Riley County; now extirpated in Kansas. No known
specimen from Kansas with authentic data. No definite nesting record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. g. silvestris_ Vieillot.


_Grus americana_ (Linnaeus). Whooping Crane. Regular transient, now
rare. Probably most individuals go through east-central part of state.
Several early specimens from state and several recent sight records and
one specimen: adult female (KU 31198), found crippled 8-1/2 miles south
of Sharon, Barber County, October 31, 1952, Thane S. Robinson.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Grus canadensis._ Sandhill Crane. Transient, rare in east, common to
abundant in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _G. c. canadensis_ (Linnaeus) and _G. c.
    tabida_ (Peters); comparative status of the two subspecies not
    known.


* _Rallus elegans._ King Rail. Transient and summer resident, locally
common.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _R. e. elegans_ Audubon.


_Rallus limicola._ Virginia Rail. Transient and summer resident, but
breeding status poorly known. One breeding record: adult with six small,
downy young, 8 miles south of Richfield, Morton County, May 24, 1950,
Richard and Jean Graber.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _R. l. limicola_ Vieillot.


* _Porzana carolina_ (Linnaeus). Sora. Common transient throughout
state; status in summer poorly known. Two breeding records: Osawatomie,
Miami County, prior to 1914 (no other details), record by Colvin, a
careful observer; two nests, at least one with eggs, Finney County State
Lake, August 21, 1951, Marvin D. Schwilling. Additional nesting records
should be sought.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Coturnicops noveboracensis._ Yellow Rail. Rare or generally overlooked
transient. Records only from eastern part of state (west to Sedgwick
County).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. m. noveboracensis_ (Gmelin).


* _Laterallus jamaicensis._ Black Rail. Rare or generally overlooked
summer resident. At least ten records, including at least seven
specimens from widely scattered localities. Two breeding records: nest
with eight eggs, Manhattan, Riley County, June, 1880, C. P. Blachly;
nest with nine eggs, near Garden City, Finney County, June 6, 1889, H.
W. Menke.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. j. jamaicensis_ (Gmelin).


_Porphyrula martinica_ (Linnaeus). Purple Gallinule. Rare and irregular
summer visitant. Five specimens taken in April and June in Douglas,
Sedgwick, and Riley counties. Several sight records from eastern Kansas.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Gallinula chloropus._ Florida Gallinule. Rare summer resident; status
poorly known. Two breeding records: nest found "on a board," Coffey
County, June (year not given), P. B. Peabody; nest (female, KU 27509,
and two eggs taken), 3 miles northeast of Lawrence, Douglas County, May
22, 1945 (previously published as 1946), R. L. Montell.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _G. c. cachinnans_ Bangs.


* _Fulica americana._ American Coot. Uncommon summer resident, abundant
transient, and local winter resident in east and central parts; status
in west poorly known. Breeding record: 3 newly hatched young (KU
16694-6), Little Salt Marsh, Stafford County, June 13, 1927, H. C.
Parker and W. H. Burt. The few other nesting localities include one in
Finney County.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _F. a. americana_ Gmelin.


_Charadrius hiaticula._ Semipalmated Plover. Regular transient
throughout state, often fairly common.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. h. semipalmatus_ Bonaparte.


_Charadrius melodus._ Piping Plover. Rare transient. Three specimens
from Douglas County, March and April, and a female (KU 15492) from
Little Salt Marsh, Stafford County, July 16, 1925, T. E. White. Nests in
Nebraska, south at least to Lincoln; observers in north-central Kansas
should watch for possible breeding birds.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. m. circumcinctus_ (Ridgway).


* _Charadrius alexandrinus._ Snowy Plover. Summer resident on salt
plains of Clark, Comanche, Stafford, Barton, and probably other
counties. Breeding range in Kansas poorly known. One definite nesting
record: adults with young, and one nest with 3 eggs, Comanche County,
June 18, 1886, Goss. One female (KU 7787), from Lawrence, Douglas
County, April 22, 1909, L. L. Dyche.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. a. tenuirostris_ (Lawrence).


* _Charadrius vociferus._ Killdeer. Common transient and summer resident
throughout state. Occasional winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. v. vociferus_ Linnaeus.


* _Eupoda montana_ (Townsend). Mountain Plover. Summer resident in High
Plains of western Kansas, but current status poorly known. Many
specimens from west and one positive breeding record: two half-grown,
partly downy males (KU 5512, 5513), 5 miles south of Tribune, Greeley
County, June 21, 1911, Bunker and Rocklund.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Pluvialis dominica._ Golden Plover. Regular transient in east,
sometimes common; more common in spring than in autumn. Formerly
abundant; status in west not known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. d. dominica_ (Müller).


_Squatarola squatarola_ (Linnaeus). Black-bellied Plover. Regular
transient throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Arenaria interpres._ Ruddy Turnstone. Rare transient. Several sight
records from eastern part of state and two specimens: one killed at
Topeka, Shawnee County, August 16, 1898, F. W. Forbes (location of
specimen unknown); male, Hamilton, Greenwood County, October 1, 1911, G.
C. Rinker.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. i. morinella_ (Linnaeus).


* _Philohela minor_ (Gmelin). American Woodcock. Uncommon transient west
to Scott and Kearny counties. Probably does not occur farther west. One
early nesting record: adult with several "at least one-fourth grown"
young, near Neosho Falls, Woodson County, May 25, 1874, Goss.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Capella gallinago._ Wilson Snipe. Common transient and occasional
winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. g. delicata_ (Ord).


* _Numenius americanus._ Long-billed Curlew. Transient and uncommon
summer resident in west; occasional transient in east. Female and two
downy young (KU 11607, 8, 9) taken 1 mile from Spring Creek, Morton
County, June 27, 1927, W. H. Burt and L. V. Compton.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _N. a. americanus_ Bechstein is the breeding
    form; _N. a. parvus_ Bishop occurs in migration (specimens from
    Riley, Lyon, and Douglas counties).


[_Numenius phaeopus._ Hudsonian Curlew. Reported by Goss, and one seen
at Iatan Marsh, Atchison County, May 16, 1948, by Harold C. Hedges, but
here placed in Hypothetical List until a specimen from Kansas is taken.]


_Numenius borealis_ (Forster). Eskimo Curlew. Formerly abundant
transient in eastern Kansas; now extinct, or nearly so. One unsexed bird
(KU 6951) taken in Douglas County, May 6, 1873, by N. J. Stevens.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Bartramia longicauda_ (Bechstein). Upland Plover. Abundant transient
and locally common summer resident in suitable habitat; most numerous in
west. Nesting records from Johnson, Wabaunsee, Chase, Finney, and Kearny
counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Actitis macularia_ (Linnaeus). Spotted Sandpiper. Common transient
and summer resident throughout state. Breeding records from Leavenworth
County and Kansas City region.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Tringa solitaria._ Solitary Sandpiper. Common transient throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. s. solitaria_ Wilson is most common in
    eastern part and _T. s. cinnamomea_ (Brewster) is most common in
    western part of Kansas, with much overlap of the two.


_Catoptrophorus semipalmatus._ Willet. Transient throughout state,
usually uncommon, but sometimes locally common.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. s. inornatus_ (Brewster). _C. s.
    semipalmatus_ (Gmelin) has been reported, probably erroneously;
    all specimens seen are of the western subspecies, _inornatus_.


_Totanus melanoleucus_ (Gmelin). Greater Yellow-legs. Common transient
throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Totanus flavipes_ (Gmelin). Lesser Yellow-legs. Common transient
throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Calidris canutus._ American Knot. Rare transient. Sight records from
eastern and western Kansas; only one specimen preserved, Hamilton,
Greenwood County, September 19, 1911, G. C. Rinker.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. rufa_ (Wilson).


_Erolia melanotos_ (Vieillot). Pectoral Sandpiper. Common transient
through state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Erolia fuscicollis_ (Vieillot). White-rumped Sandpiper. Common
transient throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Erolia bairdii_ (Coues). Baird Sandpiper. Common transient in east;
abundant transient in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Erolia minutilla_ (Vieillot). Least Sandpiper. Common transient
throughout state, but less numerous in west than in east.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Erolia alpina._ Red-backed Sandpiper. Rare or uncommon transient;
reported only from eastern half of state, west to Cloud County. Few
specimens have been preserved.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _E. a. pacifica_ (Coues).


_Limnodromus griseus._ Short-billed Dowitcher. Rare or uncommon
transient in east, status in west not known. One specimen: male (KU
29403), 3 miles east of Lawrence, Douglas County, May 14, 1946, R. L.
Montell. Dowitchers having noticeably short bills should be collected
when possible.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. g. hendersoni_ Rowan.


_Limnodromus scolopaceus_ (Say). Long-billed Dowitcher. Common transient
throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Micropalama himantopus_ (Bonaparte). Stilt Sandpiper. Common transient
throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Ereunetes pusillus_ (Linnaeus). Semipalmated Sandpiper. Common
transient throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Ereunetes mauri_ Cabanis. Western Sandpiper. Uncommon transient in
east; probably common in west but status there unknown.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Tryngites subruficollis_ (Vieillot). Buff-breasted Sandpiper. Uncommon
but regular transient in autumn in eastern Kansas, west to Republic
County; few spring records.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Limosa fedoa_ (Linnaeus). Marbled Godwit. Rare or uncommon transient
throughout state. Status somewhat uncertain because some observers
confuse this species with female Hudsonian Godwits. The latter are
larger and often much duller than male Hudsonian Godwits. Marbled
Godwits, however, show no contrasting tail pattern in flight.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Limosa haemastica_ (Linnaeus). Hudsonian Godwit. Uncommon transient in
eastern and central Kansas; status in west poorly known (reported from
Ness and Kearny counties).

    No subspecies recognized.


_Crocethia alba_ (Pallas). Sanderling. Rare transient in eastern and
central Kansas; status in west not known. Three specimens have been
taken, two from Douglas County (October) and one from Stafford County
(July).

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Recurvirostra americana_ Gmelin. Avocet. Uncommon transient in east;
common transient and uncommon summer resident in west. Breeding records
from Kearny, Finney, Haskell, Meade, and Barton counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Himantopus mexicanus_ (Müller). Black-necked Stilt. Rare transient.
Records from Crawford, Sedgwick, Cloud, Stafford, Finney, and Kearny
counties; few recent records. No satisfactory nesting record.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Phalaropus fulicarius_ (Linnaeus). Red Phalarope. Very rare transient.
Two specimens: female (KU 3778), Lake View, Douglas County, November 5,
1905, E. E. Brown; male (Ottawa Univ. 96), near Ottawa, Franklin County,
October 25, 1926, Wesley Clanton (identification checked by Tordoff).

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Steganopus tricolor_ Vieillot. Wilson Phalarope. Common transient
throughout state. One definite nesting record: adult male with downy
young, Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, June 26, 1954, Ted F. Andrews
and Homer Stephens. Goss mentioned "breeding birds" in Meade County but
the record is not convincing.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Lobipes lobatus_ (Linnaeus). Northern Phalarope. Rare transient. Goss
shot five and preserved one (now in Goss collection) of 17 or 18 seen at
Fort Wallace, Wallace County, May 25, 1883. Several sight records.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Stercorarius pomarinus_ (Temminck). Pomarine Jaeger. Accidental. One
record: immature male (KU 6967), Kansas River near Lawrence, Douglas
County, October 10, 1898, Gus Berger and Banks Brown. This specimen
erroneously reported as a Parasitic Jaeger, _Stercorarius parasiticus_
(Linnaeus), in previous lists of birds of Kansas.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Stercorarius longicaudus_ Vieillot. Long-tailed Jaeger. Accidental. One
record: female (KU 32610), Cheyenne Bottoms, Barton County, June 23,
1955, William M. Lynn and Larry D. Mosby.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Larus hyperboreus._ Glaucous Gull. One bird with crippled leg seen at
Lake Shawnee, Shawnee County, January 27, 1951, and several days
thereafter, by many observers including the author. Placed on
Hypothetical List until specimen is taken in Kansas.]


_Larus argentatus._ Herring Gull. Transient, regular along Missouri
River, uncommon to rare elsewhere in state; probably rare winter
resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. a. smithsonianus_ Coues.


_Larus californicus_ Lawrence. California Gull. Accidental. One record:
specimen (location unknown) taken by Goss, Arkansas River, Reno County,
October 20, 1880.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Larus delawarensis_ Ord. Ring-billed Gull. Transient, locally common;
rare winter resident.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Larus atricilla_ Linnaeus. Laughing Gull. Accidental. One specimen
taken 3 miles east and 2-1/2 miles south of Canton, in Marion County,
May 15, 1933, Richard H. Schmidt (specimen in his collection); sight
records from Barton and Shawnee counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Larus pipixcan_ Wagler. Franklin Gull. Transient, abundant in west,
common in east.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Larus philadelphia_ (Ord). Bonaparte Gull. Rare transient. All
specimens from eastern part, west to Cloud County; status in west not
known.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Rissa tridactyla._ Kittiwake. Immature bird seen at Lake Shawnee,
Shawnee County, October 20, 1951, by L. B. Carson and O. S. Pettingill,
Jr. In the absence of a specimen, the species is placed on the
Hypothical List.]


_Xema sabini._ Sabine Gull. Three records: immature male, taken at
Humboldt, Allen County, September 19, 1876, Peter Long (now in Goss
collection); immature male, taken at Hamilton, Greenwood County, October
3, 1909, G. C. Rinker; immature bird seen but not collected on October
18, 28, and 29, 1952, at Lake Shawnee, Shawnee County, by several
observers (Orville O. Rice secured good photographs of this bird).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _X. s. sabini_ (Sabine).


_Sterna forsteri_ Nuttall. Forster Tern. Transient, locally common in
eastern half of state; status in west unknown.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Sterna hirundo._ Common Tern. Rare transient. Two specimens: female,
Anderson County, May 11, 1878 (in Goss collection); male, Munger's Lake,
near Hamilton, Greenwood County, September 2, 1912, G. C. Rinker.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. h. hirundo_ Linnaeus.


* _Sterna albifrons._ Least Tern. Uncommon transient and local summer
resident throughout state. One definite nesting record: five nests, each
with two eggs, Arkansas River at Coolidge, Hamilton County, July 1,
1936, Otto Tiemeier.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. a. athalassos_ Burleigh and Lowery.


_Hydroprogne caspia_ (Pallas). Caspian Tern. Uncommon transient
throughout state. Many sight records but only one specimen: female (KU
17147), Douglas County, September 27, 1928, Harold Standing (skin and
body skeleton of this tern saved; erroneously reported previously as two
specimens).

    No subspecies recognized.


_Chlidonias niger._ Black Tern. Common transient and, in north-central
part, regular summer resident but no positive breeding record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. n. surinamensis_ (Gmelin).


* _Columba livia_ Gmelin. Rock Dove. Introduced. Common around
habitations; nesting locally in feral state on cliffs in western
Kansas.

    No subspecies recognized because of mixed ancestry of birds
    introduced into New World.


* _Zenaidura macroura._ Mourning Dove. Common transient and summer
resident, uncommon winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _Z. m. carolinensis_ (Linnaeus) in east, _Z.
    m. marginella_ (Woodhouse) in west, intergrading in central part.


* _Ectopistes migratorius_ (Linnaeus). Passenger Pigeon. Extinct.
Formerly irregular transient and summer resident. Two specimens, both
males, taken at Neosho Falls, Woodson County, April 14, 1876, by Goss,
who also reported this species to nest there occasionally.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Columbigallina passerina._ Ground Dove. One seen on Kansas River, 3
miles west of St. Marys, Pottawatomie County, November 11, 1954, by
Thomas A. Hoffman and James Mulligan. Placed in Hypothetical List in
absence of a specimen from Kansas.]

[_Scardafella inca_ (Lesson). Inca Dove. One seen daily at Halstead,
Harvey County, November 10, 1951, to January 21, 1952, by Edna L. Ruth
and others. One seen in Topeka, Shawnee County, last week of June, 1952,
E. J. Rice. Placed in Hypothetical List in absence of a specimen from
Kansas.]


* _Conuropsis carolinensis._ Carolina Paroquet. Extinct. Formerly common
resident in wooded areas of east; west along stream bottoms. Goss
reported nesting of small flock near Neosho Falls, Woodson County, in
spring, 1858. No specimen from Kansas preserved.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. ludovicianus_ (Gmelin), on
    geographical grounds.


* _Coccyzus americanus._ Yellow-billed Cuckoo. Common transient and
summer resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. a. americanus_ (Linnaeus).


* _Coccyzus erythropthalmus_ (Wilson). Black-billed Cuckoo. Uncommon
transient and summer resident. Nesting records: female (KU 15480) and
nest containing two Black-billed Cuckoo eggs and one Yellow-billed
Cuckoo egg, 7-1/2 miles southwest of Lawrence, Douglas County, June 5,
1926, Charles D. Bunker; nests found in Cloud County in June, 1932 (1),
1933 (1), 1934 (1), 1935 (1), 1938 (2), J. M. Porter.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Geococcyx californianus_ (Lesson). Road-runner. Resident in
south-central and southwestern Kansas; abundance and distribution
subject to wide fluctuation, current status unknown. Four nests found,
April to July, 1934, 4-1/2 miles east of Arkansas City, Cowley County,
Walter Colvin.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Crotophaga sulcirostris._ Groove-billed Ani. Accidental. Three records:
specimen (KU 31948), McCune, Crawford County, between 1885 and 1910,
Alexander J. C. Roese; specimen, Lyon County, November 1, 1904; male (KU
31951), 6-3/4 miles northeast of Blue Rapids, Marshall County, October
28, 1952, Elizabeth G. McCleod.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. s. sulcirostris_ Swainson.


* _Tyto alba._ Barn owl. Uncommon resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. a. pratincola_ (Bonaparte).


* _Otus asio._ Screech Owl. Common resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: Following reported: _O. a. naevius_ (Gmelin)
    in northeast, _O. a. hasbroucki_ Ridgway in south-central, _O. a.
    aikeni_ (Brewster) and _O. a. swenki_ Oberholser in west. The
    status of these subspecies is poorly known; additional breeding
    specimens and revisionary study are needed.


* _Bubo virginianus._ Horned Owl. Common resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. v. virginianus_ (Gmelin) in east, _B. v.
    occidentalis_ Stone in west.


_Nyctea scandiaca_ (Linnaeus). Snowy Owl. Rare and irregular winter
visitant throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Surnia ulula._ Hawk Owl. None of the several sight records from Kansas
is convincing to me. Reports from eastern Kansas indicating regular
occurrence there of this far-northern species are surely erroneous and
probably pertain to Short-eared Owls.]


* _Speotyto cunicularia._ Burrowing Owl. Common summer resident in west;
irregular transient in east. Numbers seem to be decreasing.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. c. hypugea_ (Bonaparte).


* _Strix varia._ Barred Owl. Resident in east, locally fairly common.
Status in west not known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. v. georgica_ Latham in southeast; _S. v.
    varia_ Barton elsewhere in state.


* _Asio otus._ Long-eared Owl. Uncommon summer resident, locally common
transient and winter resident throughout state. Nesting records from
Ottawa, Douglas, Doniphan, and Meade counties. Status in summer poorly
known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. o. wilsonianus_ (Lesson).


* _Asio flammeus._ Short-eared Owl. Resident, probably throughout state,
in suitable habitat. More common in winter. Nesting records from
Woodson, Republic, and Marshall counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. f. flammeus_ (Pontoppidan).


* _Aegolius acadicus._ Saw-whet Owl. Rare winter resident throughout
state. One nesting record: a pair found in Kansas City, Wyandotte
County, in winter, 1950, remained at least to September, 1951, and were
seen with young birds in summer, 1951, John Bishop.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. a. acadicus_ (Gmelin).


* _Caprimulgus carolinensis_ Gmelin. Chuck-will's-widow. Locally common
summer resident in eastern Kansas, western limit of distribution poorly
known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Caprimulgus vociferus._ Whip-poor-will. Locally common summer
resident in eastern Kansas; two specimens reported from Finney County,
but status in west poorly known. Two nests reported, at Geary, Doniphan
County, June 16 and June 14 to July 3, 1923, by Linsdale. In recent
years, Chuck-will's-widows seem to have increased at the expense of
Whip-poor-wills in Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. v. vociferus_ Wilson.


* _Phalaenoptilus nuttallii._ Poor-will. Summer resident, common in
west, rare and local in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. n. nuttallii_ (Audubon).


* _Chordeiles minor._ Nighthawk. Common transient and summer resident
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: Nesting; _C. m. minor_ (Forster) in
    northeast, _C. m. chapmani_ Coues in southeast, and _C. m.
    howelli_ Oberholser in west, intergrading with one another through
    fairly broad zones. Migration; _C. m. sennetti_ Coues throughout
    state.


* _Chaetura pelagica_ (Linnaeus). Chimney Swift. Common transient and
summer resident in east; status in west poorly known. Schwilling reports
this species only in migration in Finney and neighboring counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Archilochus colubris_ (Linnaeus). Ruby-throated Hummingbird. Common
transient and summer resident in east; much less common in west, status
there poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Stellula calliope_ (Gould). Calliope Hummingbird. One record: immature
female, 8 miles south of Richfield and 6 miles east of Kansas Highway
27, Morton County, September 3, 1952, Jean W. Graber.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Megaceryle alcyon._ Belted Kingfisher. Common summer resident and
uncommon winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. a. alcyon_ (Linnaeus).


* _Colaptes auratus._ Yellow-shafted Flicker. Common resident
throughout state, but partly replaced in west by Red-shafted Flicker and
hybrids between the two species.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. a. auratus_ (Linnaeus) in southeast, _C.
    a. luteus_ Bangs in remainder of state. _C. a. borealis_ Ridgway
    has been reported in winter in east.


* _Colaptes cafer._ Red-shafted Flicker. Common resident in west,
hybridizing with, and replaced by, Yellow-shafted Flicker eastward.
Uncommon winter resident in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. collaris_ Vigors.


* _Dryocopus pileatus._ Pileated Woodpecker. Formerly common resident in
eastern Kansas, now much reduced in numbers and distribution. Recent
sight records from Leavenworth, Wyandotte, Douglas, Miami, Linn, and
Neosho counties may indicate that this species is increasing in its
former range. Definite nesting records only from Linn County where Frank
Wood and Ivan Sutton found a nest with 4 eggs and a nest with two young
and one egg, along Marais des Cygnes River, near Pleasanton, some years
ago. Eunice and Wilson Dingus have noted this species at Mound City,
Linn County, regularly for several years.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. p. abieticola_ (Bangs) in northeast, _D.
    p. pileatus_ (Linnaeus) in southeast.


* _Centurus carolinus._ Red-bellied Woodpecker. Common resident in
eastern part, breeding west at least to Comanche County; additional
records in west from Morton, Finney, and Kearny counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. zebra_ (Boddaert).


* _Melanerpes erythrocephalus._ Red-headed Woodpecker. Common transient
and summer resident throughout state. Occasional winter resident west to
Cloud County; not found in winter in southwest by Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. e. erythrocephalus_ (Linnaeus),
    intergrading in west with _M. e. caurinus_ Brodkorb.


_Asyndesmus lewis_ (Gray). Lewis Woodpecker. Possibly rare resident in
southwest but status uncertain. Several specimens and sight records from
western third of state; one specimen, female (KU 7890), from Lawrence,
Douglas County, November 7, 1908, Bunker and Wetmore.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Sphyrapicus varius._ Yellow-bellied Sapsucker. Uncommon transient and
winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. v. varius_ (Linnaeus) in eastern Kansas,
    _S. v. nuchalis_ Baird in western part (three specimens, Wallace
    and Morton counties).


[_Sphyrapicus thyroideus._ Williamson Sapsucker. An adult male seen at
Concordia, Cloud County, April 4, 1935, by Dr. J. M. Porter. Placed in
Hypothetical List in absence of a specimen.]


* _Dendrocopos villosus._ Hairy Woodpecker. Common resident throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. v. villosus_ (Linnaeus).


* _Dendrocopos pubescens._ Downy Woodpecker. Common resident throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. p. pubescens_ (Linnaeus) in southeast
    (Labette and Montgomery counties), _D. p. medianus_ (Swainson) in
    rest of state, with fairly broad zone of intergradation between
    the two subspecies.


_Dendrocopos scalaris._ Ladder-backed Woodpecker. Common resident in
extreme southwestern Kansas (Morton County). Six specimens. No nest
found yet in Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. s. symplectus_ (Oberholser).


* _Tyrannus tyrannus_ (Linnaeus). Eastern Kingbird. Common transient and
summer resident throughout state; most numerous in east.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Tyrannus verticalis_ Say. Western Kingbird. Common transient and
summer resident east to Flint Hills; uncommon transient and summer
resident in east (occurs regularly at Lawrence but rarely at Kansas
City).

    No subspecies recognized.


_Tyrannus vociferans._ Cassin Kingbird. Transient and summer resident in
extreme western part, east to Finney County. One specimen: male, Kansas
Highway 27 at Cimarron River [7-1/2 miles north of Elkhart], Morton
County, May 26, 1950, Richard and Jean Graber. No nesting record. Status
poorly known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. v. vociferans_ Swainson.


* _Muscivora forficata_ (Gmelin). Scissor-tailed Flycatcher. Common
summer resident in southern and central Kansas; nesting west to Morton
County, north to Cloud County, east to Neosho County. Sporadic records
elsewhere in state.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Myiarchus crinitus._ Crested Flycatcher. Common transient and summer
resident throughout state, but perhaps less numerous in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. c. boreus_ Bangs.


_Myiarchus cinerascens._ Ash-throated Flycatcher. Known only from Morton
County; several seen in May, 1950, and a female with somewhat enlarged
ovary taken, 8 miles south of Richfield, May 7, 1950, Richard and Jean
Graber. No nesting record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. c. cinerascens_ (Lawrence).


* _Sayornis phoebe_ (Latham). Eastern Phoebe. Common transient and
summer resident in east; occurs, but must less common, in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Sayornis saya._ Say Phoebe. Common transient and summer resident in
west. Nesting records from Rawlins, Jewell, Logan, and Ness counties. In
migration, reported east to Republic and Lyon counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. s. saya_ (Bonaparte) is the breeding
    bird; _S. s. yukonensis_ Bishop probably occurs in migration.


_Empidonax flaviventris_ (Baird and Baird). Yellow-bellied Flycatcher.
Uncommon transient in east. Specimens from Johnson, Douglas, and Shawnee
counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Empidonax virescens_ (Vieillot). Acadian Flycatcher. Summer resident
in eastern Kansas. Specimens from Doniphan, Leavenworth, Douglas,
Woodson, Montgomery, and Labette counties. Nesting records from Doniphan
County (Jean M. Linsdale), Linn County (Wilson J. and Eunice Dingus),
and Douglas County (R. F. Miller).

    No subspecies recognized.


_Empidonax traillii._ Alder Flycatcher. Transient throughout state; no
satisfactory nesting records or specimens taken in breeding season.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _E. t. brewsteri_ Oberholser transient,
    probably more common in west, and _E. t. traillii_ (Audubon)
    transient and perhaps breeding in east.


_Empidonax minimus_ (Baird and Baird). Least Flycatcher. Common
transient throughout state; no satisfactory evidence of nesting.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Empidonax oberholseri_ Phillips. Wright Flycatcher. Known only from
three specimens, May 8 (male and female) and May 12 (male), 1950, eight
miles south of Richfield, Morton County, Richard and Jean Graber.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Empidonax difficilis._ Western Flycatcher. Known only from two
specimens taken eight miles south of Richfield, Morton County; September
3, 1952, immature female, Jean Graber; September 5, 1952, immature male
(KU 31203), Richard Graber.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _E. d. hellmayri_ Brodkorb (female
    specimen); intermediate between _E. d. hellmayri_ and _E. d.
    difficilis_ Baird (male specimen).


* _Contopus virens_ (Linnaeus). Eastern Wood Pewee. Common transient and
summer resident in east, rare transient in west. Breeding distribution
in state poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Contopus richardsonii._ Western Wood Pewee. Common transient and
probably summer resident in west; rare transient in east (specimen from
Greenwood County and one seen in Cloud County). No nesting record.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. r. richardsonii_ (Swainson).


_Nuttallornis borealis_ (Swainson). Olive-sided Flycatcher. Uncommon
transient throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Eremophila alpestris._ Horned Lark. Common transient and resident
throughout state. Numbers augmented by northern birds in winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _E. a. praticola_ (Henshaw) resident in
    east; _E. a. enthymia_ (Oberholser) resident west of Flint Hills;
    _E. a. hoyti_ (Bishop), _E. a. alpestris_ (Linnaeus), and _E. a.
    leucolaema_ (Coues) in winter.


[_Tachycineta thalassina._ Violet-green Swallow. Five birds seen at Lake
Shawnee, Shawnee County, April 14, 1947, by L. B. Carson. Placed in
Hypothetical List in absence of a specimen.]


* _Iridoprocne bicolor_ (Vieillot). Tree Swallow. Summer resident in
extreme northeastern Kansas; common transient throughout eastern half of
state, status in west not known. Nesting records only from Doniphan
County, along Missouri River, four nests located by Linsdale, in 1922,
1923, and 1924, and Leavenworth County, nests found by Brumwell along
Missouri River.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Riparia riparia._ Bank Swallow. Common transient and summer resident,
probably throughout state but status in northwest not known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _R. r. riparia_ (Linnaeus).


* _Stelgidopteryx ruficollis._ Rough-winged Swallow. Common transient
and summer resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. r. serripennis_ (Audubon).


* _Hirundo rustica._ Barn Swallow. Common transient and summer resident
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. r. erythrogaster_ Boddaert.


* _Petrochelidon pyrrhonota._ Cliff Swallow. Common transient and
locally common summer resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. p. pyrrhonota_ (Vieillot).


_Progne subis._ Purple Martin. Common transient and summer resident in
east to uncommon or rare in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. s. subis_ (Linnaeus).


* _Cyanocitta cristata._ Blue Jay. Common transient and resident
throughout state; less common in northern and western sections in
winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. bromia_ Oberholser in east, _C. c.
    cyanotephra_ Sutton in west, intergrading through central Kansas.


[_Cyanocitta stelleri._ Steller Jay. Several sight records from
southwestern Kansas. Placed in Hypothetical List in absence of a
specimen.]


_Aphelocoma coerulescens._ Scrub Jay. Irregular winter resident in
southwestern Kansas. Five specimens (KU 20812-5, 21213), 12 miles
northeast of Elkhart, Morton County, November 8, 10, 14, 1934, W. S.
Long and Fred Hastie. Two seen in Finney County, January 15, 1955, by
Marvin D. Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. c. woodhouseii_ (Baird).


_Aphelocoma ultramarina._ Arizona Jay. Accidental. One specimen:
"probably female," near Mt. Jesus, Clark County, March, 1906, B. Ashton
Keith. Identification confirmed by L. L. Dyche; present location of
specimen unknown.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. u. arizonae_ (Ridgway).


* _Pica pica._ American Magpie. Common resident in west; occasional in
east in winter. Eastward extent of breeding range poorly known; nests
from Ottawa (1951), Republic (1951 and 1953), and Cloud (1954) counties.
Extending breeding range eastward (J. M. Porter).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. p. hudsonia_ (Sabine).


_Corvus corax._ American Raven. Formerly occurred on High Plains,
precise status not known. No records since disappearance of bison herds.
One specimen: Jewell County, date unknown, Edward Kern (specimen now at
Kansas State College, Manhattan).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. c. sinuatus_ Wagler.


* _Corvus cryptoleucus_ Couch. White-necked Raven. Common summer
resident in western two tiers of counties; occasional resident east to
Ford County. Locally common winter resident (Finney, Scott, and Sherman
counties). One shot at Larned, Pawnee County, about October 25, 1937, by
Frank Robl.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Corvus brachyrhynchos._ Crow. Common resident in east, less common in
west. Abundant transient and winter resident in central Kansas.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. b. brachyrhynchos_ Brehm.


_Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus_ Wied. Piñon Jay. Irregular winter visitant,
more frequent in west than in east. Reported from Douglas (twice),
Sedgwick, Mitchell, Clark, Finney, and Kearny counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Nucifraga columbiana_ (Wilson). Clark Nutcracker. Irregular winter
visitant, more frequent in west than in east. Reported from Marshall
(twice), Ellis, Lyon, Finney, and Seward counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Parus atricapillus._ Black-capped Chickadee. Common resident in
entire state except for southern tier of counties, where either rare or
absent in summer and locally common in winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. a. atricapillus_ Linnaeus in east, where
    most specimens are more or less intermediate toward _P. a.
    septentrionalis_ Harris, the resident subspecies in the west.


* _Parus carolinensis._ Carolina Chickadee. Common resident in southern
tier of counties; taken also in Greenwood County. Reported occurrence in
Douglas County is erroneous. Proof of breeding rests on partly grown
juveniles taken in Barber County, and on two nests found in Montgomery
County by L. B. Carson.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. c. atricapilloides_ Lunk.


* _Parus bicolor_ Linnaeus. Tufted Titmouse. Common resident in eastern
Kansas, west at least to Barber, Harvey, and Cloud counties. Western
limit of breeding range poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Sitta carolinensis._ White-breasted Nuthatch. Uncommon and local
resident and winter visitant throughout state. Three positive nesting
records, all from Douglas County, by C. D. Bunker, R. F. Miller, and
Katherine Kelley.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. c. carolinensis_ Latham resident in
    Labette and Montgomery counties; _S. c. nelsoni_ Mearns occurs in
    at least Morton County, status uncertain; _S. c. cookei_
    Oberholser resident and winter visitant in rest of state.


_Sitta canadensis_ Linnaeus. Red-breasted Nuthatch. Uncommon transient
and winter resident throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Certhia familiaris._ Brown Creeper. Fairly common transient and winter
resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. f. americana_ Bonaparte.


* _Troglodytes aëdon._ House Wren. Transient and summer resident, common
in east to uncommon in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. a. parkmanii_ Audubon.


_Troglodytes troglodytes._ Winter Wren. Rare or uncommon transient and
winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. t. hiemalis_ Vieillot.


_Thryomanes bewickii._ Bewick Wren. Resident, common in south, rare in
north; status poorly known. Nesting records from Shawnee, Johnson, and
Montgomery counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. b. bewickii_ (Audubon) in northern and
    northeastern part, _T. b. cryptus_ Oberholser in rest of state.
    (_T. b. niceae_ Sutton, a questionably valid subspecies, has been
    reported from Meade and Morton counties.)


* _Thryothorus ludovicianus._ Carolina Wren. Resident, common in south,
less common to north and west. One record from Hamilton County; status
in northwest unknown.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. l. ludovicianus_ (Latham).


* _Telmatodytes palustris._ Long-billed Marsh Wren. Uncommon transient
throughout state; known as a breeding bird only from Doniphan County,
where Linsdale found several nests and collected a juvenile (KU 12869)
with half-grown tail, August 31, 1922.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. p. dissaëptus_ (Bangs).


* _Cistothorus platensis._ Short-billed Marsh Wren. Uncommon transient
and irregular summer resident in east, no records from west. One
breeding record: male (KU 29665), female (KU 29666), and their nest with
four eggs, eight miles west of Lawrence, Douglas County, August 30,
1950, H. B. Tordoff and G. P. Young.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. p. stellaris_ (Naumann).


* _Salpinctes obsoletus._ Rock Wren. Common transient and summer
resident in west, rare transient in east; eastern limit of breeding
range not known. Nests found in Hamilton, Scott, and Logan counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. o. obsoletus_ (Say).


* _Mimus polyglottos._ Mockingbird. Resident throughout state, less
common in north, especially in winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. p. polyglottos_ (Linnaeus) in east, _M.
    p. leucopterus_ (Vigors) in west (most specimens from Kansas are
    intermediate between the two subspecies).


* _Dumetella carolinensis_ (Linnaeus). Catbird. Common transient and
summer resident throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Toxostoma rufum._ Brown Thrasher. Common transient and summer
resident throughout state; occasional winter resident at least in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. r. rufum_ (Linnaeus) in east, _T. r.
    longicauda_ Baird in west.


_Oreoscoptes montanus_ (Townsend). Sage Thrasher. Rare transient in
west. Two unsexed specimens (KU 31941, 31942), 1 mile south of Holcomb,
Finney County, September 20 and October 2, 1954, Marvin D. Schwilling.
A third individual seen in Morton County, September 27, 1954, and a
fourth in Kearny County, March 23, 1955, by Schwilling.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Turdus migratorius._ Robin. Common transient and summer resident;
locally common winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _T. m. migratorius_ Linnaeus breeds in most
    of state but birds in southeast are intermediate toward _T. m.
    achrusterus_ (Batchelder); _T. m. propinquus_ Ridgway occurs in
    west, at least in migration, and irregularly in other parts of
    state in winter.


_Ixoreus naevius._ Varied Thrush. Accidental. One record: specimen
(present location unknown) taken at Garden City, Finney County, October
17, 1891, H. W. Menke.

    Subspecies in Kansas: Probably _I. n. meruloides_ (Swainson), on
    geographical grounds.


* _Hylocichla mustelina_ (Gmelin). Wood Thrush. Common transient and
summer resident in east, absent in west, western limit of breeding in
Kansas not known (nests, but uncommonly, in Cloud County).

    No subspecies recognized.


_Hylocichla guttata._ Hermit Thrush. Transient throughout state, usually
uncommon. Rare in winter in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. g. faxoni_ Bangs and Penard in east, _H.
    g. sequoiensis_ (Belding) in west.


_Hylocichla ustulata._ Olive-backed Thrush. Common transient throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. u. swainsoni_ (Tschudi).


_Hylocichla minima._ Gray-cheeked Thrush. Fairly common transient in
east; probably does not occur in west but western limit in migration in
Kansas unknown (rare in Cloud County, three records by J. M. Porter).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. m. minima_ (Lafresnaye).


_Hylocichla fuscescens._ Veery. Transient, rare in east, fairly common
in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. f. salicicola_ Ridgway.


* _Sialia sialis._ Eastern Bluebird. Common resident and transient
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. s. sialis_ (Linnaeus).


[_Sialia mexicana._ Chestnut-backed Bluebird. Said to be winter resident
at Coolidge, Hamilton County, by Shanstrum. Reliably reported from
southeastern Colorado. Placed in Hypothetical List in absence of a
specimen from Kansas.]


_Sialia currucoides_ (Bechstein). Mountain Bluebird. Common winter
resident in west; occurs regularly east to Cloud and Barber counties and
irregularly farther east (to Douglas and Anderson counties). Bunker and
Rocklund took a full-grown juvenal female (KU 5900) on June 20, 1911,
near the Colorado line northwest of Coolidge, Hamilton County.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Myadestes townsendi._ Townsend Solitaire. Winter resident in small
numbers in west; irregular in winter in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. t. townsendi_ (Audubon).


* _Polioptila caerulea._ Blue-gray Gnatcatcher. Common transient and
summer resident in east, probably transient only in west but status
there poorly known. Nesting records from Doniphan, Douglas, and Barber
counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. c. caerulea_ (Linnaeus).


_Regulus satrapa._ Golden-crowned Kinglet. Common transient throughout
state; uncommon winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _R. s. satrapa_ Lichtenstein.


_Regulus calendula._ Ruby-crowned Kinglet. Common transient throughout
state; rare winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _R. c. calendula_ (Linnaeus).


_Anthus spinoletta._ Water Pipit. Common transient throughout state,
more numerous in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. s. rubescens_ (Tunstall).


_Anthus spragueii_ (Audubon). Sprague Pipit. Transient throughout state,
perhaps more common in central or western parts; status poorly known.
Specimens known from Trego, Cloud, Greenwood, Woodson, and Anderson
counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Bombycilla garrulus._ Bohemian Waxwing. Rare winter visitant throughout
state. Few specimens on record, from Riley, Shawnee, Jefferson,
Greenwood, and Sedgwick counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _B. g. pallidiceps_ Reichenow.


* _Bombycilla cedrorum_ Vieillot. Cedar Waxwing. Common transient and
irregular winter resident throughout state; rare summer resident in
northeast. Breeding records: four nests found at Lake Quivira, Wyandotte
County, July 22, 1947 (nestling collected, KU 32374), July 3, 1949
(young in nest), July 4, 1950, July 10, 1952 (young in nest), Harold C.
Hedges; nest found in Topeka, Shawnee County, June 16, 1953, Cliff
Olander and T. W. Nelson.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Lanius excubitor._ Northern Shrike. Winter resident, rare in east,
uncommon in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. e. borealis_ Vieillot in east, _L. e.
    invictus_ Grinnell in west (most specimens from Kansas are
    intermediate between the two).


* _Lanius ludovicianus._ Loggerhead Shrike. Common resident and
transient throughout state, but may leave north-central and northwestern
parts in winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. l. migrans_ Palmer in extreme east, _L.
    l. excubitorides_ Swainson in west, east to Norton, Ness, and
    Clark counties; birds from rest of state mostly intermediate.


* _Sturnus vulgaris._ Starling. Introduced. First appeared in early
1930's, now common transient and resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. v. vulgaris_ Linnaeus.


* _Vireo atricapillus_ Woodhouse. Black-capped Vireo. Summer resident in
Comanche and possibly other south-central counties. Status poorly known.
Goss collected three pairs in southeastern Comanche County, May 7 to 18,
1885, and found a nest under construction on May 11, 1885. Sight records
from Manhattan, Riley County, June 18, 1953, by Scott Searles, and
Halstead, Harvey County, May 16, 1951, by Edna L. Ruth.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Vireo griseus._ White-eyed Vireo. Locally common transient and summer
resident in east. Status poorly known. Nesting records from Doniphan
County (Linsdale) and Kansas City region; specimens taken in summer from
Douglas, Montgomery, and Labette counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _V. g. noveboracensis_ (Gmelin).


* _Vireo bellii._ Bell Vireo. Common summer resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _V. b. bellii_ Audubon.


* _Vireo flavifrons_ Vieillot. Yellow-throated Vireo. Uncommon transient
and local, uncommon summer resident throughout state. Goss reported two
nests, one with 1 Cowbird and 3 vireo eggs, at Neosho Falls, Woodson
County, May 9, 1877, and one under construction at Topeka, Shawnee
County, May 18, 1883. T. W. Nelson found a nest at Topeka in 1947 (date
approximate). R. F. Miller found an occupied nest 3 miles north of
Baldwin, Douglas County, May 6, 1947.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Vireo solitarius._ Solitary Vireo. Fairly common transient throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _V. s. solitarius_ (Wilson) in east, _V. s.
    plumbeus_ Coues and _V. s. cassinii_ Xantus in west.


* _Vireo olivaceus_ (Linnaeus). Red-eyed Vireo. Common transient and
summer resident throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Vireo philadelphicus_ (Cassin). Philadelphia Vireo. Uncommon transient
in east (often overlooked); reported west to Harvey County but western
limit of migration in Kansas not known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Vireo gilvus._ Warbling Vireo. Common transient and summer resident
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _V. g. gilvus_ (Vieillot).


* _Mniotilta varia_ (Linnaeus). Black and White Warbler. Common
transient throughout state, local and uncommon summer resident in east.
Breeding distribution in state poorly known. Nests reported in Douglas
and Leavenworth counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Protonotaria citrea_ (Boddaert). Prothonotary Warbler. Locally common
transient and summer resident in eastern Kansas. Nesting records from
Doniphan, Leavenworth, Johnson, Douglas, Shawnee, and Woodson counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Helmitheros vermivorus_ (Gmelin). Worm-eating Warbler. Rare transient
(specimens from Doniphan, Douglas, and Woodson counties) and summer
resident in east. Linsdale saw a singing bird on July 11, 1923, in
Doniphan County. Hilton (Wilson Bull., 32, 1920:85-86) reports finding a
newly-fledged young bird with an adult at Fort Leavenworth, Leavenworth
County, on June 7, 1919 (some of Hilton's records seem highly
improbable, but the one in question is convincing to me).

    No subspecies recognized.


_Vermivora chrysoptera_ (Linnaeus). Golden-winged Warbler. Rare
transient in east. Several sight records and one specimen: female (KU
12700), 3 miles south of Lawrence, Douglas County, May 2, 1921, E. R.
Hall.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Vermivora pinus_ (Linnaeus). Blue-winged Warbler. Uncommon transient in
east. Possibly nests rarely but no definite evidence.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Vermivora peregrina_ (Wilson). Tennessee Warbler. Common transient in
east, uncommon transient in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Vermivora celata._ Orange-crowned Warbler. Common transient throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _V. c. celata_ (Say) throughout state, _V.
    c. orestera_ Oberholser in west.


_Vermivora ruficapilla._ Nashville Warbler. Common transient throughout
state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _V. r. ruficapilla_ (Wilson).


_Vermivora virginiae_ (Baird). Virginia Warbler. Transient in extreme
west. Known in Kansas only from 8 miles south of Richfield, Morton
County: five birds seen, two collected, May 4 to 10, 1950, Richard and
Jean Graber.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Parula americana_ (Linnaeus). Parula Warbler. Fairly common transient
and local summer resident in eastern Kansas. Nesting records from Riley,
Doniphan, Douglas, and Woodson counties; western limit of breeding
distribution unknown.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Dendroica petechia._ Yellow Warbler. Common transient and summer
resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. p. aestiva_ (Gmelin) breeding in all
    except southwestern Kansas; _D. p. sonorana_ Brewster probably
    breeding in extreme southwest (specimens from Morton County); _D.
    p. rubiginosa_ (Pallas) transient, probably throughout state.


_Dendroica magnolia_ (Wilson). Magnolia Warbler. Uncommon transient
throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica tigrina_ (Gmelin). Cape May Warbler. Rare transient in east.
Several sight records but only one specimen from state: immature male
(KU 31644), Lawrence, Douglas County, December 6, 1954 (abnormally late
date), Mary Edith Kizer.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica caerulescens._ Black-throated Blue Warbler. Rare transient,
more records from west than from east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. c. caerulescens_ (Gmelin).


_Dendroica coronata._ Myrtle Warbler. Common transient throughout state,
rare winter resident. (See also Audubon Warbler.)

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. c. coronata_ (Linnaeus) and _D. c.
    hooveri_ McGregor.


_Dendroica auduboni._ Audubon Warbler. Common transient in west, rare in
east, specimens taken east to Trego County. Hybrids between this species
and Myrtle Warbler common in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. a. auduboni_ (Townsend).


_Dendroica nigrescens_ (Townsend). Black-throated Gray Warbler. Common
transient in extreme western Kansas. Several sight records and four
specimens from 8 miles south of Richfield, Morton County, May 8 to 13,
1950, Richard and Jean Graber.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica townsendi_ (Townsend). Townsend Warbler. Transient in extreme
western Kansas. Five records: all from 8 miles south of Richfield,
Morton County, May 3 (female collected), 11, and 20, 1950, September 3
and 5 (immature female, KU 31206), 1952, Richard and Jean Graber.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica virens._ Black-throated Green Warbler. Transient, uncommon in
east and rare in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. v. virens_ (Gmelin).


_Dendroica cerulea_ (Wilson). Cerulean Warbler. Uncommon transient and
possibly summer resident in east, but status poorly known. No definite
nesting record. Only five specimens on record.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica fusca_ (Müller). Blackburnian Warbler. Transient, uncommon in
east, rare in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Dendroica dominica._ Sycamore Warbler. A few sight records from east
and possibly breeds in southeast but placed on Hypothetical List until a
specimen from state is obtained.]


_Dendroica pensylvanica_ (Linnaeus). Chestnut-sided Warbler. Transient,
fairly common in east, uncommon in west. Only three specimens from
state, two from Shawnee County, one from Morton County.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica castanea_ (Wilson). Bay-breasted Warbler. Uncommon transient
throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Dendroica striata_ (Forster). Black-poll Warbler. Common transient in
east, uncommon or rare in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


[_Dendroica pinus._ Pine Warbler. Probably rare transient in east where
several have been reported seen, but placed in Hypothetical List in
absence of a specimen from Kansas. Linsdale reported taking a Pine
Warbler in Doniphan County, September 13, 1923, but the specimen is
actually a Cerulean Warbler.]


* _Dendroica discolor._ Prairie Warbler. Known to occur regularly only
in Wyandotte and Johnson counties, where locally common transient and
summer resident; newly fledged young have been found. One specimen: male
(KU 32376), 2 miles west of Lake Quivira, Johnson County, May 3, 1942,
Harold C. Hedges.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. d. discolor_ (Vieillot).


_Dendroica palmarum._ Palm Warbler. Uncommon transient in east, west at
least to Cloud County. Western limit of occurrence in migration not
known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _D. p. palmarum_ (Gmelin).


* _Seiurus aurocapillus._ Oven-bird. Fairly common transient throughout
state; local summer resident in northeast. Brumwell reported one pair
nesting in June, 1939, and in 1940, at Fort Leavenworth, Leavenworth
County. His report is lacking in details but no other nesting records
are available.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. a. aurocapillus_ (Linnaeus) throughout
    state, _S. a. cinereus_ A. H. Miller taken in Cheyenne County.


_Seiurus noveboracensis._ Northern Water-thrush. Fairly common transient
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. n. notabilis_ Ridgway.


* _Seiurus motacilla_ (Vieillot). Louisiana Water-thrush. Fairly common
transient and summer resident in east, uncommon transient in west.
Approximately 11 breeding records, all from Miami and Linn counties.
Summer distribution in state inadequately known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Oporornis formosus_ (Wilson). Kentucky Warbler. Common transient and
summer resident in east. Nests west to Riley County, but not reported
from Cloud County by Porter.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Oporornis philadelphia_ (Wilson). Mourning Warbler. Locally common
transient in east, west rarely to Sedgwick and Cloud counties. Sight
records supposedly of Connecticut Warblers (_Oporornis agilis_) may, at
least in part, refer to this species. No specimens of _O. agilis_ known
from state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Oporornis tolmiei._ Macgillivray Warbler. Common transient in extreme
western Kansas, accidental in east. Specimens from Morton, Hamilton, and
Marshall (1) counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _O. t. monticola_ Phillips.


* _Geothlypis trichas._ Yellow-throat. Common transient throughout
state; common summer resident in east, less common in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _G. t. brachidactyla_ (Swainson) breeds in
    east; _G. t. occidentalis_ Brewster breeds in west. Distribution
    in Kansas of these subspecies and identity of transients poorly
    known.


* _Icteria virens._ Yellow-breasted Chat. Common transient and summer
resident, perhaps less common in west.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _I. v. virens_ (Linnaeus) in east, _I. v.
    auricollis_ (Lichtenstein) in west, intergrading through most of
    state.


_Wilsonia citrina_ (Boddaert). Hooded Warbler. Formerly common summer
resident in east, now rare and perhaps no longer nests in state. No
satisfactory breeding record. Three males from Leavenworth County, May
9, 1871, and one from Shawnee County, May 17, 1871, taken by J. A.
Allen, are now at Harvard.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Wilsonia pusilla._ Wilson Warbler. Common transient throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _W. p. pusilla_ (Wilson) in east, _W. p.
    pileolata_ (Pallas) in west; precise distribution in migration
    unknown.


_Wilsonia canadensis_ (Linnaeus). Canada Warbler. Uncommon transient in
east, reported west to Sedgwick and Cloud counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Setophaga ruticilla._ American Redstart. Common transient and local
summer resident in east; probably only transient in west but breeding
range in state poorly known. Few definite nesting records: Brumwell
reported nesting at Fort Leavenworth, Leavenworth County; J. M. Porter
found a nest in Republic County, May 22, 1940.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. r. ruticilla_ (Linnaeus) is breeding
    form; _S. r. tricolora_ (Müller) occurs in migration.


* _Passer domesticus._ English Sparrow. Introduced. Common resident
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. d. domesticus_ (Linnaeus).


* _Dolichonyx oryzivorus_ (Linnaeus). Bobolink. Transient, uncommon in
east and rare in west in spring; rare in east and absent in west in
fall. In 1940, several pairs remained until July 21 near Jamestown State
Lake, Cloud County, and two pairs were seen feeding fledglings on June
25 (J. M. Porter). No other good evidence of breeding.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Sturnella magna._ Eastern Meadowlark. Common transient and resident
in eastern part. Nests locally west to Jewell County in north and Barber
County in south. Less common in winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. m. magna_ (Linnaeus) in northeast, _S.
    m. argutula_ Bangs in southeast.


_Sturnella neglecta._ Western Meadowlark. Common transient and resident
in western part. Nests commonly east to Flint Hills, irregularly and
uncommonly in east. Largely replaces Eastern Meadowlark in east in
winter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. n. neglecta_ Audubon.


* _Xanthocephalus xanthocephalus_ (Bonaparte). Yellow-headed Blackbird.
Transient, common in west and uncommon in east, and uncommon, local
summer resident. Breeds more frequently in west; nesting records from
Meade, Wallace, Barton, Stafford, Doniphan, and Douglas counties. One
winter record, Riley County.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Agelaius phoeniceus._ Red-wing. Common transient and summer resident
throughout state, less common winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. p. phoeniceus_ (Linnaeus) breeds in most
    of state; _A. p. fortis_ Ridgway may nest in west and occurs in
    migration; _A. p. arctolegus_ Oberholser occurs in migration.


* _Icterus spurius_ (Linnaeus). Orchard Oriole. Common transient and
summer resident throughout state.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Icterus cucullatus._ Hooded Oriole. Accidental. One record: bird banded
at Los Angeles, California, January 22, 1939, found dead by Dr. F. S.
Williams, 16 miles southeast of Garden City, Finney County, about August
5, 1939; foot of specimen preserved.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _I. c. californicus_ (Lesson), on geographic
    grounds.


* _Icterus galbula_ (Linnaeus). Baltimore Oriole. Common transient and
summer resident through most of state; hybridizes freely with Bullock
Oriole in west. One winter record: immature male (KU 31988), Lawrence,
Douglas County, December 25, 1953, H. B. Tordoff.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Icterus bullockii._ Bullock Oriole. Common transient and summer
resident in west, rarely east to Stafford County (breeding?) and Douglas
County (transient).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _I. b. bullockii_ (Swainson).


_Euphagus carolinus._ Rusty Blackbird. Common transient and locally
common winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _E. c. carolinus_ (Müller).


_Euphagus cyanocephalus_ (Wagler). Brewer Blackbird. Transient and local
winter resident. Common in west, uncommon in east. Probably nests in
northwest, but no satisfactory evidence of this.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Quiscalus quiscula._ Bronzed Grackle. Common transient and summer
resident throughout state; local winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _Q. q. versicolor_ Vieillot.


* _Molothrus ater._ Cowbird. Common transient and summer resident
throughout state; local winter resident.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. a. ater_ (Boddaert) is breeding bird;
    _M. a. artemisiae_ Grinnell transient, common in west and possibly
    nesting in northwest.


_Piranga ludoviciana_ (Wilson). Western Tanager. Fairly common transient
and perhaps summer resident in extreme west. Two males taken 4-1/2 miles
west of Kendall, Hamilton County, May 20 and June 1, 1893, H. W. Menke;
many seen and two males and a female (KU 31207) taken 8 miles south of
Richfield, Morton County, May 6, 1950 (males) and September 4, 1952,
Richard and Jean Graber.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Piranga olivacea_ (Gmelin). Scarlet Tanager. Fairly common transient
in east and uncommon summer resident in northeast. Distribution in state
poorly known; breeding records from Doniphan, Leavenworth, and Cloud
counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Piranga rubra._ Summer Tanager. Common transient and summer resident,
distribution poorly known. Recorded in migration (possibly breeding?)
west to Morton County and breeding in Doniphan and Douglas counties. Not
reported by Porter as nesting in Cloud County.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. r. rubra_ (Linnaeus).


* _Richmondena cardinalis._ Cardinal. Common resident in east, uncommon
in west, rare in extreme southwest.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _R. c. cardinalis_ (Linnaeus).


* _Pheucticus ludovicianus_ (Linnaeus). Rose-breasted Grosbeak. Common
transient and locally common summer resident in east. Reported in summer
west to Rawlins County; probably absent in summer from southeast.
Distribution poorly known.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Pheucticus melanocephalus._ Black-headed Grosbeak. Common transient
and summer resident in west, nesting east to Cloud and Harvey counties.
Occasionally occurs farther east in migration.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. m. melanocephalus_ (Swainson).


* _Guiraca caerulea._ Blue Grosbeak. Common transient and summer
resident in most of state; locally common in summer in northeast.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _G. c. caerulea_ (Linnaeus) in east, _G. c.
    interfusa_ Dwight and Griscom in west; most specimens from state
    are intergrades.


_Passerina cyanea_ (Linnaeus). Indigo Bunting. Common transient and
summer resident west to Finney County, status in extreme west not known
but probably absent there.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Passerina amoena_ (Say). Lazuli Bunting. Common transient and probably
summer resident in extreme western Kansas. No breeding record. Rare in
east in migration.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Passerina ciris._ Painted Bunting. Fairly common summer resident in
east, west to Barber and north to Riley and Shawnee counties. One
positive nesting record: nest with young, successfully fledged,
Lawrence, Douglas County, spring and summer, 1918, Bessie D. Reed.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. c. pallidior_ Mearns.


* _Spiza americana_ (Gmelin). Dickcissel. Transient and summer resident
throughout state; common in east, locally common in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Hesperiphona vespertina._ Evening Grosbeak. Rare and irregular winter
visitant. Reported from widely scattered localities throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _H. v. vespertina_ (Cooper); _H. v. brooksi_
    Grinnell may occur in west.


_Carpodacus purpureus._ Purple Finch. Fairly common transient and winter
resident in east; status in west not known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. p. purpureus_ (Gmelin).


_Carpodacus mexicanus._ House Finch. Occurs in southwestern Kansas,
reported common north to Hamilton County and east to Finney County. One
record from Concordia, Cloud County, 2 or 3 birds seen from February 26
to March 6, 1954, Lillie and Ida Cook, J. M. Porter. Most records in
winter; status in summer uncertain.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. m. frontalis_ (Say).


[_Pinicola enucleator._ Pine Grosbeak. One old record (possibly based on
a specimen, but convincing details are lacking) and a few recent sight
records from east. Placed in Hypothetical List in absence of an
authentic specimen from state.]


_Acanthis flammea._ Redpoll. Rare and irregular winter visitant. Records
from Cloud, Riley (specimen), Douglas (specimens), and Woodson counties,
and Kansas City region.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. f. flammea_ (Linnaeus).


* _Spinus pinus._ Pine Siskin. Common but irregular transient and winter
resident throughout state. Two breeding records: nest with 3 or 4 young,
later successfully fledged, Onaga, Pottawatomie County, May 3, 1920, F.
F. Crevecoeur; nest with 3 eggs (young successfully fledged), 1 mile
southwest of Concordia, Cloud County, observed from April 6 to 30, 1954,
J. M. Porter.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. p. pinus_ (Wilson).


* _Spinus tristis._ Eastern Goldfinch. Common resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. t. tristis_ (Linnaeus).


* _Loxia curvirostra._ Red Crossbill. Irregular winter visitant
throughout state, locally common at times. One nesting record: nest with
one egg, Topeka, Shawnee County, March 22, 1917, A. Sidney Hyde. This
nest later held three eggs, all hatched, three young fledged, and the
family left the area in June.

    Subspecies in Kansas (in approximate decreasing order of
    frequency): _L. c. benti_ Griscom, _L. c. bendirei_ Ridgway, _L.
    c. minor_ (Brehm), _L. c. stricklandi_ Ridgway, _L. c. sitkensis_
    Grinnell.


_Loxia leucoptera._ White-winged Crossbill. Rare and irregular winter
visitant throughout the state. Only two specimens taken (Douglas and
Ellis counties).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _L. l. leucoptera_ Gmelin.


_Chlorura chlorura_ (Audubon). Green-tailed Towhee. Fairly common
transient in west; rare winter visitant in east (Shawnee County,
Wyandotte County).

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Pipilo erythrophthalmus._ Red-eyed Towhee. Common transient and
winter resident throughout state; uncommon summer resident in east,
status in west in summer not known. No nest found, but recently fledged
young reported in several counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. e. erythrophthalmus_ (Linnaeus)
    resident; _P. e. arcticus_ (Swainson) winter resident throughout
    state; _P. e. montanus_ Swarth reported as transient only from
    Morton County.


* _Calamospiza melanocorys_ Stejneger. Lark Bunting. Common transient
and summer resident in west, rare transient in east. Nesting in
southwestern Kansas irregular; absent some years and present in other
years. One nesting record from east, in Franklin County.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Passerculus sandwichensis._ Savannah Sparrow. Common transient and rare
winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. s. savanna_ (Wilson), _P. s. nevadensis_
    Grinnell, _P. s. oblitus_ Peters and Griscom.


* _Ammodramus savannarum._ Grasshopper Sparrow. Common transient and
local summer resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. s. perpallidus_ (Coues).


_Ammodramus bairdii_ (Audubon). Baird Sparrow. One record: male? (U. S.
Natl. Mus. 155884), Pendennis, Lane County, April 25, 1897, J. A.
Loring. This species probably occurs regularly in the state but is
overlooked.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Passerherbulus caudacutus_ (Latham). Leconte Sparrow. Common transient
and irregular, locally common winter resident west at least to Lane
County.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Passerherbulus henslowii._ Henslow Sparrow. Uncommon transient and
uncommon, local summer resident in east, west at least to Cloud County.
Breeding records from Morris, Shawnee, Douglas, and Anderson counties.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. h. henslowii_ (Audubon).


_Ammospiza caudacuta._ Sharp-tailed Sparrow. Rare transient in east.
Specimens taken in Shawnee, Douglas, Woodson, and McPherson counties.
Supposed nesting reported by Goss probably erroneous.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. c. nelsoni_ (Allen).


_Pooecetes gramineus._ Vesper Sparrow. Common transient throughout
state. May nest in northwest but no evidence available.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. g. gramineus_ (Gmelin) in east, _P. g.
    confinis_ Baird in west.


* _Chondestes grammacus._ Lark Sparrow. Common transient and summer
resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. g. grammacus_ (Say) east of Flint Hills,
    _C. g. strigatus_ Swainson in west; the two subspecies intergrade
    in central Kansas.


_Aimophila ruficeps._ Rufous-crowned Sparrow. Two records: male (KU
29222), Schwarz Canyon, Comanche County, June 7, 1936, C. W. Hibbard;
one seen near Point Rock, Morton County, May 21, 1950, Richard and Jean
Graber.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. r. scottii_ (Sennett).


_Aimophila aestivalis._ Pine-woods Sparrow. One specimen: male (KU
32377), Lake Quivira, in Wyandotte County, April 26, 1948, Harold C.
Hedges. One seen, Lake Quivira, in Johnson County, April 24, 1949,
Harold C. Hedges.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. a. illinoensis_ (Ridgway).


* _Aimophila cassinii_ (Woodhouse). Cassin Sparrow. Common summer
resident in southwestern Kansas, known north to Hamilton County and east
to Finney County. One nesting record: nest with two young and one pipped
egg, one mile south of Garden City, Finney County, May 24, 1954, Marvin
D. Schwilling.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Amphispiza bilineata._ Black-throated Sparrow. One record: specimen of
unknown sex (KU 31356), 4 miles north and 3 miles east of Garden City,
Finney County, November 25, 1952, Marvin D. Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _A. b. deserticola_ Ridgway.


_Junco aikeni_ Ridgway. White-winged Junco. Fairly common transient and
winter resident in western Kansas. Specimens from Wallace, Ellis,
Hamilton, and Morton counties.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Junco hyemalis._ Slate-colored Junco. Common transient and winter
resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _J. h. hyemalis_ (Linnaeus), _J. h.
    cismontanus_ Dwight.


_Junco oreganus._ Oregon Junco. Common transient and winter resident in
west, uncommon in east.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _J. o. montanus_ Ridgway, _J. o. mearnsi_
    Ridgway.


_Spizella arborea._ Tree Sparrow. Common transient and winter resident
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. a. arborea_ (Wilson) common in east; _S.
    a. ochracea_ Brewster common throughout state.


* _Spizella passerina._ Chipping Sparrow. Common transient and summer
resident in east, less common in west. Only two actual nesting records:
occupied nest at Lawrence, Douglas County, May, 1954, James S. Findley;
nest with 4 large young, 6 miles south of Atchison, Atchison County,
May, 1934 or 1935, Homer A. Stephens (photographs taken of nest and
adult).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. p. passerina_ (Bechstein) in east, _S.
    p. arizonae_ Coues in west.


_Spizella pallida_ (Swainson). Clay-colored Sparrow. Common transient
throughout state. Possibly breeds in northwest: male (KU 31950) with
greatly enlarged testes (9 × 6 mm.), 1 mile north of St. Francis,
Cheyenne County, June 12, 1954, H. B. Tordoff.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Spizella breweri._ Brewer Sparrow. Common transient in west. Five
specimens known: four males, Morton County, April 8 to May 1, 1950,
Richard and Jean Graber; one specimen (sex?), Finney County, May 3,
1954, Marvin D. Schwilling.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. b. breweri_ Cassin.


* _Spizella pusilla._ Field Sparrow. Common transient and summer
resident and uncommon winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _S. p. arenacea_ Chadbourne, intergrading in
    east with _S. p. pusilla_ (Wilson).


_Zonotrichia querula_ (Nuttall). Harris Sparrow. Common transient and
winter resident in east, uncommon in west.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Zonotrichia leucophrys._ White-crowned Sparrow. Common transient and
winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _Z. l. leucophrys_ (Forster) common in east,
    uncommon in west; _Z. l. gambelii_ (Nuttall) common in west,
    fairly common in east.


_Zonotrichia albicollis_ (Gmelin). White-throated Sparrow. Fairly common
transient, uncommon winter resident west at least to Cloud and Sedgwick
counties. Status in west poorly known; not reported at Garden City by
Marvin D. Schwilling.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Passerella iliaca._ Fox Sparrow. Fairly common transient and uncommon
winter resident in east; probably occurs in west but status there poorly
known.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. i. iliaca_ (Merrem); other subspecies
    may be found in west when specimens become available.


_Melospiza lincolnii._ Lincoln Sparrow. Common transient and uncommon
winter resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. l. lincolnii_ (Audubon) throughout
    state; _M. l. alticola_ (Miller and McCabe) in extreme west.


_Melospiza georgiana._ Swamp Sparrow. Common transient and uncommon
winter resident in east. Western limit of range in Kansas not known
(rare transient in Cloud and Finney counties--Porter and Schwilling).

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. g. georgiana_ (Latham), _M. g.
    ericrypta_ Oberholser.


_Melospiza melodia._ Song Sparrow. Common transient and winter resident
throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _M. m. euphonia_ Wetmore, _M. m. juddi_
    Bishop, _M. m. montana_ Henshaw.


_Rhynchophanes mccownii_ (Lawrence). McCown Longspur. Transient, common
in west, rare in east, and winter resident, uncommon in west, rare in
east.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Calcarius lapponicus._ Lapland Longspur. Common transient and winter
resident throughout state.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _C. l. lapponicus_ (Linnaeus) is the common
    form; _C. l. alascensis_ Ridgway occurs uncommonly (specimens from
    Douglas and Hamilton counties).


_Calcarius pictus_ (Swainson). Smith Longspur. Fairly common transient
and locally common winter resident except in extreme east, where rare.

    No subspecies recognized.


* _Calcarius ornatus_ (Townsend). Chestnut-collared Longspur. Common
transient and winter resident in west, uncommon in east. Formerly, at
least, occurred in summer in High Plains of west; nests found in Ellis
County in 1871 by J. A. Allen. No recent records in summer.

    No subspecies recognized.


_Plectrophenax nivalis._ Snow Bunting. Winter visitant at irregular and,
sometimes, long intervals. No specimens preserved in state since 1879.

    Subspecies in Kansas: _P. n. nivalis_ (Linnaeus).


                     _Transmitted May 19, 1955._




                        Index to Common Names


  Acadian Flycatcher, 334
  Alder Flycatcher, 334
  American Bittern, 312
  American Coot, 322
  American Egret, 311
  American Knot, 325
  American Magpie, 336
  American Merganser, 317
  American Raven, 336
  American Redstart, 346
  American Woodcock, 323
  Arizona Jay, 336
  Ash-throated Flycatcher, 333
  Audubon Warbler, 343
  Avocet, 326

  Baird Sandpiper, 325
  Baird Sparrow, 350
  Bald Eagle, 319
  Baldpate, 315
  Baltimore Oriole, 347
  Bank Swallow, 335
  Barn Owl, 330
  Barn Swallow, 335
  Barred Owl, 330
  Bay-breasted Warbler, 344
  Bell Vireo, 341
  Belted Kingfisher, 331
  Bewick Wren, 338
  Black and White Warbler, 342
  Black-bellied Plover, 323
  Black-billed Cuckoo, 329
  blackbirds, 346-348
  Blackburnian Warbler, 344
  Black-capped Chickadee, 337
  Black-capped Vireo, 341
  Black-crowned Night Heron, 312
  Black Duck, 314
  Black-headed Grosbeak, 348
  Black-necked Stilt, 326
  Black-poll Warbler, 344
  Black Rail, 322
  Black Tern, 328
  Black-throated Blue Warbler, 343
  Black-throated Gray Warbler, 344
  Black-throated Green Warbler, 344
  Black-throated Sparrow, 352
  Black Vulture, 318
  Blue Goose, 314
  Blue-gray Gnatcatcher, 340
  Blue Grosbeak, 348
  Blue Jay, 336
  Blue-winged Teal, 315
  Blue-winged Warbler, 342
  Bobolink, 346
  Bob-white, 321
  Bohemian Waxwing, 340
  Bonaparte Gull, 328
  Brant, 314
  Brewer Blackbird, 347
  Brewer Sparrow, 352
  Broad-winged Hawk, 319
  Bronzed Grackle, 348
  Brown Creeper, 337
  Brown Pelican, 311
  Brown Thrasher, 338
  Buff-breasted Sandpiper, 326
  Buffle-head, 316
  Bullock Oriole, 347
  buntings, 348-354
  Burrowing Owl, 330

  California Gull, 327
  Calliope Hummingbird, 331
  Canada Goose, 313
  Canada Warbler, 346
  Canvas-back, 316
  Cape May Warbler, 343
  Cardinal, 348
  Carolina Chickadee, 337
  Carolina Paroquet, 329
  Carolina Wren, 338
  Caspian Tern, 328
  Cassin Kingbird, 333
  Cassin Sparrow, 351
  Catbird, 338
  Cedar Waxwing, 340
  Cerulean Warbler, 344
  Chestnut-backed Bluebird, 339
  Chestnut-collared Longspur, 354
  Chestnut-sided Warbler, 344
  chickadees, 337
  Chimney Swift, 331
  Chipping Sparrow, 352
  Chuck-will's-widow, 331
  Cinnamon Teal, 315
  Clark Nutcracker, 337
  Clay-colored Sparrow, 352
  Cliff Swallow, 335
  Common Loon, 310
  Common Scoter, 317
  Common Tern, 328
  Cooper Hawk, 318
  cormorants, 311
  corvids, 336-337
  Cowbird, 348
  cranes, 321
  Crested Flycatcher, 333
  crossbills, 350
  Crow, 336
  cuckoos, 329-330

  Dickcissel, 349
  Double-crested Cormorant, 311
  doves, 328-329
  Downy Woodpecker, 333
  Duck Hawk, 320
  ducks, 314-317

  eagles, 319
  Eared Grebe, 310
  Eastern Bluebird, 339
  Eastern Goldfinch, 350
  Eastern Kingbird, 333
  Eastern Meadowlark, 346
  Eastern Phoebe, 334
  Eastern Wood Pewee, 335
  Eider, 316
  English Sparrow, 346
  Eskimo Curlew, 324
  European Widgeon, 315
  Evening Grosbeak, 349

  falcons, 320
  Ferruginous Rough-leg, 319
  Field Sparrow, 352
  finches, 348-354
  Flamingo, 313
  Florida Gallinule, 322
  flycatchers, 333-335
  Forster Tern, 328
  Fox Sparrow, 353
  Franklin Gull, 327
  Fulvous Tree-duck, 314

  Gadwall, 315
  geese, 313-314
  Glaucous Gull, 327
  goatsuckers, 331
  Golden-crowned Kinglet, 340
  Golden Eagle, 319
  Golden-eye, 316
  Golden Plover, 323
  Golden-winged Warbler, 342
  Goshawk, 318
  Grasshopper Sparrow, 350
  Gray-cheeked Thrush, 339
  Great Blue Heron, 311
  Greater Prairie Chicken, 320
  Greater Scaup Duck, 316
  Greater Yellow-legs, 325
  grebes, 310
  Green Heron, 312
  Green-tailed Towhee, 350
  Green-winged Teal, 315
  Groove-billed Ani, 330
  grosbeaks, 348-349
  Ground Dove, 329
  grouse, 320-321
  gulls, 327-328
  Gyrfalcon, 320

  Hairy Woodpecker, 333
  Harris Hawk, 319
  Harris Sparrow, 353
  Hawk Owl, 330
  hawks, 318-320
  Henslow Sparrow, 351
  Hermit Thrush, 339
  herons, 311-312
  Herring Gull, 327
  Hooded Merganser, 317
  Hooded Oriole, 347
  Hooded Warbler, 346
  Horned Grebe, 310
  Horned Lark, 335
  Horned Owl, 330
  House Finch, 349
  House Wren, 337
  Hudsonian Curlew, 324
  Hudsonian Godwit, 326
  hummingbirds, 331

  ibises, 312-313
  Inca Dove, 329
  Indigo Bunting, 349

  jaegers, 327
  jays, 336-337
  juncos, 352

  Kentucky Warbler, 345
  Killdeer, 323
  King Eider, 316
  kingfisher, 331
  kinglets, 340
  King Rail, 321
  kites, 318
  Kittiwake, 328

  Ladder-backed Woodpecker, 333
  Lapland Longspur, 353
  lark, 335
  Lark Bunting, 350
  Lark Sparrow, 351
  Laughing Gull, 327
  Lazuli Bunting, 349
  Least Bittern, 312
  Least Flycatcher, 334
  Least Sandpiper, 325
  Least Tern, 328
  Leconte Sparrow, 351
  Lesser Prairie Chicken, 320
  Lesser Scaup Duck, 316
  Lesser Yellow-legs, 325
  Lewis Woodpecker, 332
  Lincoln Sparrow, 353
  Little Blue Heron, 312
  Loggerhead Shrike, 341
  Long-billed Curlew, 324
  Long-billed Dowitcher, 325
  Long-billed Marsh Wren, 338
  Long-eared Owl, 330
  longspurs, 353-354
  Long-tailed Jaeger, 327
  loons, 310
  Louisiana Heron, 312
  Louisiana Water-thrush, 345

  Macgillivray Warbler, 345
  Magnolia Warbler, 343
  magpie, 336
  Mallard, 314
  Man-o'-war-bird, 311
  Marbled Godwit, 326
  Marsh Hawk, 320
  McCown Longspur, 353
  meadowlarks, 346-347
  Mexican Cormorant, 311
  Mississippi Kite, 318
  Mockingbird, 338
  Mottled Duck, 314
  Mountain Bluebird, 340
  Mountain Plover, 323
  Mourning Dove, 329
  Mourning Warbler, 345
  Myrtle Warbler, 343

  Nashville Warbler, 343
  Nighthawk, 331
  Northern Phalarope, 327
  Northern Shrike, 341
  Northern Water-thrush, 345
  nuthatches, 337

  Old-squaw, 316
  Olive-backed Thrush, 339
  Olive-sided Flycatcher, 335
  Orange-crowned Warbler, 343
  Orchard Oriole, 347
  Oregon Junco, 352
  orioles, 347
  Osprey, 320
  Oven-bird, 345
  owls, 330-331

  Painted Bunting, 349
  Palm Warbler, 345
  Parula Warbler, 343
  Passenger Pigeon, 329
  Pectoral Sandpiper, 325
  pelicans, 311
  phalaropes, 326-327
  Philadelphia Vireo, 342
  Pied-billed Grebe, 310
  Pigeon Hawk, 320
  pigeons, 328-329
  Pileated Woodpecker, 332
  Pine Grosbeak, 349
  Pine Siskin, 349
  Pine Warbler, 344
  Pine-woods Sparrow, 351
  Piñon Jay, 337
  Pintail, 315
  Piping Plover, 323
  pipits, 340
  plovers, 323
  Pomarine Jaeger, 327
  Poor-will, 331
  Prairie Falcon, 320
  Prairie Warbler, 344
  Prothonotary Warbler, 342
  Purple Finch, 349
  Purple Gallinule, 322
  Purple Martin, 336

  quail, 321

  rails, 321-322
  ravens, 336
  Red-backed Sandpiper, 325
  Red-bellied Woodpecker, 332
  Red-breasted Merganser, 317
  Red-breasted Nuthatch, 337
  Red Crossbill, 350
  Red-eyed Towhee, 350
  Red-eyed Vireo, 342
  Redhead, 315
  Red-headed Woodpecker, 332
  Red-necked Grebe, 310
  Red Phalarope, 326
  Redpoll, 349
  Red-shafted Flicker, 332
  Red-shouldered Hawk, 318
  Red-tailed Hawk, 318
  Red-throated Loon, 310
  Red-wing, 347
  Ring-billed Gull, 327
  Ring-necked Duck, 316
  Ring-necked Pheasant, 321
  Road-runner, 329
  Robin, 339
  Rock Dove, 328
  Rock Wren, 338
  Roseate Spoonbill, 313
  Rose-breasted Grosbeak, 348
  Ross Goose, 314
  Rough-legged Hawk, 319
  Rough-winged Swallow, 335
  Ruby-crowned Kinglet, 340
  Ruby-throated Hummingbird, 331
  Ruddy Duck, 317
  Ruddy Turnstone, 323
  Ruffed Grouse, 320
  Rufous-crowned Sparrow, 351
  Rusty Blackbird, 347

  Sabine Gull, 328
  Sage Thrasher, 338
  Sanderling, 326
  Sandhill Crane, 321
  sandpipers, 323-326
  Savannah Sparrow, 350
  Saw-whet Owl, 330
  Say Phoebe, 334
  Scaled Quail, 321
  Scarlet Tanager, 348
  Scissor-tailed Flycatcher, 333
  Screech Owl, 330
  Scrub Jay, 336
  Semipalmated Plover, 323
  Semipalmated Sandpiper, 325
  Sharp-shinned Hawk, 318
  Sharp-tailed Grouse, 321
  Sharp-tailed Sparrow, 351
  Short-billed Dowitcher, 325
  Short-billed Marsh Wren, 338
  Short-eared Owl, 330
  shrikes, 341
  Shoveller, 315
  Slate-colored Junco, 352
  Smith Longspur, 353
  Snow Bunting, 354
  Snow Goose, 314
  Snowy Egret, 311
  Snowy Owl, 330
  Snowy Plover, 323
  Solitary Sandpiper, 324
  Solitary Vireo, 341
  Song Sparrow, 353
  Sora, 322
  Sparrow Hawk, 320
  sparrows, 348-354
  Spotted Sandpiper, 324
  Sprague Pipit, 340
  Starling, 341
  Steller Jay, 336
  Stilt Sandpiper, 325
  Summer Tanager, 348
  Surf Scoter, 317
  Swainson Hawk, 319
  swallows, 335-336
  Swallow-tailed Kite, 318
  Swamp Sparrow, 353
  swans, 313
  swift, 331
  Sycamore Warbler, 344

  tanagers, 348
  Tennessee Warbler, 342
  terns, 328
  thrashers, 338
  thrushes, 339-340
  towhees, 350
  Townsend Solitaire, 340
  Townsend Warbler, 344
  Tree Sparrow, 352
  Tree Swallow, 335
  Trumpeter Swan, 313
  Tufted Titmouse, 337
  Turkey, 321
  Turkey Vulture, 317

  Upland Plover, 324

  Varied Thrush, 339
  Veery, 339
  Vesper Sparrow, 351
  Violet-green Swallow, 335
  vireos, 341-342
  Virginia Rail, 322
  Virginia Warbler, 343
  vultures, 317-318

  warblers, 342-346
  Warbling Vireo, 342
  Water Pipit, 340
  Water-turkey, 311
  waxwings, 340
  Western Flycatcher, 334
  Western Grebe, 310
  Western Kingbird, 333
  Western Meadowlark, 347
  Western Sandpiper, 326
  Western Tanager, 348
  Western Wood Pewee, 335
  Whip-poor-will, 331
  Whistling Swan, 313
  White-breasted Nuthatch, 337
  White-crowned Sparrow, 353
  White-eyed Vireo, 341
  White-faced Glossy Ibis, 313
  White-fronted Goose, 314
  White-necked Raven, 336
  White Pelican, 311
  White-rumped Sandpiper, 325
  White-throated Sparrow, 353
  White-winged Crossbill, 350
  White-winged Junco, 352
  White-winged Scoter, 317
  Whooping Crane, 321
  Willet, 324
  Williamson Sapsucker, 333
  Wilson Phalarope, 326
  Wilson Snipe, 324
  Wilson Warbler, 346
  Winter Wren, 337
  Wood Duck, 315
  Wood Ibis, 312
  woodpeckers, 331-333
  Wood Thrush, 339
  Worm-eating Warbler, 342
  wrens, 337-338
  Wright Flycatcher, 334

  Yellow-bellied Flycatcher, 334
  Yellow-bellied Sapsucker, 332
  Yellow-billed Cuckoo, 329
  Yellow-breasted Chat, 346
  Yellow-crowned Night Heron, 312
  Yellow-headed Blackbird, 347
  Yellow Rail, 322
  Yellow-shafted Flicker, 331
  Yellow-throat, 345
  Yellow-throated Vireo, 341
  Yellow Warbler, 343




    [Illustration: FIG. 1. Map of Kansas showing names of counties.]




                  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS,
                      MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY


Institutional libraries interested in publications exchange may obtain
this series by addressing the Exchange Librarian, University of Kansas
Library, Lawrence, Kansas. Copies for individuals, persons working in a
particular field of study, may be obtained by addressing instead the
Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. There
is no provision for sale of this series by the University Library which
meets institutional requests, or by the Museum of Natural History which
meets the requests of individuals. However, when individuals request
copies from the Museum, 25 cents should be included, for each separate
number that is 100 pages or more in length, for the purpose of defraying
the costs of wrapping and mailing.

  * An asterisk designates those numbers of which the Museum's supply
  (not the Library's supply) is exhausted. Numbers published to date,
  in this series, are as follows:

  Vol. 1. Nos. 1-26 and index. Pp. 1-638, 1946-1950.

          Index. Pp. 605-638.

 *Vol. 2. (Complete) Mammals of Washington. By Walter W. Dalquest.
          Pp. 1-444, 140 figures in text. April 9, 1948.

  Vol. 3. *1. The avifauna of Micronesia, its origin, evolution, and
              distribution. By Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 1-359, 16 figures
              in text. June 12, 1951.

          *2. A quantitative study of the nocturnal migration of birds.
              By George H. Lowery, Jr. Pp. 361-472, 47 figures in text.
              June 29, 1951.

           3. Phylogeny of the waxwings and allied birds. By M. Dale
              Arvey. Pp. 473-530, 49 figures in text, 13 tables.
              October 10, 1951.

           4. Birds from the state of Veracruz, Mexico. By George H.
              Lowery, Jr., and Walter W. Dalquest. Pp. 531-649,
              7 figures in text, 2 tables. October 10, 1951.

          Index. Pp. 651-681.

 *Vol. 4. (Complete) American weasels. By E. Raymond Hall. Pp. 1-466,
          41 plates, 31 figures in text. December 27, 1951.

  Vol. 5.  1. Preliminary survey of a Paleocene faunule from the Angels
              Peak area, New Mexico. By Robert W. Wilson. Pp. 1-11,
              1 figure in text. February 24, 1951.

           2. Two new moles (Genus Scalopus) from Mexico and Texas.
              By Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 17-24. February 28, 1951.

           3. Two new pocket gophers from Wyoming and Colorado.
              By E. Raymond Hall and H. Gordon Montague. Pp. 25-32.
              February 28, 1951.

           4. Mammals obtained by Dr. Curt von Wedel from the barrier
              beach of Tamaulipas, Mexico. By E. Raymond Hall.
              Pp. 33-47, 1 figure in text. October 1, 1951.

           5. Comments on the taxonomy and geographic distribution of
              some North American rabbits. By E. Raymond Hall and Keith
              R. Kelson. Pp. 49-58. October 1, 1951.

           6. Two new subspecies of Thomomys bottae from New Mexico and
              Colorado. By Keith R. Kelson. Pp. 59-71, 1 figure in text.
              October 1, 1951.

           7. A new subspecies of Microtus montanus from Montana and
              comments on Microtus canicaudus Miller. By E. Raymond Hall
              and Keith R. Kelson. Pp. 73-79. October 1, 1951.

           8. A new pocket gopher (Genus Thomomys) from eastern
              Colorado. By E. Raymond Hall. Pp. 81-85. October 1, 1951.

           9. Mammals taken along the Alaskan Highway. By Rollin H.
              Baker. Pp. 87-117, 1 figure in text. November 28, 1951.

         *10. A synopsis of the North American Lagomorpha. By E. Raymond
              Hall. Pp. 119-202. 68 figures in text. December 15, 1951.

          11. A new pocket mouse (Genus Perognathus) from Kansas. By E.
              Lendell Cockrum. Pp. 203-206. December 15, 1951.

          12. Mammals from Tamaulipas, Mexico. By Rollin H. Baker.
              Pp. 207-218. December 15, 1951.

          13. A new pocket gopher (Genus Thomomys) from Wyoming and
              Colorado. By E. Raymond Hall. Pp. 219-222. December 15,
              1951.

          14. A new name for the Mexican red bat. By E. Raymond Hall.
              Pp. 223-226. December 15, 1951.

          15. Taxonomic notes on Mexican bats of the Genus Rhogeëssa.
              By E. Raymond Hall. Pp. 227-232. April 10, 1952.

          16. Comments on the taxonomy and geographic distribution of
              some North American woodrats (Genus Neotoma). By Keith R.
              Kelson. Pp. 233-242. April 10, 1952.

          17. The subspecies of the Mexican red-bellied squirrel,
              Sciurus aureogaster. By Keith R. Kelson. Pp. 243-250,
              1 figure in text. April 10, 1952.

          18. Geographic range of Peromyscus melanophrys, with
              description of new subspecies. By Rollin H. Baker.
              Pp. 251-258, 1 figure in text. May 10, 1952.

          19. A new chipmunk (Genus Eutamias) from the Black Hills.
              By John A. White. Pp. 259-262. April 10, 1952.

          20. A new piñon mouse (Peromyscus truei) from Durango, Mexico.
              By Robert B. Finley, Jr. Pp. 263-267. May 23, 1952.

          21. An annotated checklist of Nebraskan bats. By Olin L. Webb
              and J. Knox Jones, Jr. Pp. 269-279. May 31, 1952.

          22. Geographic variation in red-backed mice (Genus
              Clethrionomys) of the southern Rocky Mountain region.
              By E. Lendell Cockrum and Kenneth L. Fitch.
              Pp. 281-292, 1 figure in text. November 15, 1952.

          23. Comments on the taxonomy and geographic distribution of
              North American microtines. By E. Raymond Hall and E.
              Lendell Cockrum. Pp. 293-312. November 17, 1952.

          24. The subspecific status of two Central American sloths.
              By E. Raymond Hall and Keith R. Kelson. Pp. 313-317.
              November 21, 1952.

          25. Comments on the taxonomy and geographic distribution of
              some North American marsupials, insectivores, and
              carnivores. By E. Raymond Hall and Keith R. Kelson.
              Pp. 319-341. December 5, 1952.

          26. Comments on the taxonomy and geographic distribution of
              some North American rodents. By E. Raymond Hall and Keith
              R. Kelson. Pp. 343-371. December 15, 1952.

          27. A synopsis of the North American microtine rodents. By E.
              Raymond Hall and E. Lendell Cockrum. Pp. 373-498,
              149 figures in text. January 15, 1953.

          28. The pocket gophers (Genus Thomomys) of Coahuila, Mexico.
              By Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 499-514, 1 figure in text.
              June 1, 1953.

          29. Geographic distribution of the pocket mouse, Perognathus
              fasciatus. By J. Knox Jones, Jr. Pp. 515-526, 7 figures
              in text. August 1, 1953.

          30. A new subspecies of wood rat (Neotoma mexicana) from
              Colorado. By Robert B. Finley, Jr. Pp. 527-534,
              2 figures in text. August 15, 1953.

          31. Four new pocket gophers of the genus Cratogeomys from
              Jalisco, Mexico. By Robert J. Russell. Pp. 535-542.
              October 15, 1953.

          32. Genera and subgenera of chipmunks. By John A. White.
              Pp. 543-561, 12 figures in text. December 1, 1953.

          33. Taxonomy of the chipmunks, Eutamias quadrivittatus and
              Eutamias umbrinus. By John A. White. Pp. 563-582,
              6 figures in text. December 1, 1953.

          34. Geographic distribution and taxonomy of the chipmunks of
              Wyoming. By John A. White. Pp. 584-610, 3 figures in text.
              December 1, 1953.

          35. The baculum of the chipmunks of western North America. By
              John A. White. Pp. 611-631, 19 figures in text.
              December 1, 1953.

          36. Pleistocene Soricidae from San Josecito Cave, Nuevo Leon,
              Mexico. By James S. Findley. Pp. 633-639. December 1,
              1953.

          37. Seventeen species of bats recorded from Barro Colorado
              Island, Panama Canal Zone. By E. Raymond Hall and William
              B. Jackson. Pp. 641-646. December 1, 1953.

          Index. Pp. 647-676.

 *Vol. 6. (Complete) Mammals of Utah, _taxonomy and distribution_.
          By Stephen D. Durrant. Pp. 1-549, 91 figures in text,
          30 tables. August 10, 1952.

  Vol. 7. *1. Mammals of Kansas. By E. Lendell Cockrum. Pp. 1-303,
              73 figures in text, 37 tables. August 25, 1952.

           2. Ecology of the opossum on a natural area in northeastern
              Kansas. By Henry S. Fitch and Lewis L. Sandidge.
              Pp. 305-338, 5 figures in text. August 24, 1953.

           3. The silky pocket mice (Perognathus flavus) of Mexico.
              By Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 339-347, 1 figure in text.
              February 15, 1954.

           4. North American jumping mice (Genus Zapus). By Philip H.
              Krutzsch. Pp. 349-472, 47 figures in text, 4 tables.
              April 21, 1954.

           5. Mammals from Southeastern Alaska. By Rollin H. Baker
              and James S. Findley. Pp. 473-477. April 21, 1954.

           6. Distribution of some Nebraskan Mammals. By J. Knox
              Jones, Jr. Pp. 479-487. April 21, 1954.

           7. Subspeciation in the montane meadow mouse, Microtus
              montanus, in Wyoming and Colorado. By Sydney Anderson.
              Pp. 489-506, 2 figures in text. July 23, 1954.

           8. A new subspecies of bat (Myotis velifer) from southeastern
              California and Arizona. By Terry A. Vaughn. Pp. 507-512.
              July 23, 1954.

           9. Mammals of the San Gabriel mountains of California.
              By Terry A. Vaughn. Pp. 513-582, 1 figure in text,
              12 tables. November 15, 1954.

          10. A new bat (Genus Pipistrellus) from northeastern Mexico.
              By Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 583-586. November 15, 1954.

          11. A new subspecies of pocket mouse from Kansas.
              By E. Raymond Hall. Pp. 587-590. November 15, 1954.

          12. Geographic variation in the pocket gopher, Cratogeomys
              castanops, in Coahuila, Mexico. By Robert J. Russell and
              Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 591-608. March 15, 1955.

          13. A new cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus) from northeastern
              Mexico. By Rollin H. Baker. Pp. 609-612. April 8, 1955.

          14. Taxonomy and distribution of some American shrews.
              By James S. Findley. Pp. 613-618. June 10, 1955.

          15. Distribution and systematic position of the pigmy woodrat,
              Neotoma goldmani. By Dennis G. Rainey and Rollin H. Baker.
              Pp. 619-624, 2 figs. in text. June 10, 1955.

          Index. Pp. 625-651.

  Vol. 8.  1. Life history and ecology of the five-lined skink, Eumeces
              fasciatus. By Henry S. Fitch. Pp. 1-156, 2 pls., 26 figs.
              in text, 17 tables. September 1, 1954.

           2. Myology and serology of the Avian Family Fringillidae, a
              taxonomic study. By William B. Stallcup. Pp. 157-211,
              23 figures in text, 4 tables. November 15, 1954.

           3. An ecological study of the collared lizard (Crotaphytus
              collaris). By Henry S. Fitch. Pp. 213-274, 10 figures in
              text. February 10, 1956.

           4. A field study of the Kansas ant-eating frog, Gastrophryne
              olivacea. By Henry S. Fitch. Pp. 275-306, 9 figures in
              text. February 10, 1956.

           5. Check-list of the birds of Kansas. By Harrison B. Tordoff.
              Pp. 307-359, 1 figure in text. March 10, 1956.

          More numbers will appear in volume 8.

  Vol. 9.  1. Speciation of the wandering shrew. By James S. Findley.
              Pp. 1-68, 18 figures in text. December 10, 1955.

           2. Additional records and extensions of ranges of mammals
              from Utah. By Stephen D. Durrant, M. Raymond Lee, and
              Richard M. Hansen. Pp. 69-80. December 10, 1955.

           3. A new long-eared myotis (Myotis evotis) from northeastern
              Mexico. By Rollin H. Baker and Howard J. Stains.
              Pp. 81-84. December 10, 1955.

          More numbers will appear in volume 9.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Check-list of the Birds of Kansas, by 
Harrison B Tordoff

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHECK-LIST OF THE BIRDS OF KANSAS ***

***** This file should be named 34429-8.txt or 34429-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/4/2/34429/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
