The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Subspecies of the Mountain Chickadee, by 
Joseph Grinnell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Subspecies of the Mountain Chickadee
       Vol. 17, No. 17, pp. 505-515

Author: Joseph Grinnell

Release Date: August 25, 2010 [EBook #33531]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUBSPECIES OF THE ***




Produced by Tom Cosmas, Larry B. Harrison and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS

IN

ZOOLOGY

Vol. 17, No. 17, pp. 505-515, 3 figures in text


May 4, 1918


THE SUBSPECIES OF THE

MOUNTAIN CHICKADEE

BY

JOSEPH GRINNELL

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS
BERKELEY




UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS

IN

ZOOLOGY

Vol. 17, No. 17, pp. 505-515, 3 figures in text


May 4, 1918





THE SUBSPECIES OF THE MOUNTAIN CHICKADEE


BY


JOSEPH GRINNELL


(Contribution From the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology of the University of
California)


Fieldwork was carried on by the California Museum of Vertebrate Zoology
during 1917 in the Inyo region of eastern California. In going over the
collection of birds obtained, the attention of the writer was arrested
by certain peculiarities evident in the Mountain Chickadees. Comparison
with series from the Sierras showed the Inyo birds to be paler colored
and longer tailed; and in order to appraise these differences in
taxonomic terms it became necessary to assemble material representative
of the entire range of the species, in so far as possible. The results
of the study thus undertaken are presented herewith.

The material involved in the inquiry has amounted to 464 skins of the
Mountain Chickadee, derived from the following sources other than the
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology: United States National Museum, through Dr.
Charles W. Richmond; United States Biological Survey, through Mr. Edward
W. Nelson; and the private collections of Messrs. Edward R. Warren,
Joseph and John W. Mailliard, G. Frean Morcom, Harry S. Swarth, and J.
Grinnell.

As of general interest, and in the nature of an introduction to the
systematic analysis to follow, it may be stated that _Penthestes
gambeli_ including its subspecies is throughout its range non-migratory,
save as a few individuals in pairs or small companies occasionally
descend in fall or early winter to lower levels closely adjacent to
their mountain habitats. The range of the species roughly extends from
and includes the Rocky Mountains to or nearly to the Pacific Coast, and
from Alberta and British Columbia south nearly to the Mexican
line--somewhat south of it in northern Lower California. Within this
general area the Mountain Chickadee is by no means uniformly
distributed. [Page 506] Especially towards the south is its range very
"spotty," the representations on detached mountain tops being wholly
isolated. Two main areas of relatively continuous distribution are,
however, perceivable--the Rocky Mountain area, and the Sierra Nevada
area.


    [Illustration: Fig. 1. Map showing distribution of the races of
         the Mountain Chickadee in California.]


Close scrutiny of the series of specimens at hand well representing the
entire Rocky Mountain area reveals no variation in phylogenetic
characters from the northernmost to the southernmost stations. All show
in apparently equal degree the long tail and cinnamon tinge of sides and
back, these features together constituting the grounds for separate
subspecific recognition of a Rocky Mountain form. On the other hand, the
Sierra Nevadan center, with its own recognizable race, [Page 507] of
relatively short tail, proves to have two outlying divergent forms.
These three forms are alike in their lack of any cinnamon tinge, this
being replaced in two of them by a buffy tinge and in one form by leaden
gray. The tail in one of the outlying forms is long, in the other short.
The habitats concerned are, respectively, the desert mountains of the
Inyo region of eastern California, and the coastal mountains of southern
California. This differentiation within the Pacific district,
particularly within the state of California, will be better understood
in its geographic bearing by reference to the accompanying map (fig. 1).

The behavior of the tail of _Penthestes gambeli_--long in the Rocky
Mountain district, short in the Pacific district (see figs. 2, 3)--is
paralleled in the _Penthestes atricapillus_ group of chickadees across
the North American continent in about the latitude of the state of
Washington. In the northern Rocky Mountains occurs the race _P. a.
septentrionalis_, with long tail; in the Pacific Coast strip of
Washington and Oregon occurs the race _P. a. occidentalis_, with, among
other characters, relatively short tail. Other parallels are to be found
in the genera _Psaltriparus_, _Thryomanes_ and _Pipilo_.

    [Illustration: Fig. 2. Tail of _Penthestes gambeli gambeli_
        (no. 27784, Mus. Vert. Zool.; [Male], full-grown juv.;
        Sierra Ancha, Gila Co., Arizona; June 26, 1917).  × 1.00.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 3. Tail of _Penthestes gambeli abbreviatus_
        (no. 24059, Mus. Vert. Zool.; [Male], full-grown juv.; Yolla
        Bolly Mt., Tehama Co., California; August 5, 1913). × 1.00.]

It is improbable that the fact of subspecific differentiation in
_Penthestes gambeli_ has been altogether overlooked previous to the
present time. A premonition of the geographic variation now formally
pointed out is to be found in the early writings of Baird (1858, p.
394), who remarked that "a specimen, apparently of this species [_Parus
montanus_], from Medicine Bow creek [Wyoming], (5643,) though marked
female, is larger than those from California, as shown by the
measurements." Also, some of the differences in proportions in the
subspecies now recognized are shown in the table of measurements given
by Ridgway (1904, p. 409).

For a detailed description of the Mountain Chickadee as a _species_,
the reader is referred to Ridgway (1904, p. 408).




=Penthestes gambeli gambeli= (Ridgway)

Rocky Mountain Chickadee


    _Parus montanus_ Gambel (1843, p. 259); and of authors, part.
        This name preoccupied (see Ridgway, 1904, p. 409).

    _Parus gambeli_ Ridgway _in_ American Ornithologists' Union
        Committee (1886, p. 335); and of authors, part. Substitute
        name.

    _Parus gambeli thayeri_ Birtwell (1901, p. 166). Based on
        adventitiously colored specimen from Albuquerque, New Mexico.
        Type in United States National Museum.

    _Penthestes gambeli_, of authors, part.



_Type locality._--Santa Fé, New Mexico.

_Diagnosis._--Among the four subspecies of _Penthestes gambeli_ here
recognized, color alone is sufficient for distinguishing _P. gambeli
gambeli_. The flanks, sides of body and back in this form are pervaded
with a distinct tinge of cinnamon--more exactly, the "pinkish buff" of
Ridgway (1912, pl. 29). In addition, this race shows the greatest length
of tail, and slenderest bill.

_Measurements._--Average of 14 males: Wing, 70.5 mm.; tail, 70.2;
exposed culmen, 8.6; depth of bill at base, 3.8. For extremes, see
accompanying table.

_Note._--In this paper the length of wing is the usual chord of the
folded wing as dried at the side of the body in the conventional study
skin. The tail length, however, is measured from the _base_ of the
uropygium to the tip of the longest pair of rectrices. It is found that
in preparing specimens there is a practically uniform place for cutting
off from the body the uropygium with attached feathers, and this is
exactly where the tail bends back at an angle to the body in the fresh
bird. The lateral rectrices are rooted evenly with the base of the dried
uropygium so that the measurement of tail length thus taken becomes the
distance from the extreme proximal ends of the most lateral pair of
rectrices to the tips of the central pair--somewhat greater than the
length of tail as given by Ridgway (1901, p. xv), the latter being the
measurement from the base of the central pair of tail feathers to the
tips of same. My reason for adopting this different procedure here is
that more accuracy seems possible thereby, at least in the kind of
material here dealt with. There is less mussing of the specimen also.

Neither depth of bill nor culmen is a practical index to degree of
slenderness of bill. No ordinary method of measurement will suffice to
indicate the facts as they are perceived by the eye.

As will be seen by the dates in the tables, as a rule only unworn
specimens have been selected for measurement.

_Range._--The Rocky Mountain region of North. America, from
eastern British Columbia and western Alberta south to western Texas,
New Mexico and Arizona. _Specimens examined_, 72, from the following
localities:

Alberta: Smoky Valley, 50 miles north of Jasper House, 1; Henry House, 1;
15 miles west of Henry House, 1.

British Columbia: South fork of Moose River, 1.

Montana: Gallatin County: Jefferson River, 1; Madison River, 2;
Hillsdale, 2; Mystic Lake, 1; Dry Creek, 1.

Idaho: Sawtooth Lake, 1.

Wyoming: Mammoth Hot Springs, 3; Jackey's Creek, 4 miles southwest of
Dubois, 1; Teton Pass, 7200 ft., 2; Salt River Mts., head of Dry Creek,
9200 ft., 1; Medicine Bow Mts., 10 200[**10,200-see Twining NM below]
ft., 1; Medicine Bow Creek, 1.

Utah: Filmore, 1.

Colorado: Loveland, 1; Middle Park, 1; Sangre de Christo Pass, 1; Fort
Garland, 1; Platte Canyon, 1; Pueblo, 2; Estes Park, 1; Boulder, 2; Gold
Hill, 1; Golden, 7300 ft., 1; Colorado Springs, 5; Querida, Custer
County, 1; Salida, Chaffee County, 1; Crested Butte, Gunnison County, 1;
Stamford, 1.

Texas: Guadalupe Mts., 6800 ft., 1; Davis Mts., 1.

New Mexico: Fort Massachusetts, 1; Fort Wingate, 1; Albuquerque, 1; Taos
Mts., 8800 ft., 1; Manzano Mts., 4; Magdalena Mts., 7000 ft., 1;
Cienequilla, 1; Mt. Capitan, 1; Pecos Baldy, 1; Bear Spring Mts., 1;
Shiprock, 1; Corona, 1; Twining, 12,500 ft., 1; Fulton, 1; San Mateo
Mts., 9500 ft., 1.

Arizona: Fort Whipple, 1; Mt. Graham, 1; San Francisco Mt., 2; Bright
Angel Spring, Kaibab Plateau, 1; Canyon Spring, 1; Santa Catalina Mts.,
2; Sierra Ancha, 6500 ft., 1.




=Penthestes gambeli inyoensis=, new subspecies

Inyo Mountain Chickadee


     _Parus gambeli_, of authors, part.

     _Penthestes gambeli_, of authors, part.

     _Penthestes gambeli baileyae_, American Ornithologists' Union
         Committee (1910, p. 351), part (?).


_Type locality._--Panamint Mountains (northern part), 3 miles east of
Jackass Spring, 6200 feet altitude, Inyo County, California. _Type_,
male adult, no. 28782, Mus. Vert. Zool.; October 7, 1917; collected by
J. Grinnell, orig. no. 4588.

_Diagnosis._--The palest colored race of the four; sides, flanks and
back, in unworn plumage, pervaded with pale buff--the "cartridge buff"
of Ridgway (1912, pl. 30). Wear or fading, or both, removes most of this
buff tone, so that the resulting effect, in spring and summer birds, is
of an ashy tone of coloration, distinctly lighter than in any of the
other three subspecies, in same stage. It seems probable that there is a
paler tone to the underlying plumage parts and that this becomes
revealed by loss of the superficial pigment-bearing portions through the
gradual progress of feather abrasion. _Inyoensis_ shows nearly as long a
tail as does _gambeli_. Its bill is somewhat smaller.

_Measurements._--Average of 10 males: "Wing, 71.1 mm.; tail, 69.3;
exposed culmen, 8.1; depth of bill at base, 3.7. For extremes, see
accompanying table.

_Range._--The higher mountains of eastern California lying east and
southeast of Owens Valley, from the vicinity of the Mono Craters and the
White Mountains, in Mono County, south to the Panamint Mountains, in
Inyo County. _Specimens examined_, 50, from the following localities,
all in California:

Mono County: Mono Mills, 1; near Benton, 2; near Big Prospector Meadow,
10,000-10,500 ft., White Mts., 15; Cottonwood Creek, 9200 ft., White
Mts., 1. Inyo County: Silver Canyon, 7000-8000 ft., White Mts., 8;
Roberts Ranch, 8300 ft., White Mts., 1; head of Black Canyon, 8000 ft.,
White Mts., 2; Independence, 3900 ft., 1 (vagrant); Mazourka Canyon,
8000-10,000 ft., Inyo Mts., 3; near Jackass Spring, 6000-6200 ft.,
Panamint Mts., 14; Hanaupah Canyon, 7500-9000 ft., Panamint Mts., 2.




=Penthestes gambeli abbreviatus=, new subspecies

Short-tailed Mountain Chickadee


     _Parus montanus_, of authors, part.

     _Parus gambeli_, of authors, part.

     _Penthestes gambeli_, of authors, part.


_Type locality._--Horse Creek, Siskiyou Mountains (near Seiad Valley P.
O.), Siskiyou County, California. _Type_, male, no. 119 (orig. no., in
coll. J. Grinnell); December 12, 1901; collected by Malcolm P. Anderson.

_Diagnosis._--Tone of color on sides, flanks and back the same as in
_inyoensis_, though not quite so pale, namely, in fresh plumage,
cartridge buff. Tail (see figs. 2, 3) much shorter than in either
_gambeli_ or _inyoensis_; and bill averaging smaller than in any of the
other three races.

_Measurements._--Average of 14 males: Wing, 69.7 mm.; tail, 65.0;
exposed culmen, 7.9; depth of bill at base, 3.8. For extremes, see
accompanying table.

_Range._--The higher mountains of central and northern California,
southern Oregon (probably this subspecies), and northwestern[** sic]
Nevada. Occurs west in northern California through the Siskiyou and
Salmon mountains and to South Yolla Bolly Mountain and Mount Sanhedrin;
and south in the Sierra Nevada to the vicinity of Mount Whitney.
_Specimens examined_, 182, from the following localities:

California: Modoc County: Sugar Hill, 4; Warner Mts., 27. Siskiyou
County: Mt. Shasta, 3; Jackson Lake, 5900 ft., 5; South Fork Salmon
River, 5000 ft., 1; head of Rush Creek, 6400 ft., 2; Kangaroo Creek, 3;
Castle Lake, 5400 ft., 1; Horse Creek, Siskiyou Mts., 11; Beswick, 1.
Trinity County: head of Bear Creek, 6400 ft., 4; head of Grizzly Creek,
6000 ft., 6. Tehama County: near South Yolla Bolly Mt., 4. Mendocino
County: near Castle Peak, 1; near Sanhedrin Mt., 4. Lassen County: Eagle
Lake, 6. Plumas County: Meadow Valley, 1. Nevada County: Independence
Lake, 3. Placer County: Summit, 1; Cisco, 6000 ft., 18; Blue Canyon,
4700-5000 ft., 12; Dutch Flat, 1. Eldorado County: Tahoe Valley, 2;
Kyburz Station, 1. Mariposa County: vicinity of Yosemite Valley, 13.
Mono County: Warren Fork of Leevining Creek, 9200 ft., 1; Williams
Butte, 7500 ft., 1. Fresno County: Bullfrog Lake, 10,600 ft., 6. Inyo
County (not typical): near Kearsarge Pass at 8500 ft., 1; Little Onion
Valley, 7500 ft., near Kearsarge Pass, 1; Cottonwood Lakes, 11,000 ft.,
7. Tulare County (not typical): Whitney Creek, 11,000 ft., 3; Whitney
Meadows, 9800 ft., 14; Olancha Peak, 10,000 ft., 1.

Nevada: Pine Forest Mts., Humboldt County, 13.




=Penthestes gambeli baileyae= (Grinnell)

Bailey Mountain Chickadee


     _Parus montanus_, of authors, part.

     _Parus gambeli_, of authors, part.

     _Parus gambeli baileyae_ Grinnell (1908, p. 29).

     _Penthestes gambeli baileyae_, American Ornithologists'
         Union Committee (1910, p. 351), part (?); and of authors.


_Type locality._--Mount Wilson, 5500 feet altitude, San Gabriel
Mountains, Los Angeles County, California. Type in coll. J. Grinnell.

_Diagnosis._--Tone of coloration on sides, flanks and back distinctly
plumbeous--more exactly, on sides and flanks the "smoke gray" of Ridgway
(1912, pl. 46), and on back near the "mouse gray" of the same authority
(pl. 51). The tail in this race is short as in _abbrevialus_, but the
bill is long and heavy, averaging thicker through than in any of the
other three races.

_Measurements._--Average of 14 males: Wing, 70.0 mm.; tail, 65.4;
exposed culmen, 8.5; depth of bill at base, 4.1. For extremes, see
accompanying table.

_Range._--Higher mountains of southern California, from the extreme
southern Sierra Nevada in Tulare County, and the Santa Lucia Mountains
in Monterey County, south to the Cuyamaca Mountains, San Diego County;
also (probably this subspecies) in the San Pedro Martir Mountains, in
northern Lower California. _Specimens examined_, 160, from the following
localities, all in California:

Monterey County: Headwaters of Big Creek, 2. Ventura County: Mt. Pinos,
2. Kern County: Kiavah Mt., 7000 ft., near Walker Pass, 2. Tulare County
(not typical): Taylor Meadow, 7000 ft., 8; Cannell Meadow, 7500 ft., 1;
Pine Flat, 7500 ft., 1; Long Meadow, 7700 ft., 1; Sirretta Meadows, 9000
ft., 3; Trout Creek, 6000 ft., 10; near Trout Creek, 7500 ft., 2;
Jackass Meadow, 7750 ft., 3; Troy Meadows, 8000 ft., 1. Los Angeles
County: Mt. Wilson, 25; Buckhorn Canyon, near Mt. Waterman, 2; near
Pasadena, 9 (vagrants); Verdugo, 1 (vagrant). San Bernardino County:
near Cucamonga, 1; San Bernardino Mts., 35; Victorville, 3 (vagrants).
Riverside County: San Jacinto Mts., 29; Thomas Mt., 1; Santa Rosa Mts.,
10. Orange County: Santa Ana Mts., 3000 ft., 1 (vagrant?). San Diego
County: Julian, 1; Cuyamaca Mts., 6.

_General remarks._--In making use of the intrinsic color characters,
which are important here in distinguishing subspecies, it is, of course,
essential that the effects of extraneous factors be taken into account.
Prolonged wear and fading evidently serve to weaken the intensity of the
color tones, more especially the buffy ones. Then, too, chickadees seem
peculiarly susceptible to discoloration by smoke, soot and charred wood;
for example, our series from Cisco and Blue Cañon, stations along the
Central Pacific Railway over the Sierra Nevada, even though taken in
September and October almost immediately after completion of the fall
molt, are obviously more or less begrimed with soot. On the other hand,
the autumn- and winter-taken series from the Yosemite region and from
the Siskiyou Mountains are clean, and show their intrinsic color tones
to good advantage.

Intergradation undoubtedly connects the four races of the Mountain
Chickadee into a continuous series of forms. Abundant material at hand
from that portion of the Sierra Nevada immediately south of Mount
Whitney shows complete transition from _Penthestes gambeli baileyae_ to
_P. g. abbreviatus_; in fact, many of the specimens can only be placed
arbitrarily in one category or the other. Several examples from the
vicinity of Mono Lake, in Mono County, California, and from along the
west flank of the Sierras in Inyo County, insensibly bridge the interval
between _P. g. abbreviatus_ and _P. g. inyoensis_, especially when
considered in connection with the individual variation to which each
race is subject in about normal degree.

Material at hand from different parts of the Great Basin is
unsatisfactory either in that it is scanty or because of the worn state
of the plumage. A summer-taken series of 13 Mountain Chickadees (nos.
8952-8964, Mus. Vert. Zool.) from the Pine Forest Mountains, Humboldt
County, Nevada, shows in color no approach to _P. gambeli gambeli_. In
this respect it is like _P. g. inyoensis_, but the tail averages nearly
as short as in _P. g. abbreviatus_. Taking all features into account it
seems best placed under _abbreviatus_. Fresh-plumaged fall specimens
from this locality would make determination more certain.

A specimen ([Male], no. 547, Mus. Vert. Zool.) from Anthony, Baker
County, Oregon, taken October 16, 1907, might be referred to _P. g.
abbreviatus_; but the tone of color of back and sides is much darker
than usual in that form. It is certainly much darker than in _P. g.
inyoensis_. Its tail is but 65.3 mm. long. A skin ([Female], no. 18,
Morcom coll.) from Camp Harney, Harney County, Oregon, February 17,
1875, has a tail length of 67.7 mm., and in depth of color is about
intermediate between _abbreviatus_ and _P. g. gambeli_. A specimen
([Female], no. 136639, U. S. Nat. Mus., Biol. Surv. coll.) from Fort
Spokane, Lincoln County, Washington, September 28, 1890, is almost
identical with _gambeli_ in coloration; but it, too, has a short tail,
only 64.4 mm. long, though there is chance of error here, as several of
the rectrices are missing. The writer prefers to leave these last three
examples for the time being unplaced.

It is clear that intergradation between _Penthestes gambeli gambeli_
and any one of the other three subspecies is less well established than
between any two of these other three. But sufficiency of material from
the proper localities through eastern Oregon and eastern Washington
would likely prove its existence as is the case between the California
forms.


MEASUREMENTS (IN MILLIMETERS) OF SELECTED SPECIMENS REPRESENTING THE
FOUR RACES OF _Penthestes gambeli_

 Key to Table Columns:
  (A) Wing
  (B) Tail
  (C) Exposed culmen
  (D) Depth of bill


_Penthestes gambeli gambeli_

 U.S.N.M.   Sex     Date        Locality           [A]   [B]  [C]  [D]
  no.
 160697    [Male] Nov. 24,  Boulder, Colo.
                    1892                           71.7 71.2  8.8  4.0
 109948    [Male] Oct. 8,   Pueblo, Colo.
                    1886                           72.0 72.4  8.4  3.9
 109949    [Male] Oct. 5,   Pueblo, Colo.
                    1886                           70.9 70.3  8.5  4.0
 176650    [Male] Sept. 23, Madison E.,
                    1888     Gallatin Co., Mont.   68.0 67.8  8.9  4.1
 124151    [Male] Sept. 15, Jefferson E.,
                    1888     Gallatin Co., Mont.   69.7 67.7 10.0  3.6
 188823    [Male] Oct. 15,  Mammoth Hot Springs,
                    1902     Wyo.                  68.1 67.0  9.0  3.6
  62546    [Male] Nov. 17,  Filmore,
                     1872    Utah                  69.8 68.3  8.3  3.5
 136638[1] [Male] Sept. 27, Sawtooth Lake,
                    1890     Idaho                 68.1 69.7  8.8  3.8
 228227[1] [Male] Sept. 14, Teton Pass,
                    1910     Wyo.                  71.2 70.4  8.3  3.6
 193086[1] [Male] Nov. 6,   Manzano Mts.,
                    1903     N. Mex.               71.4 70.6  7.8  4.0
 184653[1] [Male] Oct.  22, Corona,
                    1902     N. Mex.               69.0 71.0  9.0  4.1
 192942[1] [Male] Oct. 10,  Twining,
                    1903     N. Mex.               72.0 71.4  8.5  4.0
 136637[1] [Male] Sept. 18, San Francisco Mt.,
                    1889     Ariz.                 71.3 70.3  7.8  3.8
 205661[1] [Male] Sept. 10, Kaibab Plateau,
                    1909     Ariz.                 73.5 74.3  8.3  4.0

[Footnote 1: Biol. Surv. Coll.]


 Mus.             _Penthestes gambeli inyoensis_
 Vert.
 Zool.   Sex       Date        Locality           [A]   [B]   [C]  [D]
  no.
 28751  [Male]    July 24,  White Mts.,
                    1917     Mono Co., Calif.     73.0  72.4  7.9  3.7
 28760  [Male]    July 29,  White Mts.,
                    1917     Mono Co., Calif.     71.0  67.0  8.0  3.6
 28766  [Male]    July 31,  White Mts.,
                    1917     Mono Co., Calif.     72.4  67.5  8.8  3.5
 28767  [Male]    Aug. 18,  White Mts.,
                    1917     Inyo Co., Calif.     69.4  68.1  8.0  3.7
 28770  [Male]    Sept. 29, Panamint Mts.,
                    1917     Inyo Co., Calif.     68.8  69.8  8.1  3.7
 28771  [Male]    Oct.  2,  Panamint Mts.,
                    1917     Inyo Co., Calif.     71.4  70.2  7.4  4.0
 28773  [Male]    Oct.  2,  Panamint Mts.,
                    1917     Inyo Co., Calif.     72.7  71.0  8.4  3.8
 28774  [Male]    Oct.  2, Panamint Mts.,
                    1917    Inyo Co., Calif.      69.0  66.0  8.1  3.7
 28781  [Male]    Oct.  5, Panamint Mts.,
                    1917    Inyo Co., Calif.      71.0  70.0  8.3  3.7
 28782  [Male][2] Oct.  7, Panamint Mts.,
                    1917    Inyo Co., Calif.      72.0  71.5  8.4  3.5

[Footnote 2: Type.]


_Penthestes gambeli abbreviatus_

 No.     Sex       Date        Locality           [A]   [B]   [C]   [D]

 114[3] [Male]    Dec. 9,  Horse Cr.,
                    1901    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 68.4  63.8  7.3   3.9
 117[3] [Male]    Dec. 12, Horse Cr.,
                    1901    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 69.0  64.7  7.9   3.7
 119[3] [Male][4] Dec. 12, Horse Cr.,
                    1901    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 70.0  65.0  7.8   3.6
 129[3] [Male]    Dec. 14, Horse Cr.,
                    1901    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 68.4  63.0  8.0   3.6
 164[3] [Male]    Dec. 29, Horse Cr.,
                    1901    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 69.0  64.2  7.2   3.9
 178[3] [Male]    Jan. 4,  Horse Cr.,
                    1902    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 66.8  63.0  7.2   3.7
 244[3] [Male]    Feb. 16, Horse Cr.,
                    1902    Siskiyou Mts., Calif. 70.8  65.0  7.3   3.6
 23307  [Male]    Oct. 21, Blue Cañon,
                    1912    Placer Co., Calif.    71.8  69.5  8.2   3.9
 23302  [Male]    Oct. 19, Blue Cañon,
                    1912    Placer Co., Calif.    71.2  64.3  8.8   4.1
 23298  [Male]    Oct. 14, Blue Cañon,
                    1912    Placer Co., Calif.    71.6  65.7  7.8   3.5
 25263  [Male]    Dec. 26, Yosemite Park,
                    1914    Calif.                69.8  65.9  8.4   3.8
 25800  [Male]    June 11, Yosemite Park,
                    1915    Calif.                72.8  67.7  8.7   4.0
 26117  [Male]    Oct. 22, Yosemite Park,
                    1915    Calif.                69.0  65.0  8.8   4.0
 26342  [Male]    Nov. 27, Yosemite Park,
                    1915    Calif.                67.1  63.6  8.3   3.9

    [Footnote 3: Collector's original number, in Grinnell coll.;
        rest of numbers, Mus. Vert. Zool.]

    [Footnote 4: Type.]


  _Penthestes gambeli baileyae_

  No.      Sex       Date      Locality                 [A]  [B]  [C]  [D]

  182[5]  [Male]    Nov. 29,  Mt. Wilson,
                      1895     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  67.0 63.0 8.9  4.3
  725[5]  [Male]    Nov. 1,   Mt. Wilson,
                      1897     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  70.1 66.9 9.0  4.4
  963[5]  [Male]    Oct. 31,  Mt. Wilson,
                      1898     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  67.0 63.3 8.2  4.0
  636[6]  [Male]    Feb. 1,   Mt. Wilson,
                      1896     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  70.3 65.5 8.3  4.1
  637[6]  [Male]    Feb. 1,   Mt. Wilson,
                      1896     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  68.6 65.8 8.2  4.0
 1832[6]  [Male]    Dec. 12,  Mt. Wilson,
                      1896     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  72.3 65.7 7.7  4.0
 1834[6]  [Male]    Dec. 12,  Mt. Wilson,
                      1896     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  65.4 63.7 8.0  3.9
 1836[6]  [Male]    Dec. 12,  Mt. Wilson,
                     1896      Los Angeles Co., Calif.  67.7 63.0 ...  4.0
 5516[6]  [Male][9] Nov. 27,  Mt. Wilson,
                      1903     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  72.1 66.6 8.6  3.9
 6073[6]  [Male]    Sept. 21, Pasadena,
                      1904     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  69.7 66.0 9.0  4.3
 7458[6]  [Male]    Dec. 23,  Pasadena,
                       1905    Los Angeles Co., Calif.  70.0 66.7 7.8  3.6
 9958[7]  [Male]    Oct. 31,  Mt. Wilson,
                      1897     Los Angeles Co., Calif.  70.3 67.2 8.6  4.3
 3364[7]  [Male]    Sept. 18, Santa Ana Mts.,
                      1908     Orange Co., Calif.       70.8 66.0 9.5  4.0
 x3325[8] [Male]    July 4,   Hd. of Big Cr.,
                      1905     Monterey Co., Calif.     70.5 66.0 9.0  4.2


    [Footnote 5: Coll. H. S. Swarth.]

    [Footnote 6: Coll. J. Grinnell.]

    [Footnote 7: Mus. Vert. Zool.]

    [Footnote 8: Coll. J. & J. W. Mailliard.]

    [Footnote 9: Type.]



LITERATURE CITED



  AMERICAN ORNITHOLOGISTS' UNION COMMITTEE.
    1886. The code of nomenclature and check list of North American
          birds adopted by the American Ornithologists' Union.
          (New York, American Ornithologists' Union), viii + 392 pp.
    1910. Check-list of North American birds. Ed. 3, revised (New
          York, American Ornithologists' Union), 430 pp., 2 maps.

  BAIRD, S. F. ("with the co operation of" CASSIN, J., and
      LAWRENCE, G. N.)
    1858. Birds. Pacific Railroad Reports, 9, lvi + 1005 pp.

  BIRTWELL, F. J.
    1901. Description of a supposed new subspecies of _Parus_ from New
          Mexico. Auk, 18, pp. 165-167.

  GAMBEL, W.
    1843. Descriptions of some new and rare birds of the Rocky
          Mountains and California. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila., 1,
          pp. 258-262.

  GRINNELL, J.
    1908. The southern California chickadee. Condor, 10, pp. 29-30.

  RIDGWAY, R.
    1901. The birds of North and Middle America. U. S. Nation. Mus.
          Bull., 50, part I, xxx + 715 pp., 20 pls.
    1904. _Ibid._, part III, xx + 801 pp., 19 pls.
    1912. Color standards and color nomenclature. (Washington, D. C.,
          Ridgway), iii + 44 pp., 53 pls.


_Transmitted March 3, 1918._



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS

Note.--The University of California Publications are offered in
exchange for the publications of learned societies and institutions,
universities and libraries. Complete lists of all the publications of
the University will be sent upon request. For sample copies, lists of
publications or other information, address the Manager of the
University Press, Berkeley, California, U.S.A. All matter sent in
exchange should be addressed to The Exchange Department, University
Library, Berkeley, California, U.S.A.


ZOOLOGY.--W. E. Ritter and C. A. Kofoid, Editors. Price per volume,
$3.50; beginning with vol. 11, $5.00.

This series contains the contributions from the Department of Zoology,
from the Marine Laboratory of the Scripps Institution for Biological
Research, at La Jolla, California, and from the California Museum of
Vertebrate Zoology in Berkeley.

Cited as Univ. Calif. Publ. Zool.


Volume 1, 1902-1905, 317 pages, with 28 plates                   $3.50

Volume 2 (Contributions from the Laboratory of the Marine Biological
    Association of San Diego), 1904-1906, xvii + 382 pages, with
    19 plates                                                    $3.50

Volume 3, 1906-1907, 383 pages, with 23 plates                   $3.50

Volume 4, 1907-1908, 400 pages, with 24 plates                   $3.50

Volume 5, 1908-1910, 440 pages, with 34 plates                   $3.50

Volume 6, 1908-1911, 478 pages, with 48 plates                   $3.50

Volume 7 (Contributions from the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology),
    1910-1912, 446 pages, with 12 plates                         $3.50

Volume 8, 1911, 357 pages, with 25 plates                        $3.50

Volume 9, 1911-1912, 365 pages, with 24 plates                   $3.50

Volume 10, 1912-1913, 417 pages, with 10 plates                  $3.50

Volume 11, 1912-1914, 538 pages, with 26 plates                  $5.00

Volume 12 (Contributions from the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology),
    1913-1916, 558 pages, with 22 plates                         $5.00

Volume 13, 1914-1916, 529 pages, with 39 plates                  $5.00

Vol. 14. 1. A Report upon the Physical Conditions in San Francisco
             Bay, Based upon the Operations of the United States
             Fisheries Steamer "Albatross" during the Years 1912 and
             1913, by F. B. Sumner, G. D. Louderback, W. L. Schmitt,
             E. C. Johnston. Pp. 1-198, plates 1-13, 20 text figures.
             July, 1914                                          $2.25

Vol. 15, Introduction. Dependence of Marine Biology upon Hydrography
          and Necessity of Quantitative Biological Research.
          Pp. i-xxiii, June, 1916                                  .25

         1. Hydrographic, Plankton, and Dredging Records of the
             Scripps Institution for Biological Research of the
             University of California, 1901 to 1912, compiled and
             arranged under the supervision of W. E. Ritter by Ellis
             L. Michael and George F. McEwen. Pp. 1-206, 4 text
             figures and map. July, 1915                          2.25

         2. Continuation of Hydrographic, Plankton, and Dredging
             Records of the Scripps Institution for Biological
             Research of the University of California (1913-1915),
             compiled, and arranged under the supervision of W. E.
             Ritter, by Ellis L. Michael, Zoologist and
             Administrative Assistant, George F. McEwen, Hydrographer.
             Pp. 207-254, 7 figures in text. November, 1916        .50

         3. Summary and Interpretation of the Hydrographic
             Observations made by the Scripps Institution for
             Biological Research of the University of California,
             1908 to 1915, by George F. McEwen, Hydrographer.
             Pp. 255-356, plates 1-38. December, 1916             1.00

Vol. 16. 1. An Outline of the Morphology and Life History of
             _Crithidia leptocoridis_, sp, nov., by Irene McCulloch.
             Pp. 1-22, plates 1-4, 1 text figure. September, 1915  .25

        2. On _Giardia microti_, sp. nov., from the Meadow Mouse,
            by Charles Atwood Kofoid and Elizabeth Bohn Christiansen.
            Pp. 23-29, 1 figure in text.

        3. On Binary and Multiple Fission in _Giardia muris_
            (Grassi), by Charles Atwood Kofoid and Elizabeth Bohn
            Christiansen. Pp. 30-54, plates, 5-8, 1 figure in text.
              Nos. 2 and 3 in one cover. November, 1915            .30

        4. The Cultivation of Tissues from Amphibians, by John C.
            Johnson. Pp. 55-62, 2 figures in text. November, 1915   10

          5. Notes on the Tintinnoina. 1. On the Provable Origin of
              _Dictyocysta tiara_ Haeckel. 2. On _Petalotricha entzi_,
               sp. nov., by Charles Atwood Kofoid. Pp. 68-69,
               8 figures in text. December, 1915                   .05

          6. Binary and Multiple Fission in _Hexamitus_, by Olive
              Swezy. Pp. 71-88, plates 9-11.

          7. On a New Trichomonad Flagellate, _Trichomitus parvus_,
              from the Intestine of Amphibians, by Olive Swezy.
              Pp. 89-94, plate 12.

                Nos. 6 and 7 in one cover. December, 1915          .25

          8. On _Blepharcorys equi_, sp. nov., a New Ciliate from the
              Caecum of the Horse, by Irwin C. Schumacher.
              Pp. 95-106, plate 13. December, 1915                 .10

          9. Three New Helices from California, by S. Stillman Berry.
              Pp. 107-111. January, 1916                           .05

         10. On _Trypanosoma triatomae_, a New Flagellate from a
              Hemipteran Bug from the Nests of the Wood Rat _Neotoma
              fuscipes_, by Charles Atwood Kofoid and Irene McCulloch,
              Pp. 113-126, plates 14-15. February, 1916            .15

         11. The Genera _Monocercomonas_ and _Polymastix_, by Olive
              Swezy. Pp. 127-138, plates 16-17. February, 1916     .10

         12. Notes on the Spiny Lobster (_Panulirus interruptus_) of
              the California Coast, by Bennet M. Allen. Pp. 139-152,
              2 figures in text. March, 1916                       .15

         13. Notes on the Marine Fishes of California, by Carl L.
              Hubbs. Pp. 153-169, plates 18-20. March, 1916        .15

         14. The Feeding Habits and Food of Pelagic Copepods and the
              Question of Nutrition by Organic Substances in Solution
              in the Water, by Calvin O. Esterly. Pp. 171-184,
              2 figures in text. March, 1916                       .15

         15. The Kinetonacleus of Flagellates and the Binuclear
              Theory of Hartmann, by Olive Swezy. Pp. 185-240,
              58 figures in text. March, 1916                       50

         16. On the Life-History of a Soil Amoeba, by Charlie Woodruff
              Wilson. Pp. 241-292, plates 18-23. July, 1916        .60

         17. Distribution of Land Vertebrates of Southeastern
              Washington, by Lee Raymond Dice. Pp. 293-348,
              plates 24-26. June, 1916                             .60

         18. The Anatomy of _Heptanchus maculatus_: the Endoskeleton,
              by J. Frank Daniel. Pp. 349-370, pls. 27-29, 8 text
              figures. December, 1916                              .25

         19. Some Phases of Spermatogenesis in the Mouse, by Harry B.
              Yocom. Pp. 371-380, plate 30. January, 1917          .10

         20. Specificity in Behavior and the Relation between Habits
              in Nature and Reactions in the Laboratory, by Calvin
              O. Esterly. Pp. 381-392. March, 1917                 .10

         21. The Occurrence of a Rhythm in the Geotropism of Two
              Species of Plankton Copepods when Certain Recurring
              External Conditions are Absent, by Calvin O. Esterly.
              Pp. 393-400. March, 1917                             .10

         22. On Some New Species of Aphroditidae from the Coast of
              California, by Christine Essenberg. Pp. 401-430,
              plates 31-37. March, 1917                            .35

         23. Notes on the Natural History and Behavior of _Emerita
              analoga_ (Stimpson), by Harold Tupper Mead.
              Pp. 431-438,1 text figure. April, 1917               .10

         24. Ascidians of the Littoral Zone of Southern California,
              by William E. Ritter and Ruth A. Forsyth. Pp. 439-512,
              plates 38-46. August, 1917                          1.00
                Index in preparation.

Vol. 17.  1. Diagnoses of Seven New Mammals from East-Central
              California, by Joseph Grinnell and Tracy I. Storer.
              Pp. 1-8.

          2. A New Bat of the Genus _Myotis_ from the High Sierra
              Nevada of California, by Hilda Wood Grinnell. Pp. 9-10.

                Nos. 1 and 2-in one cover. August, 1916            .10

          3. _Spelerpes platycephalus_, a New Alpine Salamander from
              the Yosemite National Park, California, by Charles Lewis
              Camp. Pp. 11-14. September, 1916                     .05

          4. A New Spermophile from the San Joaquin Valley,
              California, with Notes on _Ammospermophilus nelsoni
              nelsoni_ Merriam, by Walter P. Taylor. Pp. 15-20,
              1 figure in text. October, 1916                      .05

          5. Habits and Food of the Roadrunner in California, by
              Harold C. Bryant. Pp. 21-58, plates 1-4, 2 figures in
              text. October, 1916                                  .35

          6. Description of _Bufo canorus_, a New Toad from the
              Yosemite National Park, by Charles Lewis Camp.
              Pp. 59-62, 4 figures in text. November, 1916         .05

          7. The Subspecies of _Sceloporus occidentalis_, with
              Description of a New Form from the Sierra Nevada and
              Systematic Notes on Other California Lizards, by
              Charles Lewis Camp. Pp. 63-74. December, 1916        .10

          8. Osteological Relationships of Three Species of Beavers,
              by F. Harvey Holden. Pp. 75-114, plates 5-12, 18 text
              figures. March, 1917                                 .40

          9. Notes on the Systematic Status of the Toads and Frogs of
              California, by Charles Lewis Camp. Pp. 115-125, 3 text
              figures. February, 1917                              .10

         10. A Distributional List of the Amphibians and Reptiles of
              California, by Joseph Grinnell and Charles Lewis Camp.
              Pp. 127-208. 14 figures in text. July, 1917          .35

         11. A Study of the Races of the White-Fronted Goose
              (_Anser albifrons_) Occurring in California, by H.
              S. Swarth and Harold C. Bryant. Pp. 209-222, 2 figures
              in text, plate 13. October, 1917                     .15

         12. A Synopsis of the Bats of California, by Hilda Wood
              Grinnell. Pp. 223-404, plates 14-24, 24 text figures.
              January 31, 1918                                    2.00

         13. The Pacific Coast Jays of the Genus _Aphelocoma_,
              by H. S. Swarth. Pp. 405-422, 1 figure in text.
              February 23, 1918                                    .20

         14. Six New Mammals from the Mohave Desert and Inyo Regions
              of California, by Joseph Grinnell. Pp. 423-430.

         15. Notes on Some Bats from Alaska and British Columbia,
              by Hilda Wood Grinnell. Pp. 431-433.

               Nos. 14 and 15 in one cover. April, 1918           .15

         16. The Subspecies of the Mountain Chickadee, by Joseph
              Grinnell. Pp. 505-515, 3 figures in text.
              May 4, 1918                                          .15

Vol. 18.  1. Mitosis in _Giardia microti_, by William C. Boeck.
              Pp. 1-26, plate 1. October, 1917                     .35

          2. An Unusual Extension of the Distribution of the Shipworm
              in San Francisco Bay, California, by Albert L. Barrows.
              Pp. 27-43. December, 1917                            .20

          3. Description of Some New Species of _Polynoidae_ from the
              Coast of California, by Christine Essenberg. Pp. 45-60,
              plates 2-3. October, 1917                            .20

          4. New Species of _Amphinomidae_ from the Pacific Coast,
              by Christine Essenberg. Pp. 61-74, plates 4-5.
              October, 1917                                        .15

          5. _Crithidia euryophthalmi_, sp. nov., from the Hemipteran
              Bug, _Euryophthalmus convivus_ Stål, by Irene McCulloch.
              Pp. 75-88, 35 text figures. December, 1917           .15

          6. On the Orientation of _Erythropsis_, by Charles Atwood
              Kofoid and Olive Swezy. Pp. 89-102, 12 figures in test.
              December, 1917         \                             .15

          7. The Transmission of Nervous Impulses in Relation to
              Locomotion in the Earthworm, by John T. Bovard.
              Pp. 103-134, 14 figures in text. January, 1918       .35

          8. The Function of the Giant Fibers in Earthworms, by John
              F. Bovard. Pp. 135-144, 1 figure in text.
              January, 1918                                        .10

          9. A Rapid Method for the Detection of Protozoan Cysts in
              Mammalian Faeces, by William C. Boeck. Pp. 145-149.
              December, 1917                                       .05

         10. The Musculature of _Heptanchus maculatus_, by Pirie
              Davidson Pp. 151-170, 12 figures in text.
              March, 1918                                          .25

         11. The Factors Controlling the Distribution of the
              Polynoidae of the Pacific Coast of North America,
              by Christine Essenberg. Pp. 171-238, plates 6-8,
              2 figures in text. March, 1918                       .75

         12. Differentials in Behavior of the Two Generations of
              _Salpa democratica_ Relative to the Temperature of the
              Sea, by Ellis L. Michael. Pp. 239-298, plates 9-11,
              1 figure in text. March, 1918                        .65

         13. A Quantitative Analysis of the Molluscan Fauna of San
              Francisco Bay, by E. L. Packard. Pp. 299-336,
              plates 12-13, 6 figs, in text. April, 1918           .40



Transcriber's Notes

Emphasis Notation:

     _text_ - italicized

     =text= - bold

All of the text presented here is  a copy of the original article's
text with the following exceptions:<

    1. Typographical Corrections

        A. Page 509 - Medicine Bow Mts., 10 200 => 10,200

        B. Table 1. Added missing period in column 1
             U. S N. M. no. => U. S. N. M. no.

        C. Vol. 17 number 16 => 15 of the "UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
             PUBLICATIONS" listing

    2. Placement of UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PUBLICATIONS Listing

       The original publication had this list beginning inside the
       front cover and continuing on the back cover (inside and out).
       Here it was moved to the end of the book for readability.
       Inconsistancies in the formatting of the list (i.e., periods,
       commas, etc.) were left as presented in the original (with the
       exception noted above).







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Subspecies of the Mountain
Chickadee, by Joseph Grinnell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUBSPECIES OF THE ***

***** This file should be named 33531-8.txt or 33531-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/5/3/33531/

Produced by Tom Cosmas, Larry B. Harrison and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
