Project Gutenberg's Mammals of the Grand Mesa, Colorado, by Sydney Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mammals of the Grand Mesa, Colorado

Author: Sydney Anderson

Release Date: February 15, 2010 [EBook #31280]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS OF THE GRAND MESA ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS
MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY


Volume 9, No. 16, pp. 405-414, 1 fig.
May 20, 1959



Mammals of the Grand Mesa, Colorado

BY

SYDNEY ANDERSON



UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1959




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Robert W. Wilson


Volume 9, No. 16, pp. 405-414, 1 fig.
Published May 20, 1959


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED IN
THE STATE PRINTING PLANT
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1959

27-7472




Mammals of the Grand Mesa, Colorado

BY

SYDNEY ANDERSON


The Grand Mesa of Colorado is a westward extension of the mountains of
central Colorado, standing more than five thousand feet above the
valleys of the Colorado and the Gunnison rivers. To certain montane
mammals the mesa is a peninsula of cool, moist, forest surrounded by
inhospitable, hot, dry, barren lowland.

Few mammals previously have been preserved or reported from the Grand
Mesa. Of the species here reported, Warren (1942, The Mammals of
Colorado, Univ. Oklahoma Press) mentioned only four from the counties
in which the Grand Mesa is located. Twenty-two species are here
recorded from the Grand Mesa, and two localities below the rim of the
Mesa on the north slope, on the basis of specimens preserved, and five
additional species on the basis of observations. Many of these species
are limited to a montane habitat or find their optimum conditions
there. The known geographic ranges of some subspecies are extended
westward.

Specimens and notes were obtained by members of a field party from the
Museum of Natural History led by Dr. Harrison B. Tordoff. The party,
including also R. Gordon Cliffgard, John M. Legler, Olin L. Webb, and
Glen E. Woolfenden, was in the area from June 17 to July 5, 1954, and
obtained all of the specimens listed excepting those from 28 miles east
of Grand Junction (Sect. 29, T. 11S, R. 95W), Mesa County, that were
obtained from June 13 to July 2, 1956, by Phillip M. Youngman, and
those from Land's End Road that were obtained on May 13 and 14, and on
October 1, 1948, by D. A. Sutton.

Localities designated by numbers in the accounts to follow are listed
in the legend for Figure 1. Localities 1 and 3 lie below the rim of the
Mesa on the north side. Catalogue numbers are of the Museum of Natural
History of the University of Kansas, unless noted otherwise.

=_Sorex cinereus cinereus_= Kerr.--Two male (59642-59643) Masked Shrews
weighing 4.8 and 4.9 grams were trapped on June 17 at locality 10, and
a nonpregnant female (59644) was trapped on June 26 at locality 6.
_Sorex cinereus_ seemed to be less abundant on the Mesa than _Sorex
vagrans_; more individuals of _S. vagrans_ than of _S. cinereus_ were
trapped on June 17 at locality 10 and on June 26 at locality 6, and _S.
vagrans_ was trapped at three localities where no _S. cinereus_ was
obtained.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Map of the Grand Mesa (for purposes of this
paper the area above 7500 feet on each side of the northern boundary of
Delta County). The inset of the western three-fourths of Colorado shows
the Grand Mesa in relation to the larger areas of mountains in the
state (areas above 9000 feet are stippled). The following collecting
localities are indicated by numbered, black dots:

 (1) 2 mi. N, 9 mi. E Collbran, 7000 ft., Mesa County.
 (2) Land's End Road to Grand Mesa, 6800 to 8050 ft., Mesa County.
 (3) 3 mi. E, 4 mi. S Collbran, 6800 ft., Mesa County.
 (4) 3 mi. E, 9 mi. S Collbran, 10,200 ft., Mesa County.
 (5) 5-1/2 mi. E, 11-1/2 mi. S Collbran, _in_ Delta County.
 (6) 5-1/2 mi. E, 12 mi. S Collbran, 9600 to 10,400 ft., _in_ Delta County.
 (7) 28 mi. E Grand Junction (Sec. 29, T. 11S, R. 95W), Mesa County.
 (8) 6 mi. E Skyway, 10,000 to 10,500 ft., _in_ Delta County.
 (9) 7 mi. E Skyway, _in_ Delta County.
(10) 8 mi. E, 1/2 mi. S Skyway, 9500 to 10,200 ft., _in_ Delta County.
(11) 8 mi. E, 3/4 mi. S Skyway, 10,200 ft., _in_ Delta County.
(12) 8 mi. E, 1 mi. S Skyway, 10,000 to 10,200 ft., _in_ Delta County.
(13) 8 mi. E, 1-1/2 mi. S Skyway, 8500 to 9600 ft., _in_ Delta County.
(14) 8 mi. E, 2 mi. S Skyway, 9000 ft., _in_ Delta County.
(15) 8 mi. E, 2-1/2 mi. S Skyway, 9600 ft., _in_ Delta County.
(16) 1 mi. S, 4 mi. W Skyway, 10,200 ft., Mesa County.]

=_Sorex vagrans obscurus_= Merriam.--Fifteen specimens of the Vagrant
Shrew (59645-59655, 59665-59668) were trapped in Delta County from
localities 6, 10, 12, 13, and 14. The fourteen specimens having skulls
fell into two distinct age-classes based on wear of the teeth as
described by Findley (1955, Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 9:8);
5 were in the younger group and 9 in the older group. Weights in grams
of the younger shrews were 4.6, 5.5, 5.7, 5.8, and 6.4; weights of the
older shrews were 6.4, 6.8, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 8.0, 8.3, and 8.8. One of
the seven females was lactating; none contained embryos.

=_Sorex palustris navigator_= (Baird).--Six Water Shrews (59633-59638)
were trapped in Delta County at localities 10, 13, 14, and 15. The one
specimen from locality 10 was trapped on June 17; all others were taken
on June 21. None was pregnant or lactating. Two are young, weighing
11.0 and 12.9 grams; the other four are older, weighing 16.6, 17.0,
19.2, and 21.5 grams.

=_Myotis evotis evotis_= (H. Allen).--One female Long-eared Myotis
(59671), containing no embryos, was shot at dusk on July 2, at locality
3, which is below the rim of the Mesa.

=_Myotis volans interior_= Miller.--One female Long-legged Myotis
(70016), containing no embryos, was shot at locality 7 on July 1, 1956.

=_Ochotona princeps figginsi_= J. A. Allen.--Six specimens of the Pika
(59672-59675, 70018-70019) from localities 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 extend the
known range of the subspecies approximately 55 miles to the westward
from Irwin in Gunnison County. Each of two females taken on June 18 and
26 contained three embryos, which measured 20 millimeters in the
latter; a third female on June 29 contained two embryos 35 millimeters
in length.

=_Lepus americanus bairdii_= Hayden.--No Snowshoe Rabbit was taken, but
one individual was observed by H. B. Tordoff on June 18, 1954, at
locality 8. Droppings of a large lagomorph were seen in the woods, and
tracks were seen in the snow.

=_Marmota flaviventris luteola_= A. H. Howell.--The seven specimens of
the Yellow-bellied Marmot (59731-6, 70022, four adult and two young,
each a skin and skull, and one skull only of an adult) are referable on
the basis of size, color, and locality as discussed by Warren (1936,
Jour. Mamm., 17:394) to _M. f. luteola_. The total lengths in
millimeters are as follows: young male 582; adult males 640, 655; young
females 460, 520; adult female 630. The color and condition of the
pelage is the same in all the specimens except that the two largest
males are much more worn and show irregular patches of new hair on the
back, and the two young females are paler especially on the back and
tail. These marmots were taken at localities 4, 7, 8, 10, and 16.

=_Spermophilus lateralis lateralis_= (Say).--Eleven specimens of the
Golden-mantled Ground Squirrel (59748-59756, 59763-59764) were taken at
localities 1, 3, and 4. Young were born before late June; three young
of the year were taken at locality 3 on June 29 and 30, and none of the
adult females taken at locality 1 (1 female) and at locality 4 (3
females) was pregnant. Most adults of both sexes at all elevations
represented (6800 to 10,200 ft.) showed molt in progress and proceeding
from anterior to posterior. All specimens were obtained from June 25 to
July 4.

=_Spermophilus variegatus grammurus_= (Say).--Three Rock Squirrels
(59738-59739, 59742) were obtained at locality 3. One of these
specimens was a skull found near a wood rat nest. The other two were
nonpregnant females; the adult measured 485 millimeters in total
length, and the younger individual measured 413 millimeters. The two
skins are characteristic of _S. v. grammurus_ in their paleness.

=_Eutamias minimus consobrinus_= (J. A. Allen).--The 63 specimens of
the Least Chipmunk (59770-59824, 60105-60108, 70024-70025, and nos.
5194 and 5196 in Univ. of Colorado Museum) were taken at localities 2,
3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, and 15. The reproductive condition at time of
death had been noted for 20 females obtained from June 17 to July 2 at
elevations from 9500 to 10,400 feet. Eleven of these had no embryos,
but six have mammae that are still prominent on the dried skins and may
have had litters prior to their capture. Nine females contained
embryos, numbering 3 in two specimens, 5 in four specimens, 6 in two
specimens, and 7 in one specimen.

=_Eutamias quadrivittatus hopiensis_= Merriam.--Four specimens of the
Colorado Chipmunk were obtained by D. A. Sutton at locality 2, at 6800,
6900, 7175, and 8050 feet elevation. All are males taken on May 13 and
14, 1949; the specimens bear numbers 5197, 5198, 5199, and 5201 in the
collection of the University of Colorado Museum.

=_Thomomys talpoides fossor_= J. A. Allen.--The 27 specimens of the
Northern Pocket Gopher (59840-59849, 70086-70102) were trapped at
localities 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 13. The eight skins from locality 7
differ from those from the other localities on the Mesa in being
uniformly duller in color dorsally. No significant difference in size
or cranial characters was observed. Specimens assigned to _T. t.
fossor_, in the collection of the Museum of Natural History, from other
localities in Colorado differ in color from any of the specimens from
the Grand Mesa. Until larger numbers of _Thomomys talpoides_ from other
localities in Colorado and from the type locality of _T. t. fossor_,
stated to be at Florida, in southern Colorado, have been studied, the
specimens from the Grand Mesa seem best referred to _T. t. fossor_.
Three females from localities 7, 10, and 11 contained embryos (2, 4,
and 5 in number), and seven other females from localities 6 and 7 show
distinct mammae on the dried skins or were recorded by the collectors
as lactating.

=_Castor canadensis concisor_= Warren and Hall.--Dams constructed by
beavers were seen at locality 4 on June 23, 1954. No specimen was
taken.

=_Peromyscus maniculatus rufinus_= (Merriam).--The 36 specimens of the
Deer Mouse (59921-59956) are from seven localities (3, 4, 6, 10, 12,
14, and 15). The mice vary considerably in color; most of them are like
mice of the highlands of Colorado and unlike the paler mice inhabiting
the lower areas immediately to the west of the Grand Mesa. Young
individuals trapped on June 20, 21, and 22 and judged to range from a
month through two months in age, and females containing embryos, attest
to a somewhat protracted breeding season on the Grand Mesa.

=_Neotoma cinerea arizonae_= Merriam.--Two immature Bushy-tailed Wood
Rats (60000-60001) were obtained at locality 3 on July 3.

=_Clethrionomys gapperi galei_= (Merriam).--The 22 specimens
(60005-60025, 70133) of Gapper's Red-backed Vole were taken at
localities 6, 7, and 10, and are clearly referable to _C. g. galei_,
rather than to _Clethrionomys gapperi gauti_ to the south, on the basis
of generally dark dorsal pelage, indistinctly bordered broad dorsal
stripe, and cranial features. _C. g. gauti_ was described by Cockrum
and Fitch (1952, Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 5:289) on the
basis of 14 specimens from southern Colorado and northern New Mexico.
Twenty-one additional specimens from five miles south and one mile
west of Cucharas Camps, Huerfano County, were obtained from the seventh
to the fourteenth of July by the field party led by Tordoff after the
party left the Grand Mesa. These specimens substantiate the subspecific
distinctness of _C. g. gauti_ in that they agree in external and in
cranial appearance with the description of typical _C. g. gauti_, and
are distinct in appearance from specimens of _C. g. galei_ from the
Grand Mesa and from other localities in northern Colorado. The six
specimens from two localities in Colorado available to Cockrum and
Fitch exhibited evidence of intergradation at one locality, and
atypical smallness at the other locality. A specimen (70134) taken on
June 26, 1956, by Phillip M. Youngman on the Black Mesa, nine miles WNW
of Sapinero, 9500 ft., Gunnison County, Colorado, is almost identical
in color to the two specimens from Saguache County regarded by Cockrum
and Fitch as intergrades between _C. g. galei_ and _C. g. gauti_, but
in small size of auditory bullae and narrowness of braincase resembles
_C. g. galei_, to which it seems best referred. The specimens from the
Grand Mesa extend the known range of _C. g. galei_ approximately 50
miles westward in central Colorado from Gothic. Three females were
pregnant; two trapped on June 17 and June 25 contained 6 embryos each,
and one trapped on June 25 contained 5 embryos. Four of the females
taken in Huerfano County were pregnant; one contained 3 embryos, two
contained 5 embryos, and one contained 7 embryos. Immature individuals
are present in the sample from Huerfano County also.

=_Phenacomys intermedius intermedius_= Merriam.--Three Heather Voles
(60048, 60049, 70135) were trapped at localities 6, 7, and 10. All were
adult females; one, taken on June 25 at locality 6, contained seven
embryos five millimeters in length, and one, taken on July 2 at
locality 7, contained seven embryos nine millimeters in length. These
specimens extend the known range of the species approximately 55 miles
west from Gothic (Pruitt, Jour. Mamm., 35:450, 1954).

=_Microtus longicaudus mordax_= (Merriam).--Ten Long-tailed Voles
(60070-60079) represent localities 3, 6, 12, 13, 14, and 15.

=_Microtus montanus fusus_= Hall.--Ten Montane Voles (60060-60068,
70145) represent localities 3, 6, 7, and 15.

=_Ondatra zibethicus osoyoosensis_= (Lord).--Muskrats were seen daily
from June 17 to June 23 in a lake at locality 13. No specimen was
obtained.

=_Zapus princeps princeps_= J. A. Allen.--Nineteen Western Jumping Mice
(60109-60126, 60137) were trapped at localities 6, 10, 12, 14, and 15.

=_Erethizon dorsatum epixanthum_= Brandt.--A Porcupine skull was seen
in the nest of a wood rat by John M. Legler at locality 3 on July 2. On
June 20 a porcupine was seen at locality 12. No specimen was obtained.

=_Mustela frenata nevadensis_= Hall.--Seven Long-tailed Weasels
(60138-60143, 70152) were taken at localities 1, 4, 7, 8, 13, and 14.
Four are males and three are females. Some of these were attracted by
"squeaking" noises and then shot.

=_Taxidea taxus taxus_= (Schreber).--One adult male Badger (60144) was
found dead; the skull and baculum were saved. The subspecific
identification is on geographic grounds, and is tentative. In this area
_T. t. taxus_ and _T. t. fippsi_ may intergrade.

=_Mephitis mephitis estor_= Merriam.--One Striped Skunk (60145) of
unknown sex was found dead in the cellar of a cabin at locality 10.

=_Odocoileus hemionus hemionus_= (Rafinesque).--Mule Deer were observed
at locality 15; no specimen was obtained.


DISCUSSION

The species here reported from the Grand Mesa may be placed according
to their geographic ranges and their restriction to certain habitats in
two groups:

BOREAL.--Each of the 12 species listed below is of northern
distribution, is dependent, at the latitude of Colorado, upon the
habitat provided by areas of high altitudes, and is near its southern
zonal limit on the Grand Mesa. The 12 species are: _Sorex cinereus_,
_Sorex palustris_, _Sorex vagrans_, _Ochotona princeps_, _Lepus
americanus_, _Marmota flaviventris_, _Spermophilus lateralis_,
_Clethrionomys gapperi_, _Phenacomys intermedius_, _Microtus
longicaudus_, _Microtus montanus_, and _Zapus princeps_. _Thomomys
talpoides_ may be considered in this category also, although it is less
restricted in range and habitat than most of the other species listed
as boreal. These thirteen species make up almost half of the
twenty-seven species known from the Grand Mesa.

WIDE-SPREAD.--Species in this category are those that are widely
distributed in the western United States and that occur in Colorado in
both the mountains and the lower more arid intermontane areas. Some of
these species are differentiated into subspecies, one of which
inhabits the mountains and another the lowlands. Wide-spread species
that do not have subspecies in the lowlands different than the
subspecies in the mountains or that are represented by too little
material from the Grand Mesa to be evaluated critically are _Myotis
evotis_, _Myotis volans_, _Spermophilus variegatus_, _Eutamias
quadrivittatus_, _Castor canadensis_, _Ondatra zibethicus_, _Erethizon
dorsatum_, _Mustela frenata_, _Taxidea taxus_, _Mephitis mephitis_, and
_Odocoileus hemionus_. Three other wide-spread species are
differentiated into lowland and highland subspecies; two of these
species, _Eutamias minimus_ and _Peromyscus maniculatus_, are
represented on the Grand Mesa by the darker subspecies of the
mountains. The third species, _Neotoma cinerea_, is represented by two
individuals from below the actual rim of the mesa; they are intergrades
between the lowland and highland subspecies.

Species of southern distribution, that are dependent at the latitude of
Colorado upon the habitat provided by areas of lower altitudes, and
that are here in Colorado near their northern limit comprise a third
category that is not represented in the list of mammals from the Grand
Mesa although such characteristic species as _Ammospermophilus
leucurus_, _Perognathus apache_, and _Dipodomys ordii_ occur as near as
Grand Junction.

Approximately 55 per cent of the species of the mammalian fauna are
boreal; no species of Sonoran affinities finds haven on the Grand Mesa.

Transmitted January 22, 1959.


27-7472




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Italicized text is shown within _underscores_.

Bold italicized text is shown within =_equal signs and underscores_=.

Page 407: Rejoined the remainder of the last paragraph, originally
found on page 409.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mammals of the Grand Mesa, Colorado, by 
Sydney Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS OF THE GRAND MESA ***

***** This file should be named 31280.txt or 31280.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/8/31280/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
