Project Gutenberg's Mammals from Tamaulipas, Mexico, by Rollin H. Baker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Mammals from Tamaulipas, Mexico

Author: Rollin H. Baker

Release Date: February 28, 2010 [EBook #31448]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS FROM TAMAULIPAS, MEXICO ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











Mammals from Tamaulipas, Mexico


BY

ROLLIN H. BAKER


University of Kansas Publications
Museum of Natural History

Volume 5, No. 12, pp. 207-218
December 15, 1951


University of Kansas
LAWRENCE
1951




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
Edward H. Taylor, Robert W. Wilson


Volume 5, No. 12, pp. 207-218
December 15, 1951


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED BY
FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1951

23-8338




Mammals from Tamaulipas, Mexico

By

ROLLIN H. BAKER


Forming the northeastern border of Mexico, Tamaulipas extends in an
elongated, north-south direction from the Temperate into the Torrid
Zone and contains faunal elements from both the Nearctic and
Neotropical regions. The mammals are less known than those from some of
the bordering states; for the most part collecting has been limited to
a few localities, chiefly along the Pan-American Highway. Accordingly,
as a step towards a long-range study of the mammals of Tamaulipas, the
Museum of Natural History of the University of Kansas acquired from
William J. Schaldach, Jr., a small, but significant, collection of
mammals taken in the last month of 1949 and the first four months of
1950.

Collections were made at several places in the vicinity of Ciudad
Victoria, including localities along the humid, eastern face of the
Sierra Madre Oriental. Many of these specimens were obtained near camps
made west of the village of El Carrizo. This small community is on the
Pan-American highway, 70 kilometers (by highway) south of Ciudad
Victoria. The resulting collections, which are reported upon here,
disclose that several tropical mammals range farther northward than
previously reported. Funds for financing the field work were made
available by a grant from the Kansas University Endowment Association.


ACCOUNTS OF SPECIES

~Didelphis mesamericana mesamericana~ Oken


Central American Opossum

     _Did[elphys] mes-americana_ Oken, Lehrbuch d. Naturgesch.,
     pt. 3, vol. 2:1152, 1816. (Type from Northern Mexico.)

     _Didelphis mes-americana_ Allen, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat.
     Hist., 16:256, August 18, 1902.


     _Specimens examined_, 2 as follows: 36 km. N and 10 km. W
     Ciudad Victoria, 1 km. E El Barretal, on Río Purificacíon,
     1; 12 km. N and 4 km. W Ciudad Victoria, 1.


~Philander opossum pallidus~ (Allen)

Four-eyed Opossum

     _Metachirus fuscogriseus pallidus_ Allen, Bull. Amer. Mus.
     Nat. Hist., 14:215, July 3, 1901. (Type from Orizaba,
     Veracruz, Mexico.)

     _Philander opossum pallidus_ Dalquest, Occ. Papers Mus.
     Zool., Louisiana State Univ., No. 23:2, July 10, 1950.


     _Specimens examined_, 3 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo.

_Remarks._--These three specimens have proportionately longer tails
than typical _P. o. pallidus_ from central Veracruz; total length and
length of tail of two adult males are 575, 295, and 568, 290
respectively.

This marsupial has been previously unrecorded from Tamaulipas or from
so northward a locality. The four-eyed opossum evidently ranges
northward along the east face of the Sierra Madre Oriental within the
humid division of the Upper Tropical Life-zone. These animals, all
males, were taken in steel traps baited with the bodies of skinned mice
or birds. Sets were made along well-used trails leading from a densely
vegetated arroyo into a corn field through openings in a fence of
roughly piled logs. The elevation of this locality is approximately
2500 feet.


~Desmodus rotundus murinus~ Wagner

Vampire Bat

     _D[esmodus] murinus_ Wagner, Schreber's Säugthiere, Suppl.,
     1:377, 1840. (Type from Mexico.)

     _Desmodus rotundus murinus_ Osgood, Field Mus. Nat. Hist.,
     publ. 155, zool. ser., 10:63, January 10, 1912.

     _Specimens examined_, 9 as follows: 12 km. W and 8 km. N
     Ciudad Victoria, 2500 ft., 3; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 6 km. W of the [Pan-American] highway [at El
     Carrizo], 6.

_Remarks._--Vampire bats were taken at two caves. At the cave called
"Los Troncones", 12 kilometers west and 8 kilometers north of Ciudad
Victoria, seven bats were shot down; three were saved. The second cave,
south of Ciudad Victoria, was considerably damper than the first.
Vampires were found in a small side chamber; nine bats were knocked
down. No other kinds of bats were present in either cave.


~Sylvilagus floridanus connectens~ (Nelson)

Florida Cottontail

     _Lepus floridanus connectens_ Nelson, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 17:105, May 18, 1904. (Type from Chichicaxtle,
     Veracruz, Mexico.)

     _Sylvilagus floridanus connectens_ Lyon and Osgood, Catal.
     Type spec. Mamm. U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 62:32, January 28,
     1909.

     _Specimens examined_, 2 from 70 km. [by highway] S. Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo.


~Sciurus aureogaster aureogaster~ F. Cuvier

Red-bellied Squirrel

     [_Sciurus_, by implication] _aureogaster_ F. Cuvier, Hist.
     nat. mammifères, vol. 6, livr. 59, pl. with text, September,
     1829. Binomial published at end of work only, vol. 7, tabl.
     generale et méthodique, p. 4, 1842. (Type from "California"
     = eastern Mexico.)

     _Specimens examined_, 13 as follows: 43 km. S Ciudad
     Victoria, 1; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad Victoria, and 6
     km. W of [Pan-American] highway [at El Carrizo], 3; 70 km.
     [by hwy.] S Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo, 9.

_Remarks._--These colorful squirrels were taken in thick timber and
brush, and locally are referred to as "ardilla pinta" or "ardilla
colorada." One female obtained on January 22 is black. Local hunters
state that these squirrels are most active early in the morning and
late in the afternoon. Two squirrels were seen in copulation on January
19.


~Sciurus negligens~ Nelson

Little Gray Squirrel

     _Sciurus negligens_ Nelson, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     12:147, June 3, 1898. (Type from Alta Mira, Tamaulipas,
     Mexico.)

     _Specimens examined_, 17 as follows: 70 km. [by highway] S
     of Ciudad Victoria and 6 km. W of the [Pan-American] highway
     [at El Carrizo], 5; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad Victoria
     and 2 km. W El Carrizo, 12.

_Remarks._--Referred to as "ardilla chica" locally, these squirrels
were most frequently seen in the dense forest of the lower, elevations.
Active both in trees and on the ground, these animals were reported as
being destructive to corn crops. Females taken in January were
lactating.


~Heterogeomys hispidus concavus~ Nelson and Goldman

Hispid Pocket Gopher

     _Heterogeomys hispidus concavus_ Nelson and Goldman, Proc.
     Biol. Soc. Washington, 42:148, March 30, 1929. (Type from
     Pinal de Amoles, Queretaro, Mexico.)

     _Specimens examined_, 5 as follows: 70 km. [by highway] S
     Ciudad Victoria and 5 km. W El Carrizo, 4; 70 km. [by
     highway] S Ciudad Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo, 1.

_Remarks._--These gophers have been compared with specimens of _H. h.
hispidus_ from Veracruz (5 km. N Jalapa and 4 km. WNW Fortin) and with
specimens of _H. h. concavus_ from San Luis Potosí (Xilitla and
vicinity and 3 mi. NW Pujal); the latter were examined through the
courtesy of Dr. George H. Lowery, Jr., of the Museum of Zoology at
Louisiana State University. These five specimens are assigned to _H. h.
concavus_ and resemble in every way this subspecies except: slightly
smaller, somewhat darker, and skull with lambdoidal crest less inclined
forward. In the latter feature, the single skull available seems to
resemble most closely that of _H. h. hispidus_. Unfortunately, all but
one skull, that of a subadult female, were destroyed in the field.

This is the first known record of this genus in Tamaulipas and the most
northern locality from which specimens have been taken. At this
latitude, the gopher appears to be restricted to the humid belt on the
east face of the Sierra Madre Oriental. These large gophers were
difficult to trap by ordinary means; Schaldach got two by using
large-sized Macabee traps but the others were taken at night either
with the aid of a dog or by natives with slingshots.


~Liomys irroratus texensis~ Merriam

Spiny Pocket Mouse

     _Liomys texensis_ Merriam, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     15:44, March 5, 1902. (Type from Brownsville, Cameron
     County, Texas.)

     _Liomys irroratus texensis_ Goldman, N. Amer. Fauna, 34:59,
     September 7, 1911.

     _Specimens examined_, 15 as follows: 7 km. S and 2 km. W San
     Fernando, 8; 36 km. N and 10 km. W Ciudad Victoria, 1 km. E
     El Barretal, on Río Purificacíon, 1; 70 km. [by highway] S
     Ciudad Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo, 6.

_Remarks._--Most of these mice were taken in densely vegetated fallow
fields, where both grass and brush were found. Many of the mice were
captured at their burrow openings, some of which were found to be
plugged and others not plugged.


~Reithrodontomys fulvescens intermedius~ Allen

Fulvous Harvest Mouse

     _Reithrodontomys mexicanus intermedius_ Allen, Bull. Amer.
     Mus. Nat. Hist., 7:136, May 21, 1895. (Type from
     Brownsville, Cameron County, Texas.)

     _Reithrodontomys fulvescens intermedius_ Howell, N. Amer.
     Fauna, 36:47, June 5, 1914.

     _Specimen examined_, 1 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo.


~Baiomys taylori taylori~ (Thomas)

Pygmy Mouse

     _Hesperomys (Vesperimus) taylori_ Thomas, Ann. and Mag. Nat.
     Hist, ser. 5, 19:66, January, 1887. (Type from San Diego,
     Duval County, Texas.)

     _Baiomys taylori_ Mearns, Mamm. Mex. Bound., Bull. 56:381,
     April 13, 1907.


     _Specimens examined_, 2 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo.

_Remarks._--Specimens were captured in runways in dense grass and weeds
at the edge of a corn field.


~Peromyscus leucopus texanus~ (Woodhouse)

White-footed Mouse

     _Hesperomys texana_ Woodhouse, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
     Philadelphia, 6:242, 1853. (Type probably from the vicinity
     of Mason, Mason County, Texas.)

     _Peromyscus leucopus texanus_ Osgood, N. Amer. Fauna,
     28:127, April 17, 1909.

     _Specimens examined_, 8 as follows: 7 km. S and 2 km. W San
     Fernando, 1; 12 km. N and 4 km. W Ciudad Victoria, 2; 70 km.
     [by highway] S Ciudad Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo, 4.


~Peromyscus ochraventer~ new species

Brown-bellied Wood Mouse

     _Type._--Female, adult, skin and skull; no. 36958, Univ.
     Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 6 km. W of the [Pan-American] highway [at El
     Carrizo], Tamaulipas, Mexico; 12 January 1950; obtained by
     William J. Schaldach, Jr., original no. 566.

     _Range._--Known only from the type locality; probably found
     in other localities along the humid, east face of the Sierra
     Madre Oriental in Tamaulipas.

     _Diagnosis._--Size medium (see measurements); upper parts
     near Ochraceous Tawny (capitalized color terms after
     Ridgway, Color Standards and Color Nomenclature, Washington,
     D. C., 1912), brighter on sides and duller on back; cheeks,
     sides of neck, shoulders and upper forelegs lighter, between
     Ochraceous Buff and Ochraceous Orange; eye ring dark;
     underparts light Cinnamon Buff, breast patch brighter; ears
     dusky, sparsely covered with hairs colored like back; feet
     white; tail scaly in appearance, indistinctly bicolored with
     short dark hairs above and short pale hairs below; skull
     without beaded or ridged supraorbital border; rostrum
     expanded anteriorly with sides almost parallel; teeth with
     strongly developed outer accessory cusps on the first and
     second upper molar teeth; anteriormost loph
     (parastyle-protoconule of Goldman, N. Amer. Fauna, 43:11,
     September 23, 1918) of the first upper molar large, almost
     as broad as greatest breadth of tooth.

     _Comparisons._--_Peromyscus ochraventer_ has been compared
     with _P. difficilis_ (specimens from Veracruz), _P. boylei_
     (Veracruz), _P. banderanus_ (Guerrero), _P. mexicanus_
     (Veracruz), _P. furvus_ (Veracruz), and _P. latirostris_
     (San Luis Potosí). From _P. difficilis_, _P. ochraventer_
     differs in having underparts distinctively brownish, rostrum
     expanded anteriorly with sides almost parallel, anteriormost
     loph of the first upper molar larger, and auditory bulla
     smaller. From _P. boylei_, _P. ochraventer_ differs in
     having underparts distinctively brownish, tail less
     distinctly bicolored, rostrum expanded anteriorly with sides
     almost parallel, and anteriormost loph of the first upper
     molar larger. From _P. banderanus_, _P. ochraventer_ differs
     in having underparts distinctively brownish, tail less
     distinctly bicolored, rostrum expanded anteriorly with sides
     almost parallel, anteriormost loph of the first upper molar
     larger, auditory bulla smaller, and in lacking a beaded or
     ridged supraorbital border. From _P. mexicanus_, _P.
     ochraventer_ differs in having underparts distinctively
     brownish, tail not irregularly blotched with dusky, rostrum
     expanded anteriorly with sides almost parallel, anteriormost
     loph of the first upper molar larger, and in lacking a
     beaded or ridged supraorbital border. From _P. furvus_ and
     _P. latirostris_, _P. ochraventer_ differs in being smaller,
     having underparts distinctively brownish, tail not
     irregularly blotched with dusky, rostrum proportionately
     shorter, and interpterygoid space relatively narrower.

_Remarks._--_Peromyscus ochraventer_ is considered to be a distinct
species showing little evident relationship with other Mexican
_Peromyscus_. In the shape of the skull, especially the anterior
expansion of the rostrum, _P. ochraventer_ seems to be related to _P.
furvus_ and _P. latirostris_, a series of the latter being made
available for examination by Dr. George G. Lowery, Jr., of the Museum
of Zoology at Louisiana State University. However, the rostrum of these
two larger species is proportionately longer than the rostrum of _P.
ochraventer_. In size, coloration and most cranial features, _P.
ochraventer_ resembles _P. mexicanus_, although the absence, instead of
presence, of a supraorbital bead or ridge, the almost parallel-sided,
instead of more pointed, rostrum and the larger, instead of smaller,
interiormost loph of the first upper molar in _P. ochraventer_ are
well-marked differences. The baculum of _P. ochraventer_ is much
shorter with a proportionately heavier base and shaft than the baculum
of _P. mexicanus mexicanus_ (from Veracruz) and _P. m. saxatilis_ (from
Costa Rica). The geographic range of _Peromyscus ochraventer_ is not
known to meet that of _P. mexicanus_; the nearest place to the type
locality of _P. ochraventer_ from which _P. mexicanus_ has been taken
is at Xilitla approximately 225 kilometers to the southward in San Luis
Potosí (Dalquest, Occ. Papers Mus. Zool., Louisiana State Univ., No.
28:8, July 10, 1950).

The brown coloring on the underparts is a distinctive feature of _P.
ochraventer_; in adults this color differs in shade. In some specimens
patches of whitish hair give the tail a splotched appearance. Eleven of
the twenty-eight skulls and lower jaws examined have bone eroded away
from around the cheek-teeth exposing part of the roots. Most of the
fully adult animals have this condition. One adult female, no. 36959,
has the upper third molar on the right side missing, possibly as a
result of bone erosion.

These mice were taken in junglelike forest, in rocks and adjacent to
logs. Schaldach writes that "Their burrows go back under the large
limestone blocks, and each burrow where I caught a mouse has a pile of
excavated earth, like a tiny gopher mound." The trapping area was at an
elevation of approximately 2800 feet on the steep sides of a small hill
on top of which the field camp was situated. Schaldach indicated that
this locality was transitional between arid tropical and humid tropical
conditions. On January 13, 1950, a female taken was lactating and had
five recent placental scars; another taken the same day also had five
placental scars.

     _Measurements._--Average and extreme measurements of seven
     adult males and six adult females of _P. ochraventer_ from
     the type locality are, respectively, as follows: Total
     length, 238.0 (227-249), 236.5 (226-248); length of tail,
     124.4 (117-127), 122.2 (116-128); length of hind foot, 25.6
     (24-26), 25.5 (25-26); length of ear from notch, 20.9
     (20-21), 20.7 (20-21); greatest length of skull, 31.0
     (30.6-31.9), 30.8 (30.5-31.0); basilar length, 23.3
     (22.7-23.8), 23.4 (23.0-23.9); zygomatic breadth, 15.1
     (14.6-15.7), 15.0 (14.9-15.2); post palatal length, 10.6
     (10.5-10.9), 10.9 (10.5-11.2); interorbital breadth, 4.7
     (4.5-4.9), 4.7 (4.6-4.8); mastoidal breadth, 12.8
     (12.4-13.2), 12.8 (12.6-12.9); length of nasals, 11.6
     (10.8-12.0), 11.6 (11.2-11.7); length of shelf of bony
     palate, 4.7 (4.5-4.8), 4.6 (4.5-4.7); length of palatine
     slits, 6.3 (6.0-6.5), 6.2 (6.0-6.4); length of diastema, 8.2
     (8.0-8.5), 8.2 (8.1-8.4); alveolar length of upper
     molariform tooth-row, 4.4 (4.3-4.6), 4.4 (4.3-4.5).

     _Specimens examined_, 28, from the type locality.


~Oryzomys couesi aquaticus~ Allen

Coues Rice Rat

     _Oryzomys aquaticus_ Allen, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist.,
     3:289, June 30, 1891. (Type from Brownsville, Cameron
     County, Texas.)

     _Oryzomys couesi aquaticus_ Goldman, N. Amer. Fauna, 43:39,
     September 23, 1918.

     _Specimens examined_, 2 as follows: 36 km. N and 10 km. W
     Ciudad Victoria, 1 km. E El Barretal, on Río Purificacíon,
     1; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad Victoria and 6 km. W of the
     [Pan-American] highway [at El Carrizo], 1.

_Remarks._--The specimens, all immatures, are slightly darker than
topotypes of _O. c. aquaticus_, seemingly tending toward the darker _O.
c. peragrus_ Merriam to the southward. These records of occurrence
extend the known range of this subspecies approximately 210 miles to
the southward and increase the possibility of continuous distribution
between _O. c. aquaticus_ and _O. c. peragrus_.

The male obtained south of Ciudad Victoria was taken on January 12, by
William J. Shaldach, Jr., 200 yards within the tunnel of a mine at an
elevation of approximately 2600 feet. This was in the Sierra Gorda,
which is a part of the Sierra Madre Oriental.


~Oryzomys rostratus rostratus~ Merriam

Rice Rat

     _Oryzomys rostratus_ Merriam, Proc. Washington Acad. Sci.,
     3:293, July 26, 1901. (Type from Metlaltoyuca, Pueblo,
     Mexico.)

     _Specimen examined_, 1 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo.

_Remarks._--This immature male is paler than specimens of _O. r.
rostratus_ from the state of Veracruz. This locality extends the known
range of this species northward a distance of approximately 100 miles.
Previously it had been recorded from only as far north as Alta Mira,
Tamaulipas (Goldman, N. Amer. Fauna, 43:54, September 23, 1918). This
specimen was trapped on February 16 in a rodent runway in dense grass
in a fallow cane field.


~Oryzomys fulvescens engraciae~ Osgood

Fulvous Rice Rat

     _Oryzomys fulvescens engraciae_ Osgood, Jour. Mamm., 26:300,
     November 14, 1945. (Type from Hacienda Santa Engracia,
     northwest of Ciudad Victoria, Tamaulipas, Mexico.)

     _Specimens examined_, 5 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. E El Carrizo.

_Remarks._--These specimens are referred to _O. f. engraciae_ on the
basis of their pale color and narrow interorbital space. They were
taken in runways in dense grass in fallow cane fields.


~Sigmodon hispidus toltecus~ (Saussure)

Hispid Cotton Rat

     [_Hesperomys_] _toltecus_ Saussure, Revue et magasin de
     zoologie, _ser._ 2, 12:98, 1860. (Type from mountains of
     Veracruz, Mexico.)

     _Sigmodon hispidus toltecus_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 15:110, June 2, 1902.

     _Specimens examined_, 23 as follows: 36 km. N and 10 km. W
     Ciudad Victoria, 1 km. E El Barretal, on Río Purificacíon,
     1; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad Victoria and 2 km. W El
     Carrizo, 22.

_Remarks._--Among named kinds of _Sigmodon_ this series most closely
approaches _S. h. toltecus_ to the southward. The specimens are
slightly lighter in color of the upper parts than are examples of this
same subspecies from 8 km. NW of Potrero, Veracruz, but in other ways
are similar. The single specimen from 36 km. N and 10 km. W Ciudad
Victoria is a skull only, but seems closest to _S. h. toltecus_. As is
often the case with collections of _Sigmodon_, this series contains
mostly immatures.

Cotton rats were found abundantly in cultivated areas. Local farmers
stated that these rats were destructive to sugar cane by girdling the
stems one and one-half inches above the ground.


~Neotoma micropus micropus~ Baird

Baird Wood Rat

     _Neotoma micropus_ Baird, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
     Philadelphia, p. 333, April, 1855. (Type from Charco
     Escondido, Tamaulipas, Mexico.)

     _Specimens examined_, 2 from 7 km. S and 2 km. W San
     Fernando.


~Neotoma angustapalata~ new species

Tamaulipan Wood Rat

     _Type._--Male, subadult, skin and skull; No. 36976, Univ.
     Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.; 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 6 km. W of the [Pan-American] highway [at El
     Carrizo], Tamaulipas, Mexico; 14 January 1950; obtained by
     William J. Schaldach, Jr., original no. 578.

     _Range._--Known only from the type locality; probably found
     in other localities along the humid, east face of the Sierra
     Madre Oriental in Tamaulipas.

     _Diagnosis._--Size large (see measurements); upper parts
     dusky brown, paler on sides, individual hairs on middle of
     back tipped with black or with Light Pinkish Cinnamon
     (capitalized color term after Ridgway, Color Standards and
     Color Nomenclature, Washington, D. C., 1912); head grayer
     especially on cheeks; underparts dusky (dark bases of
     white-tipped hairs exposed), hairs on throat and inguinal
     region of adult specimen white to base; outside of legs
     dusky gray; tail scaly in appearance and sparsely covered
     with short, blackish hairs above and short, whitish hairs
     below; skull with auditory bulla large; external auditory
     meatus large; palatine region narrow; sides of
     interpterygoid fossa concave and broadly excavated near
     posterior end of molariform tooth-rows.

     _Comparison._--_Neotoma angustapalata_ has been compared
     with _N. torquata_ (specimens from Veracruz and Puebla), _N.
     navus_ (Coahuila), _N. mexicana_ (New Mexico), _N. micropus_
     (Tamaulipas), _N. albigula_ (Coahuila), _N. ferruginea_
     (Jalisco), and _N. distincta_ (from published description in
     Goldman, N. Amer. Fauna, 31:64, October 19, 1910). _Neotoma
     angustapalata_ differs from _N. micropus_ and _N. albigula_
     in having a deep, instead of a shallow, anterointernal
     reentrant angle on the first upper molar and seems to belong
     to the _N. mexicana_ group of wood rats. _Neotoma
     angustapalata_ differs from _N. navus_, _N. mexicana_, _N.
     torquata_, and _N. ferruginea_ in larger size, darker
     underparts, tail with sparse, short hairs and scaly
     appearance, more broadly concave sides of interpterygoid
     fossa at posterior end of molariform tooth-rows, larger
     external auditory meatus, and narrower palatine breadth.
     _Neotoma angustapalata_ differs from the description of _N.
     distincta_ in having a faintly bicolored tail, no ochraceous
     pectoral band, broadly concave sides to interpterygoid
     fossa, and narrower palatine breadth.

_Remarks._--_Neotoma angustapalata_ is represented by two specimens;
the type and another specimen, an adult male, no. 37062, with skin and
broken skull. The description takes into account both of these
specimens. The most significant characteristics of _N. angustapalata_
are its scaly-appearing tail with short, sparse hairs, dusky
underparts, broadly concave sides of the interpterygoid fossa at the
posterior end of molariform tooth-rows, and the narrow palatine
breadth. Among named kinds of _Neotoma_, the newly named species most
closely resembles _N. torquata_ and _N. distincta_; however, it is
geographically widely separated from these two species. _Neotoma navus_
of southeastern Coahuila is the only other member of the _N. mexicana_
group in northeastern Mexico.

These wood rats were taken in rocks and crevices at the base of a small
hill in thick vegetation growing in deep humus. Schaldach termed the
trapping site as "arid tropical tending toward humid tropical".

     _Measurements._--The subadult, male holotype measures as
     follows: Total length, 325; length of tail, 154; length of
     hind foot, 36; length of ear from notch, 29; basilar length
     (of skull), 33.9; zygomatic breadth, 22.1; interorbital
     breadth, 5.7; length of nasals, 15.2; length of incisive
     foramina, 8.7; length of palatal bridge, 8.5; least breadth
     of palate between first upper molars, 2.7; greatest breadth
     of interpterygoid space, 4.1; alveolar length of upper
     molariform tooth-row, 9.6. The adult, male, no. 37062,
     measures as follows: Total length, 380; tail vertebrae, 195;
     hind foot, 42; ear from notch, 31; interorbital breadth (of
     skull), 6.4.

     _Specimens examined_, 2, from the type locality.


~Rattus rattus~ subsp.

Black Rat

     _Specimens taken_, 2 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 6 km. W of the [Pan-American] highway [at El
     Carrizo].


~Mus musculus~ subsp.

House Mouse

     _Specimen examined_, 1 from 12 km. N and 4 km. W Ciudad
     Victoria.


~Nasua narica tamaulipensis~ Goldman

Coati

     _Nasua narica tamaulipensis_ Goldman, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 55:80, June 25, 1942. (Type from Cerro de la
     Silla, near Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico.)

     _Specimen examined_, 1 from 70 km. [by highway] S Ciudad
     Victoria and 2 km. W El Carrizo.

_Remarks._--Several bands of coatis were observed in the vicinity of
the village of El Carrizo. One skull of a male was obtained.


_Transmitted June 8, 1951_.


23-8338




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Italicized text is shown within _underscores_.

Bold text is shown within ~tildes~.

Page 210: Säugthiere may be a typo for Säugethiere.








End of Project Gutenberg's Mammals from Tamaulipas, Mexico, by Rollin H. Baker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS FROM TAMAULIPAS, MEXICO ***

***** This file should be named 31448-8.txt or 31448-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/4/4/31448/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
