The Project Gutenberg EBook of Noteworthy Mammals from Sinaloa, Mexico, by 
J. Knox Jones, Jr. and Ticul Alvarez and M. Raymond Lee

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Noteworthy Mammals from Sinaloa, Mexico

Author: J. Knox Jones, Jr.
        Ticul Alvarez
        M. Raymond Lee

Release Date: March 18, 2010 [EBook #31683]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Simon Gardner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 14, No. 12, pp. 145-159, 1 fig. in text

May 18, 1962




                Noteworthy Mammals from Sinaloa, Mexico

          J. KNOX JONES, JR., TICUL ALVAREZ, AND M. RAYMOND LEE


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS

LAWRENCE

1962

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
Theodore H. Eaton, Jr.

Volume 14, No. 12, pp. 145-159, 1 fig. in text

Published May 18, 1962


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS

Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY
JEAN M. NEIBARGER, STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS

1962

29-3000




Noteworthy Mammals from Sinaloa, Mexico

BY

J. KNOX JONES, JR., TICUL ALVAREZ, and M. RAYMOND LEE


In several of the past twelve years field parties from the Museum of
Natural History have collected mammals in the Mexican state of Sinaloa.
Most of the collections contained only a modest number of specimens
because they were made by groups that stopped for short periods on their
way to or from other areas, but several collections are extensive. Field
work by representatives of this institution now is underway in Sinaloa
with the aim of acquiring materials suitable for treating the entire
mammalian fauna of that state.

Among the mammals thus far obtained are specimens of twenty species that
represent significant extensions of known range, are of especial
taxonomic or zoogeographic interest, or that complement published
information, and it is these records that are reported herein.

The following persons obtained specimens mentioned beyond: J. R. Alcorn
(1950); J. R. and A. A. Alcorn (1954 and 1955); R. H. Baker and a party
of students (1955); W. L. Cutter (1957); S. Anderson and a party of
students (1959); M. R. Lee (1960 and 1961); and J. K. Jones, Jr.,
accompanied by R. R. Patterson and R. G. Webb (1961). The Kansas
University Endowment Association and the American Heart Association
provided funds that helped to defray the cost of field operations.

In the accounts that follow, all measurements are in millimeters and all
catalogue numbers refer to the mammal collection of the Museum of
Natural History, The University of Kansas. Placenames associated with
specimens examined are indicated on the accompanying map (Fig. 1).

_Notiosorex crawfordi_ (Coues).--A non-pregnant female (75184) was
obtained on November 29, 1957, at El Fuerte by W. L. Cutter. Comparison
of this specimen with topotypes of _N. evotis_ (see below) and with
undoubted examples of _N. crawfordi_ proves our specimen to be referable
to the latter. We presume that the shrew reported as _evotis_ on
geographic grounds from El Carrizo by Hooper (1961:120) also is
referable to _crawfordi_. External measurements of our female are: total
length, 77; length of tail, 20 (tip missing); length of hind foot, 11;
length of ear from notch, 8; weight in grams, 4. Cranial measurements of
this individual are given in Table 1.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Map of Sinaloa on which are plotted symbols
representing placenames mentioned in text. From north to south, these
are: El Fuerte; San Miguel; Los Mochis; Guamúchil; Terrero; Pericos;
Culiacán; El Dorado; Piaxtla and Camino Reál (one symbol); Pánuco;
Mazatlán; Matatán; Rosario; Escuinapa; Concepción.]

_Notiosorex evotis_ (Coues).--Four topotypes (85533-36), all males, were
collected by Lee at Mazatlán. One was caught on December 17, 1960, in a
museum special trap set "in low weeds near thorn bush" in a sandy field
at the north edge of Mazatlán, less than a mile from the ocean. A few
trees and some grasses grew in this area; _Mus musculus_ and
_Perognathus pernix_ were taken in the same line of traps. Additional
trapping at this locality failed to produce more shrews. The other
three specimens were captured alive on February 1 (one) and February 2
(two), 1961, in the wake of a bulldozer that was clearing land adjacent
to the place where the first specimen was trapped. The ground cover
being cleared away consisted mostly of dry, dense weeds and short,
thorny scrub; the latter was sparse in some places and formed dense
thickets in others. One individual that was kept alive for a short time
in a can ate crickets and roaches readily and ate one spider, but
refused isopods. On one occasion it ate six crickets in about three
hours. Wet oatmeal and oatmeal mixed with peanut butter both were
refused.

TABLE 1. CRANIAL MEASUREMENTS OF TWO SPECIES OF NOTIOSOREX.

Table Legend for the table headers:

Column CA: Catalogue number, or number of specimens averaged, and sex
Column CO: Condylobasal length
Column IN: Interorbital constriction
Column MA: Maxillary breadth
Column CR: Cranial breadth
Column PA: Palatal length
Column LE: Length of maxillary tooth-row

====================================================================
        CA          |  CO   |  IN   |  MA   |  CR   |  PA   |  LE
--------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------

          _Notiosorex crawfordi_, Huachuca Mts., Arizona[A]

                    |       |       |       |       |       |
Average 6 (2♂, 4♀)  | 16.01 |  3.72 |  5.08 |  8.32 |  6.59 |  5.93
Minimum             | 15.7  |  3.6  |  4.9  |  7.8  |  6.3  |  5.8
Maximum             | 16.5  |  3.85 |  5.2  |  8.8  |  7.15 |  6.2

                        El Fuerte, Sinaloa

75184 KU, ♀         | 16.5  |  3.7  |  5.0  |  8.4  |  6.9  |  6.1

                      SW Guadalajara, Jalisco

33318 KU, ♂         |  ..   |  3.6  |  4.9  |  ..   |  7.1  |  5.7
42583 KU, ?         | 15.0+ |  3.5  |  4.6  |  ..   |  6.6  |  5.4±
42584 KU, ?         |  ..   |  3.6  |  4.9  |  ..   |  7.1± |  6.1±

                    2 mi. E La Palma, Michoacán

42586 KU, ?         |  ..   |  3.8  |  4.9  |  ..   |  6.9  |  ..
42587 KU, ?         |  ..   |  3.8  |  4.8  |  ..   |  6.9  |  6.0
42588 KU, ?         |  ..   |  ..   |  4.9  |  ..   |  6.9  |  6.2

                _Notiosorex evotis_, Mazatlán, Sinaloa

Average 4 (♂)       | 17.68 |  4.05 |  5.37 |  8.68 |  7.60 |  6.58
Minimum             | 17.4  |  4.0  |  5.3  |  8.5  |  7.5  |  6.5
Maximum             | 17.9  |  4.1  |  5.4  |  8.8  |  7.7  |  6.7
--------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------

[Footnote A: After Hoffmeister and Goodpaster, 1954:51.]

     Average and extreme external measurements of the four males are as
     follows: total length, 93.2 (90-98); length of tail, 25.5 (23-27);
     length of hind foot, 11.9 (11-13); length of ear from notch, 7.7
     (7-8); weight in grams, 5.4 (4.4-6.3). Cranial measurements are
     given in Table 1.

_Notiosorex evotis_ was described by Coues (1877:652) on the basis of a
single specimen, obtained at Mazatlán by Ferdinand Bischoff in 1868,
that originally had at least the partial skull inside. Subsequently the
skull was removed and evidently lost (Poole and Schantz, 1942:181).
Coues named _evotis_ as a species distinct from _crawfordi_ (described
by him in the same paper) on the basis of larger size, shorter tail, and
alleged slight differences in color. He did not describe the skull, but
did note that the dentition was "substantially the same as that of _N.
crawfordi_." Evidently, the only other correctly identified specimen of
_evotis_ on record is an individual from Mazatlán in the British Museum,
the skull of which was figured by Dobson (1890:pl. 23, fig. 20).

Merriam (1895:34) characterized _evotis_, known to him by only the
holotype, as: "Similar to _N. crawfordi_, but slightly larger and
darker." He did not examine the skull, which by that time had been "lost
or mislaid." Merriam reduced _evotis_ to subspecific status under
_crawfordi_ with the following remarks: "In the absence of sufficient
material of _N. evotis_, it is impossible to determine its exact
relations to _crawfordi_. Dobson did not recognize it as distinct, but
figured its teeth under the name _crawfordi_ [_loc. cit._, possibly a
_lapsus_]. For the present it seems best to retain it as a subspecies."

Merriam's arrangement of _evotis_ as a subspecies of _crawfordi_ has
been followed by subsequent workers, mostly, we suppose, because
additional material of undoubted _evotis_ has not until now been
available. Comparisons of our four specimens with specimens (from
Jalisco, Sinaloa and Tamaulipas) and published descriptions and
measurements (see especially Hoffmeister and Goodpaster, 1954:46-47, 51)
of _crawfordi_ reveal that _evotis_ has a longer body and hind foot than
_crawfordi_ but a relatively (sometimes actually) shorter tail and ear,
and a distinctly larger, heavier skull (see Table 1). The upper parts of
our specimens average pale brownish gray and are paler, not darker, than
the upper parts of _crawfordi_. But, all of the latter were obtained in
the warm months of the year except one November-taken individual from El
Fuerte, Sinaloa, the dorsal pelage of which approaches in color that of
the darkest of the _evotis_. The pelage of both kinds probably is paler
in winter than in summer and may be indistinguishable in the same
season. Ventrally, all four _evotis_ are grayish white, faintly to
moderately tinged with brownish buff.

_Notiosorex evotis_ differs cranially from _Notiosorex crawfordi_ as
follows: larger (see measurements); mesopterygoid fossa squared rather
than broadly U-shaped anteriorly; rounded process on maxillary at
posterior border of infraorbital canal well developed (faint or lacking
in _crawfordi_); occipital condyles smaller and, in lateral view,
elevated above basal plane of skull; upper molars slightly more crowded
in occlusal view. These differences, although admittedly slight, appear
to be constant in the specimens we have seen, but ought to be used
cautiously owing to the small samples studied.

Shrews of the genus _Notiosorex_ have been reported twice previously
from localities in west-central México, other than from Mazatlán, as
follows: 21 mi. SW Guadalajara (remains from owl pellets) and 13 mi. S,
15 mi. W Guadalajara, Jalisco, by Twente and Baker (1951:120-121); and
Cerrito Loco, 2 mi. E La Palma, Michoacán (remains from owl pellets), by
Baker and Alcorn (1953:116). The remains were referred to _evotis_ on
geographic grounds in one instance and were so referred inferentially in
the other. Examination of the specimens upon which these reports were
based reveals that all are _crawfordi_ on the basis of characters
previously cited. As a result, _N. evotis_ is known only from the type
locality at Mazatlán, whereas _N. crawfordi_ is widely distributed on
the Mexican Plateau as far south as Jalisco and northern Michoacán, and
occurs on the west side of the Sierra Occidental as far south as
northern Sinaloa.

The two kinds obviously are closely related and intergradation
eventually may be demonstrated between them. But, for the present, we
adopt a conservative course and treat _evotis_ as a full species owing
to its distinctive features, restricted geographic distribution, and the
lack of evidence of intergradation between it and _crawfordi_.

_=Balantiopteryx plicata pallida=_ Burt.--Thirty-five specimens from two
adjacent localities along the Río del Fuerte in northern Sinaloa, 3 mi.
NE San Miguel, 300 ft. (84944-48) and 10 mi. NNE Los Mochis (60572-75,
60667-78, 60681-94), provide the first records of the subspecies from
the state. Individuals from both localities were shot at dusk as they
foraged among trees in the valley of the river. Fifteen of 18 females
from 10 mi. NNE Los Mochis, collected on June 5, 6 and 7, 1955, were
pregnant; each contained a single embryo, the embryos ranging from 7 to
15 mm. in crown-rump length. _B. p. pallida_ previously has been
reported from the southern parts of Baja California and Sonora.

_=Balantiopteryx plicata plicata=_ Peters.--Specimens in the Museum of
Natural History from the following localities, several of which are
marginal, document better than previously has been done the distribution
of this subspecies in Sinaloa: 32 mi. SSE Culiacán (60699); 10 mi. SE
Escuinapa (68629); 17 mi. SSE Guamúchil (60576); 5 mi. NW Mazatlán
(85537-61, 85901-04); 1 mi. SE Mazatlán, 10 ft. (39461-76); 1 mi. S
Pericos (60697-98, 60700); ½ mi. E Piaxtla (60701); ½ mi. W Rosario,
100 ft. (39477-79); 5 mi. SSE Rosario (60702-03); 4 mi. N Terrero
(60695-96).

Pregnant females, each with a single embryo, were recorded in 1954 from
4 mi. N Terrero, 2 (June 9), 1 mi. S Pericos, 2 (June 13), and 5 mi. SSE
Rosario, 2 (June 20). None of 16 December-taken females from 5 mi. NW
Mazatlán was pregnant.

The specimen from 17 mi. SSE Guamúchil, preserved in alcohol, is
provisionally referred to _B. p. plicata_ on geographic grounds inasmuch
as specimens from the nearby localities of 1 mi. S Pericos and 4 mi. N
Terrero, although more grayish on the average than specimens from
southern Sinaloa, are somewhat darker and distinctly larger than
specimens of _B. p. pallida_ from along the Río del Fuerte in northern
Sinaloa. Specimens from southern Sinaloa average only slightly paler
than typical _plicata_ examined from southern México and Nicaragua.

_=Pteronotus psilotis=_ (Dobson).--A total of six specimens from two
localities in southern Sinaloa provide the first records from the state
and are the northernmost records in western México. The two localities
are: ½ mi. S Concepción, 250 ft. (84987-90); 1 mi. W Matatán
(84985-86). The two individuals from the last-mentioned place extend the
known range of the species approximately 275 miles north-northwest from
a locality 7 mi. W, ½ mi. S Santiago, Colima (Anderson, 1956:349), and
place the limit of the known distribution of _P. psilotis_ farther to
the north in western México than in the eastern part of the country. We
follow Burt and Stirton (1961:24-25) in use of the generic name
_Pteronotus_ for this species.

The two specimens from 1 mi. W Matatán were shot at late dusk as they
foraged with other bats, presumably of the same species, low over water
at the place where the Río San Antonio joins the larger Río Baluarte.
The four individuals from ½ mi. S Concepción were captured in mist
nets stretched across the Río de las Cañas at the Sinaloa-Nayarit
border, and were taken shortly after dark at heights of three feet or
less above the water. Our six specimens all are males. Five are in the
reddish color phase and one is in the brownish phase.

     Average and extreme measurements of the six males, which average
     slightly smaller than specimens examined from Colima and Guerrero,
     are as follows: total length, 66.8 (65-69); length of tail, 16.3
     (15-18); length of hind foot, 11.8 (11-12); length of ear from
     notch, 16.9 (16.5-17.0); length of forearm (dry), 41.5 (40.6-42.4);
     weight in grams, 8.3 (6.9-9.8); greatest length of skull, 15.4
     (15.2-15.5); zygomatic breadth, 8.3 (8.2-8.4); interorbital
     constriction, 3.4 (3.3-3.6); mastoid breadth, 8.7 (8.6-8.8); length
     of maxillary tooth-row, 5.8 (5.8-5.9); breadth across M3, 5.4
     (5.3-5.6).

_=Sturnira lilium parvidens=_ Goldman.--The first specimens to be
reported from Sinaloa are as follows: 32 mi. SSE Culiacán (61087); 1 mi.
S El Dorado (75207); Pánuco, 22 km. NE Concordia (85648-50). The three
bats from the last-mentioned locality were caught after midnight in a
mist net stretched across a road adjacent to a nearly dry stream bed.
The vegetation in the vicinity of the net consisted mostly of dry weeds
and grass along with some low shrubs, but a tree-filled canyon was about
one-fourth mile above the net. We lack details about the capture of the
other two bats.

_S. l. parvidens_ has been reported only once from farther north in
western México than Sinaloa. Anderson (1960:7) recorded five specimens
from along the Río Septentrión, 1½ mi. SW Tocuina, Chihuahua.

_=Artibeus lituratus palmarum=_ Allen and Chapman.--This species has
been reported once previously from Sinaloa (from 1 mi. S El Dorado by
Anderson, 1960:3). Six specimens (85668-72, 85674), all males, collected
on December 23 and 24, 1960, at Pánuco, 22 km. NE Concordia, provide the
second known occurrence in the state.

_=Artibeus toltecus=_ (Saussure).--A male (85666) from Pánuco, 22 km. NE
Concordia, provides the first record of this species from Sinaloa and
extends the known range northwestward approximately 182 miles from Ambas
Aguas [= 6½ km. SW Amatlán de Jora], Nayarit (Andersen, 1908:300). Our
specimen was taken on December 22, 1960, in a mist net placed across a
road in an area where vegetation consisted mostly of weeds, grasses and
shrubs. Two _Glossophaga soricina leachii_ and two _Choeronycteris
mexicana_ were taken in the same net.

Davis' (1958:165-166) key is useful in separating the small Mexican
members of the genus _Artibeus_, but we have found some adults of
_toltecus_ to be smaller than the key indicates. For example, in the 12
Mexican specimens (Oaxaca, 6, Tamaulipas, 3, Jalisco, 2, Sinaloa, 1)
examined by us the total length of skull varies from 19.7 to 21.0 and
the forearm from 36.3 to 42.6.

Dalquest (1953) and more recently Koopman (1961) regarded _A. toltecus_
and the larger _A. aztecus_, which occurs in the same areas but at
higher elevations than _toltecus_, as subspecies of the more southerly
_A. cinereus_. Davis (_op. cit._), on the other hand, recognized
_toltecus_, _aztecus_, and _cinereus_ as distinct species. More
specimens of small and medium-sized _Artibeus_ are needed from México
before this baffling complex can be studied adequately, but on the basis
of specimens examined we are inclined to agree with Davis as concerns
the specific distinctness of _toltecus_ and _aztecus_. In Tamaulipas
(the mammalian fauna of which is currently under study by Alvarez) for
example, _toltecus_ is known from Rancho Pano Ayuctle at an elevation of
300 feet in tropical deciduous forest, whereas _aztecus_ has been taken
only four miles away at Rancho del Cielo, but at an elevation of 3000
feet in cloud forest. The altitudinal difference between ranges of the
two kinds in Tamaulipas corresponds to that found in Sinaloa (see
Koopman, _loc. cit._) and is of approximately the same magnitude found
by Davis at higher elevations in Guerrero. This relationship suggests
that the two kinds are neither subspecies of a single species, nor
individual variants of a widespread, monotypic species, but probably are
two different species. We agree that one, most likely the smaller
_toltecus_, may eventually prove to be a northern subspecies of
_cinereus_.

_=Myotis occultus=_ Hollister.--A single specimen of this species
(67491) from 1 mi. N, ½ mi. E San Miguel provides the first certain
record from Sinaloa, and is indistinguishable from specimens from
Alamos, Sonora, that were referred to _occultus_ by Hall and Dalquest
(1950:587). Miller and Allen (1928:100) identified a skin alone from
Escuinapa as _occultus_, but Hall and Dalquest (_loc. cit._) later
assigned this specimen provisionally to _M. fortidens_ on geographic
grounds and because it agreed in color with undoubted specimens of the
latter from Guerrero. Specimens from south of San Miguel and north of
the undoubted range of _fortidens_ are needed in order to ascertain
whether the two kinds are distinct species or instead only subspecies of
a single species.

The Sinaloan bat was taken in a mist net stretched over a drainage ditch
adjacent to the Río del Fuerte on the night of June 19-20, 1955, by R.
H. Baker. Several other kinds of bats were obtained (shot or netted) at
the same place, among which was one specimen of _Myotis velifer_. The
specimens studied of _occultus_ from Sinaloa and Sonora are clearly
separable from specimens of _velifer_ from the same region (Sonora and
northern Sinaloa) in having paler (more reddish) pelage, shorter
forearm, smaller skull, relatively broader rostrum, and four fewer
teeth.

_=Myotis velifer velifer=_ (J. A. Allen).--Three specimens from the
following localities in northern Sinaloa provide the first records of
the species from the state: El Fuerte (75234); Río del Fuerte, 1 mi. N,
½ mi. E San Miguel (67490); Río del Fuerte, 10 mi. NNW Los Mochis
(61149). The subspecies _M. v. velifer_ has been reported previously
from the adjacent states of Chihuahua, Durango, and Sonora.

A female (61149) obtained on June 8, 1954, carried a single embryo that
measured 3 mm. in crown-rump length.

_=Lasiurus borealis teliotis=_ (H. Allen).--A female from 10 mi. NNW Los
Mochis (61172), obtained on June 8, 1954, represents the first record of
the species from Sinaloa, and is tentatively referred to this
subspecies. It resembles cranially, but is paler than, Californian
specimens seen of _teliotis_.

_=Molossus ater nigricans=_ Miller.--This large free-tailed bat
previously has been reported no farther north in western México than the
type locality, Acaponeta, Nayarit. Nineteen specimens from four
different localities in Sinaloa are as follows: 1 mi. SE Camino Reál,
400 ft. (85093-99); 32 mi. SSE Culiacán (61279-87); 1 mi. S Pericos
(61277-78); ½ mi. E Piaxtla (61288). The specimens labeled with
reference to Camino Reál and Piaxtla were obtained along the Río Piaxtla
at approximately the same place. Those from 1 mi. S Pericos extend the
known range of the species approximately 225 miles northwestward.

_M. a. nigricans_ is characteristically an early flier. Along the Río
Piaxtla, 1 mi. SE Camino Reál, where bats probably found daytime
retreats in the rocky walls of the steep-sided valley of the river,
individuals first appeared early in the evening when the sun was still
on the western horizon, but were gone before other species of bats were
seen. A female from 32 mi. SSE Culiacán, taken on June 18, 1954,
contained one embryo that was 18 mm. in crown-rump length. Each of the
color phases of the species, reddish (8) and black (11), are represented
among our specimens. We follow Goodwin (1960) in the use of the specific
name _ater_ for this bat.

_=Dasypus novemcinctus mexicanus=_ Peters.--Two armadillos (85402-03)
from the valley of the Río del Fuerte, 3 mi. NE San Miguel, 300 ft., are
the first of the species to be reported from northern Sinaloa. They
extend the known range northwestward in the state approximately 285
miles from Escuinapa (Russell, 1953:25) and signal the possible
occurrence of _D. n. mexicanus_ in southern Sonora. Sign of the
armadillo was abundant at the place where our two specimens were
collected. Because it was felt that the species possibly had been
introduced along the Río del Fuerte, a number of local residents were
questioned on the point, but all insisted that armadillos were native to
the area.

     External measurements of 85402 (female) and 85403 (male) are,
     respectively, as follows: total length, 725, 748; length of tail,
     351, 357; length of hind foot, 87, 89; length of ear from notch,
     39, 39.

_=Sylvilagus audubonii goldmani=_ (Nelson).--This cottontail has been
reported from Sinaloa only from Bacubirito, Culiacán (type locality),
and Sinaloa (Nelson, 1909:226). Additional records are: 12 mi. N
Culiacán (67561-62); 6 mi. N El Dorado (75263); 6 mi. N, 1½ mi. E El
Dorado (75264-66); 7 mi. NE El Fuerte (81076-77); and 1 mi. S Pericos
(61292-93). Specimens from the vicinity of El Dorado extend the known
range some 30 miles southward from the type locality. A female from 1
mi. S Pericos that was taken on June 13, 1954, carried three embryos
that measured 29 mm. in crown-rump length.

_=Sciurus truei=_ Nelson.--Three specimens (61300-02) of this species
collected by A. A. Alcorn on June 19, 1954, 32 mi. SSE Culiacán extend
the known range approximately 210 miles south-southeast from Guirocoba,
Sonora (Burt, 1938:38), and provide the first record from Sinaloa. Two
of the specimens are females and each was pregnant, one with two embryos
and the other with three.

Our specimens generally agree in color with _S. truei_, but are larger
than typical individuals and in this respect approach _S. sinaloensis_
of southern Sinaloa. Probably _truei_ and _sinaloensis_ both are only
subspecies of the more southerly _S. colliaei_. The three nominal
species currently constitute the _S. colliaei_ group in which the
presence or absence of P3 seems to vary geographically. The tooth
frequently is absent in the northern _truei_ and usually present
(invariably in the specimens we have examined) in _colliaei_. Only one
of our Sinaloan specimens is accompanied by a skull; in it P3 is present
on the right side and absent on the left.

     External measurements of the male and two females are,
     respectively: total length, 512, 508, 504; length of tail, 263,
     263, 252; length of hind foot, 64, 63, 64; length of ear from
     notch, 28, 29, 28. Cranial measurements of 61300 (a female) are:
     greatest length of skull, 56.2; zygomatic breadth, 32.6;
     interorbital constriction, 17.9; postorbital constriction, 17.9;
     length of nasals, 17.3; alveolar length of maxillary tooth-row (on
     side lacking P3), 10.9.

_=Thomomys umbrinus atrovarius=_ J. A. Allen.--Two specimens (85104-05)
from the valley of the Río Piaxtla, 1 mi. SE Camino Reál, 400 ft.,
resemble the description of _atrovarius_ and agree in size, color and
most cranial details with a specimen (85744) from 5 mi. NW Mazatlán. The
first-mentioned specimens extend the known range of the subspecies some
50 miles northward from Mazatlán (Bailey, 1915:96), and indicate the
probable occurrence of the species at lower elevations in other parts of
central Sinaloa.

_=Peromyscus merriami goldmani=_ Osgood.--This subspecies has been
reported previously only from the type locality, Alamos, Sonora. Eight
specimens were collected in Sinaloa by W. L. Cutter in the autumn of
1957 as follows: 6 mi. N, 1½ mi. E El Dorado (75368-72); 2½ mi. N
El Fuerte (75365-66); El Fuerte (75367). The first-mentional locality is
approximately 200 miles south-south-east of the type locality. All
specimens collected by Cutter were taken in lowland areas, supporting
remarks by Commissaris (1960) concerning habitat preferences of _P.
merriami_ as compared with those of the closely related _P. eremicus_.

Two of three females from northeast of El Dorado were pregnant on
November 18 and 19; one carried four embryos (8 mm. in crown-rump
length) and the other three (11 mm.).

     External and cranial measurements of _P. m. goldmani_ previously
     were known only for the holotype (Osgood, 1909:252, 267).
     Measurements of five adults, a male (75370) and four females
     (75365, 75369, 75371-72) are, respectively, as follows: total
     length, 204, 225, 215, 214, 210; length of tail, 105, 120, 110,
     108, 109; length of hind foot, 21, 23, 23, 22, 22; length of ear
     from notch, 21, 21, 21, 20, 21; weight in grams, 29, 19, 35
     (pregnant), 33, 34 (pregnant); greatest length of skull, 26.6,
     26.5, 26.9, 26.5,----; zygomatic breadth, 13.8, 13.9, 14.1,
     13.4,----; interorbital constriction, 3.9, 3.8, 4.0, 4.0,----;
     mastoid breadth, 11.8, 11.9, 11.8, 11.9, 11.5; length of nasals,
     10.1, 9.4, 10.0, 10.0,----; length of maxillary tooth-row, 4.5,
     4.3, 4.1, 4.1, 4.1.

_=Onychomys torridus yakiensis=_ Merriam.--Only one specimen of this
grasshopper mouse has been reported previously from Sinaloa (from the
town of Sinaloa by Hollister, 1914:471). Thirteen specimens in the
Museum of Natural History better define the range of the species in the
state as follows: 12 mi. N Culiacán (67981-82); 6 mi. N, 1½ mi. E El
Dorado (75374-80); 2½ mi. N El Fuerte (75373); 1 mi. S Pericos
(62118-20). The individuals from northeast of El Dorado extend the known
range of the species some 115 miles south-southeast from Sinaloa.

A female taken on November 17, 1957, from 6 mi. N, 1½ mi. E El Dorado
carried two embryos that measured 23 mm. in crown-rump length. A female
obtained on November 18 at the same place carried four embryos that
measured 10 mm.

_=Neotoma albigula melanura=_ Merriam.--Four specimens from northern
Sinaloa, two (85379-80) from 3 mi. N, 1 mi. E San Miguel, 350 ft., and
two (75386-87) from 2½ mi. N El Fuerte, provide the first records of
the species from the state. _N. a. melanura_ has been known previously
from adjacent parts of Sonora and Chihuahua (see Hall and Kelson,
1959:687-688). The specimens from northeast of San Miguel were trapped
in runways under cholla cactus, in which nests also were found, on a
slope above a rocky arroyo.

_=Spilogale pygmaea=_ Thomas.--Two pygmy spotted skunks from 5 mi. NW
Mazatlán (85898-99) are the fifth and sixth of the species to be
reported (see Van Gelder, 1959:381) and the second and third taken in
Sinaloa (the holotype of _pygmaea_ was obtained at Rosario). One of our
specimens, an adult male, was shot on the night of January 10, 1961, as
it foraged near an old hollow tree in weedy-thorn bush habitat adjacent
to the Pacific Ocean. The hollow tree contained the nest of a woodrat.
The second, an adult female, was trapped nearby in a commercial rat trap
baited with peanut butter and set near a burrow in a forested area
having little undergrowth.

     The two individuals here reported fit fairly well the description
     of color pattern given for the species by Van Gelder (_op. cit._:
     379), but are larger (considering sex), externally and cranially,
     than any of the four specimens reported previously. Measurements of
     the male and female are, respectively: total length, 291, 270;
     length of tail, 65, 58; length of hind foot, 38, 35; length of ear
     from notch, 25, 23; weight in grams, 247.0, 190.5; condylobasal
     length, 46.0, 42.9; occipitonasal length, 45.0, 41.4; zygomatic
     breadth, 29.0, 27.3; mastoid breadth, 23.9, 22.5; interorbital
     constriction, 14.3, 13.6; postorbital constriction, 14.8, 14.1;
     palatilar length, 15.6, 14.6; postpalatal length, 23.2, 22.4;
     cranial depth, 16.6, 15.2; length of maxillary tooth-row, 14.2,
     13.4. Cranial measurements were taken in the manner described by
     Van Gelder (_op. cit._: 236-237).


LITERATURE CITED

ANDERSEN, K.

     1908. A monograph of the Chiropteran genera _Uroderma_,
     _Enchistenes_, and _Artibeus_. Proc. Zool. Soc. London, pp.
     204-319, illustrated, September.

ANDERSON, S.

     1956. Extension of known ranges of Mexican bats. Univ. Kansas
     Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 9:347-351, August 15.

     1960. Neotropical bats from western México. Univ. Kansas Publ.,
     Mus. Nat. Hist., 14:1-8, October 24.

BAILEY, V.

     1915. Revision of the pocket gophers of the genus Thomomys. N.
     Amer. Fauna, 39:1-126, 8 pls., 10 figs., November 15.

BAKER, R. H., and A. A. ALCORN

     1953. Shrews from Michoacán, México, found in barn owl pellets.
     Jour. Mamm., 34:116, February 9.

BURT, W. H.

     1938. Faunal relationships and geographic distribution of mammals
     in Sonora, Mexico. Misc. Publ. Mus. Zool., Univ. Michigan, 39:1-77,
     26 maps, February 15.

BURT, W. H., and R. A. STIRTON

     1961. The mammals of El Salvador. Misc. Publ. Mus. Zool., Univ.
     Michigan, 117:1-69, 1 fig., September 22.

COMMISSARIS, L. R.

     1960. Morphological and ecological differentiation of _Peromyscus
     merriami_ from southern Arizona. Journ. Mamm., 41:305-310, 2 figs.,
     August 15.

COUES, E.

     1877. Precursory notes on American insectivorous mammals, with
     descriptions of new species. Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv. Territories,
     3:631-653, May 15.

DALQUEST, W. W.

     1953. Mexican bats of the genus Artibeus. Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 66:61-65, August 10.

DAVIS, W. B.

     1958. Review of the Mexican bats of the Artibeus "cinereus"
     complex. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 71:163-166, 1 fig., December
     31.

DOBSON, G. E.

     1890. A monograph of the Insectivora, systematic and anatomical.
     Part III (includes only plates XXIII-XXVIII), Gurney and Jackson,
     London, May.

GOODWIN, G. G.

     1960. The status of _Vespertilio auripendulus_ Shaw, 1800, and
     _Molossus ater_ Geoffroy, 1805. Amer. Mus. Novit, 1994:1-6, 1 fig.,
     March 8.

HALL, E. R., and W. W. DALQUEST

     1950. Pipistrellus cinnamomeus Miller 1902 referred to the genus
     Myotis. Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 1:581-590, 5 figs.,
     January 20.

HALL, E. R., and K. R. KELSON

     1959. The mammals of North America. Ronald Press, New York,
     2:viii+547-1083+79, illustrated, March 31.

HOFFMEISTER, D. H., and W. W. GOODPASTER

     1954. The mammals of the Huachuca Mountains, southeastern Arizona.
     Illinois Biol. Monog., 24:v+1-152, 27 figs., December 31.

HOLLISTER, N.

     1914. A systematic account of the grasshopper mice. Proc. U. S.
     Nat. Mus., 47:427-489, pl. 15, 3 figs., October 29.

HOOPER, E. T.

     1961. Notes on mammals from western and southern Mexico. Jour.
     Mamm., 42:120-122, February 20.

KOOPMAN, K. F.

     1961. A collection of bats from Sinaloa, with remarks on the limits
     of the Neotropical Region in northwestern Mexico. Jour. Mamm.,
     42:536-538, November 20.

MERRIAM, C. H.

     1895. Revision of the shrews of the American genera Blarina and
     Notiosorex. N. Amer. Fauna, 10:5-34, pls. 1-3, 2 figs., December
     31.

MILLER, G. S., JR., and G. M. ALLEN

     1928. The American bats of the genera Myotis and Pixonyx. Bull. U.
     S. Nat. Mus., 144:viii+1-218, 1 pl., 1 fig., 13 maps, May 25.

NELSON E. W.

     1909. The rabbits of North America. N. Amer. Fauna, 29:1-314, 13
     pls., 19 figs., August 31.

OSGOOD, W. H.

     1909. Revision of the mice of the American genus Peromyscus. N.
     Amer. Fauna, 28:1-285, 8 pls., 12 figs., April 17.

POOLE, A. J., and V. S. SCHANTZ

     1942. Catalog of the type specimens of mammals in the United States
     National Museum, including the Biological Surveys collection. Bull.
     U. S. Nat. Mus., 178:xiii+1-705, April 9.

RUSSELL, R. J.

     1953. Description of a new armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus) from
     Mexico with remarks on geographic variation of the species. Proc.
     Biol. Soc. Washington, 66:21-25, March 30.

TWENTE, J. W., and R. H. BAKER

     1951. New records of mammals from Jalisco, Mexico, from barn owl
     pellets. Jour. Mamm., 32:120-121, February 15.

VAN GELDER, R. G.

     1959. A taxonomic revision of the spotted skunks (genus
     _Spilogale_). Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 117:229-392, 47 figs.,
     June 15.


_Transmitted March 15, 1962_.


[SQUARE]

29-3000

       *       *       *       *       *


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

Corrected typo: semi-colon for comma in "postpalatal length, 23.2,
22.4;".

Italic typeface is indicated by _underscores_.

Bold typeface is indicated by =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Noteworthy Mammals from Sinaloa, Mexico, by 
J. Knox Jones, Jr. and Ticul Alvarez and M. Raymond Lee

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS ***

***** This file should be named 31683-0.txt or 31683-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/8/31683/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Simon Gardner and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
