The Project Gutenberg EBook of An Annotated Checklist of Nebraskan Bats, by 
Olin L. Webb and J. Knox Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: An Annotated Checklist of Nebraskan Bats

Author: Olin L. Webb
        J. Knox Jones

Release Date: February 19, 2010 [EBook #31325]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNOTATED CHECKLIST--NEBRASKAN BATS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net











An Annotated Checklist of Nebraskan Bats

BY

OLIN L. WEBB and J. KNOX JONES, JR.


University of Kansas Publications
Museum of Natural History

Volume 5, No. 21, pp. 269-279
May 31, 1952


University of Kansas
LAWRENCE
1952




UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
Edward H. Taylor, Robert W. Wilson

Volume 5, No. 21, pp. 269-279
May 31, 1952


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED BY
FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1952

24-2965




An Annotated Checklist of Nebraskan Bats

BY

OLIN L. WEBB and J. KNOX JONES, JR.


HISTORY

The first mention of bats in Nebraska possibly was by Harrison Allen,
in his "Monograph of the Bats of North America" (1864:14, 20, 30, 35,
42), who listed _Nycticejus crepuscularis_ [= _Nycticeius humeralis_],
_Lasiurus borealis_, _Scotophilus carolinensis_ and _Scotophilus
fuscus_ [both = _Eptesicus fuscus_], and _Scotophilus noctivagans_ [=
_Lasionycteris noctivagans_], as collected in "Nebraska" (then Nebraska
Territory) by J. G. Cooper. Henry W. Setzer (in _litt._) reports that
none of the bats collected by Cooper now exists in the United States
National Museum and that no data pertaining to any of them are
available except that a single specimen of _Nycticeius humeralis_ was
traded to the British Museum in 1866. Cooper journeyed through parts of
the present state of Nebraska in the summer and autumn of 1857 and,
judging from Taylor's (1919:72-80) report of Cooper's travels, this was
the only time he entered any part of Nebraska Territory. The writers
are of the opinion that the specimens in question probably were
collected in Nebraska; but since Allen listed no exact localities or
dates of collection and since the specimens and data pertaining to them
are not now available, we have not included them here as Nebraskan
records.

In the first comprehensive account of Nebraskan mammals, Myron H. Swenk
(1908:137-139) listed six kinds of bats, _Myotis evotis_, _Myotis
californicus ciliolabrum_ [= _Myotis subulatus subulatus_],
_Lasionycteris noctivagans_, _Eptesicus fuscus_, _Lasiurus borealis_,
and _Lasiurus cinereus_, as occurring within the state. Zimmer
(1913:665) recorded _Nyctinomus mexicanus_ [= _Tadarida mexicana_] from
Nebraska. Subsequently, Swenk (1915:854) reported _Myotis lucifugus
lucifugus_ in the state and three years later (1918:411) he reported
_Eptesicus fuscus pallidus_ for the first time. The report of _M. l.
lucifugus_ seemingly was not substantiated by any actual specimens. The
addition of _Myotis volans interior_ (Quay, 1948:181) brought to ten
the number of species and subspecies of bats reported from the state.

In the present paper, _Myotis keenii septentrionalis_, _Myotis
lucifugus carissima_, and _Pipistrellus subflavus subflavus_ are
reported from Nebraska for the first time. Also, the first authentic
record of _Myotis lucifugus lucifugus_ is presented, along with
additional information on previously reported species. A total number
of 169 specimens from Nebraska was available for the present study.
This includes almost all of the known specimens preserved in all
collections as well as material obtained by us in the past six years.

Nebraska has no natural caves or caverns; however, there are two
extensive man-made limestone caves near Louisville, in Cass and Sarpy
counties, where four kinds of bats have been found. Two of these are
here reported as new to Nebraska. The quarries, one on either side of
the Platte River Valley, are in a horizontal stratum of limestone 40
feet in thickness, and are of the room and pillar type; that is to say,
the stone has been quarried away leaving rooms having supporting
pillars approximately every 50 feet. The average temperatures in summer
and winter within these tunnels, recorded over a period of several
years by the Ash Grove Lime and Portland Cement Company of Louisville,
are 65° F. and 50° F. respectively. The Kiewit Stone Quarry, abandoned
since 1936, is one-half mile west of Meadow, Sarpy County, and has one
remaining entrance measuring approximately 30 by 30 feet. This quarry
has an area of approximately one-fifth square mile and is usually
flooded with several feet of water. The other man-made cave, known
formerly as the National Stone Quarry, is one mile northeast of
Louisville, Cass County. This quarry was abandoned in September, 1938,
and until the winter of 1948-1949 had eight or nine entrances and two
air shafts. It was approximately one-third square mile in area. All the
openings to this quarry were covered in late 1949. Bats were first
observed in the National Stone Quarry by one of us (Webb) as early as
1939, less than a year after operations in the quarry ceased.


METHODS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

     Records of Nebraskan bats are arranged in two categories;
     specimens examined and additional records. The latter refer
     to citations in the literature. Genera are arranged
     according to Simpson (1945:59, 60), and species are listed
     alphabetically under each genus. Specimens examined are in
     the personal collection of the authors unless otherwise
     indicated.

     In connection with this study the authors acknowledge the
     assistance of Drs. Edson H. Fichter, Department of
     Biological Sciences, Idaho State College, and E. Raymond
     Hall and Rollin H. Baker, University of Kansas Museum of
     Natural History for critical assistance with the manuscript.
     We are indebted to Mr. Richard B. Loomis, University of
     Kansas, for aid in collecting specimens; to Dr. Henry W.
     Setzer, United States National Museum, for providing
     information on possible early Nebraskan records; and to Mr.
     Fred Brammer, Ash Grove Lime and Portland Cement Company,
     Louisville, Nebraska, for information on, and permission to
     collect in, the quarries of that area. For the loan of
     specimens we are grateful to Dr. William H. Burt, University
     of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Dr. C. Bertrand Schultz,
     University of Nebraska State Museum, Dr. Otis Wade,
     University of Nebraska Department of Zoology, Miss Lucille
     Drury, Cleveland Museum of Natural History, Mr. W. E.
     Eigsti, Hastings Museum, Hastings, Nebraska, and to those in
     charge of the collections of the Nebraska Game, Forestation
     and Parks Commission.


ACCOUNTS OF SPECIES

~Myotis evotis evotis~ (H. Allen)

Long-eared Myotis

     _Vespertilio evotis_ H. Allen, Smithsonian Misc. Coll.,
     165:48, June, 1864 (part), type from Monterey, Monterey Co.,
     California.

     _Myotis evotis_, Miller, N. Amer. Fauna, 13:78, October 16,
     1897.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Pine Ridge area of northwestern
     part of state.

     _Record of occurrence._--Specimen examined, 1, as follows:
     SIOUX CO.: Warbonnet Canyon, 1 (Univ. Nebr. State Mus.).

_Remarks._--This specimen was taken by Merritt Cary on July 22, 1901.


~Myotis keenii septentrionalis~ (Trouessart)

Eastern Long-eared Myotis

     [_Vespertilio gryphus_] var. _septentrionalis_ Trouessart,
     Catal. Mamm. viv. foss., p. 131, 1897, type from Halifax,
     Halifax Co., Nova Scotia.

     _Myotis keenii septentrionalis_, Miller and Allen, Bull. U.
     S. Nat. Mus., 144:105, May 25, 1928.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Known from limestone quarries
     in Cass and Sarpy counties. Probably in other parts of
     extreme eastern Nebraska.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 35, as
     follows: CASS CO.: 1 mi. NE Louisville, 4. SARPY CO.: 1/2
     mi. W Meadow, 31 (some of these specimens have been
     deposited in other collections as follows: Private
     Collection of P. H. Krutzsch, 3; Private Collection of W. G.
     Frum, 2; Nebr. Game, Forestation and Parks Comm., 1; Univ.
     Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist., 2; Univ. Nebr. State Mus., 7).

_Remarks._--Although not so common as _Pipistrellus_ in the limestone
quarries, hibernating bats of this species frequently are found there,
usually as solitary individuals either in drill holes or clinging to
the walls of the quarries; occasionally, however, two or three bats
have been found together in a single drill hole.


~Myotis lucifugus carissima~ Thomas

Brown Myotis

     _Myotis (Leuconoe) carissima_ Thomas, Ann. and Mag. Nat.
     Hist., (ser. 7), 13:383, May, 1904, type from Yellowstone
     Lake, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.

     _Myotis lucifugus carissima_, Cary, N. Amer. Fauna, 42:43,
     October 3, 1917.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Known from a single record in
     extreme northwestern Nebraska, but probably occurs
     throughout Panhandle of state.

     _Record of occurrence._--Specimen examined, 1, as follows:
     SIOUX CO.: Agate, 1 (Univ. Mich. Mus. Zool.).


~Myotis lucifugus lucifugus~ (Le Conte)

Brown Myotis

     _V[espertilio]. lucifugus_ Le Conte, McMurtrie's Cuvier,
     Animal Kingdom, 1:431, June, 1831, type from Georgia,
     probably from the Le Conte Plantation, near Riceboro,
     Liberty County.

     _Myotis lucifugus [lucifugus]_, Miller, N. Amer. Fauna,
     13:59, October 16, 1897.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Known only from the limestone
     quarry in Sarpy County, but probably occurs over most of
     eastern third of state.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 2, as follows:
     SARPY CO.: 1/2 mi. W Meadow, 2 (Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat.
     Hist., 1).

_Remarks._--Two bats of this subspecies were found in the quarry in
Sarpy County on December 30, 1949. None was found on subsequent visits
to the quarry, although three other species of bats have been found
there in large numbers. These specimens appear to be the first actual
records of _M. l. lucifugus_ in the state, although Swenk (1915:854,
and in subsequent lists) reported it as "uncommon eastwardly".

One of these bats, a male (KU 35076), possesses a peculiar dental
abnormality. Both of the second upper premolars (P3) are lacking,
although the mandibular dentition is normal. This condition has been
reported previously for this species by Frum (1946:176) in specimens
from West Virginia.


~Myotis subulatus subulatus~ (Say)

Small-footed Myotis

     _Vespertilio subulatus_ Say, Long's Exped. to Rocky Mts.,
     2:65 (footnote), 1823, type from the Arkansas River near La
     Junta, Otero Co., Colorado.

     _Myotis subulatus_, Warren, The Mammals of Colorado, G. P.
     Putnam's Sons, New York, 1910. p. 275.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Northern and western Nebraska.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 9, as follows:
     CHERRY CO.: Valentine, 1 (Univ. Nebr. Dept. Zool.). SHERIDAN
     CO.: Rushville, 1; 15 mi. N Rushville, 2. SIOUX CO.: Agate,
     1 (Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.); Monroe Canyon, 5-1/2 mi.
     N, 2-1/2 mi. W Harrison, 2 (Nebr. Game, Forestation and
     Parks Comm.); Warbonnet Canyon, 2 (Univ. Nebr. State Mus.).

     Additional records: DAKOTA CO.: Crystal Lake, 1 (Stephens,
     1945:92). DAWES CO.: Chadron, 1 (Miller and Allen,
     1928:169). SIOUX CO.: Antelope Township, 1 (Quay, 1948:181);
     Sugarloaf Township, 1 (Quay, 1948:181).

_Remarks._--This bat is common along the Niobrara River in the
northwestern part of the state. Stephens (_loc. cit._) reports taking
a bat of this species in Dakota County in the northeastern corner of
Nebraska. This specimen was sent to Swenk at the University of Nebraska
for positive identification and was, according to Stephens, deposited
in the Swenk collection. No trace of the specimen can be found at the
present time. It is here assigned to _M. s. subulatus_.

_M. s. subulatus_ has been observed frequently in the Pine Ridge area,
generally in association with _Eptesicus fuscus pallidus_. Two
specimens were shot by us from many that were seen flying over a small
clearing in the pines in northern Sioux County on August 2, 1949.
Several _Eptesicus_ were also obtained there. One of us (Webb) took two
of these bats from their daytime retreat in a barn north of Rushville,
Sheridan County, on September 5, 1951, where _Eptesicus_ was also
found. They are known to inhabit hay barns at the Ft. Niobrara Game
Reserve, Cherry County, also in association with _Eptesicus_. Swenk
(1908:137) reports finding two of these bats under a loose strip of
pine bark in Sioux County.


~Myotis volans interior~ Miller

Hairy-winged Myotis

     _Myotis longricus interior_ Miller, Proc. Biol. Soc.
     Washington, 27:211, October 31, 1914, type from Twining,
     Taos Co., New Mexico.

     _Myotis volans interior_, Miller and Allen, Bull. U. S. Nat.
     Mus., 144:142, May 25, 1928.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Badlands area of extreme
     northwestern part of state.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 2, as follows:
     SIOUX CO.: Warbonnet Township, 8 mi. N Harrison, 2
     (Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist.).

_Remarks._--Quay (1948:181) reported finding a colony of approximately
180 of these bats in northern Sioux County in the summer of 1944. They
were found in a crevice in a dry creek bed. He examined several dozen,
all females, two of which were saved as specimens.

The authors, while engaged in field work in this approximate locality
in the summers of 1948 and 1949, were unable to locate any of these
bats.


~Lasionycteris noctivagans~ (Le Conte)

Silver-haired Bat

     _V[espertilio], noctivagans_ Le Conte, McMurtrie's Cuvier,
     Animal Kingdom, 1:431, June, 1831, type from eastern United
     States.

     _Lasionycteris noctivagans_, Peters, Monatsber. k. preuss.
     Akad. Wissensch. Berlin, p. 648, 1865.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--"Entire state, fairly common
     during migrations but probably not breeding within our
     limits" (Swenk, 1908:138).

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 2, as follows:
     CLAY CO.: Inland, 1 (Hastings Museum, Hastings, Nebraska).
     FRANKLIN CO.: Campbell, 1 (Hastings Museum, Hastings,
     Nebraska).

     Additional records (Swenk, 1908:138): CUMING CO.: West
     Point. DOUGLAS CO.: Omaha. LANCASTER CO.: Lincoln. County
     undesignated: "Platte River".


~Pipistrellus subflavus subflavus~ (F. Cuvier)

Eastern Pipistrelle

     _V[espertilio]. subflavus_ F. Cuvier, Nouv. Ann. Mus. Hist.
     Nat. Paris, 1:17, 1832, type from eastern United States,
     probably Georgia.

     _Pipistrellus subflavus_, Miller, N. Amer. Fauna, 13:90,
     October 16, 1897.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Known from limestone quarries
     in Cass and Sarpy counties; probably ranging throughout
     eastern Nebraska.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 34, as
     follows: CASS CO.: 1 mi. NE Louisville, 4. SARPY CO.: 1/2
     mi. W Meadow, 30 (some of these specimens have been
     deposited in other collections as follows: Private
     Collection of P. H. Krutzsch, 3; Private Collection of W. G.
     Frum, 2; Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist., 4; Univ. Nebr. State
     Mus., 4).

_Remarks._--This bat is the most common of the four species that are
known to inhabit the quarries in Cass and Sarpy counties. Individuals
have been found both in drill holes and clinging to the walls of the
quarries. We have always found this bat to be solitary while in
hibernation.


~Eptesicus fuscus fuscus~ (Beauvois)

Big Brown Bat

     _Vespertilio fuscus_ Beauvois, Catal. Raisonné Mus. Peale,
     Philadelphia, p. 18, 1796, type from Philadelphia,
     Philadelphia Co., Pennsylvania.

     _Eptesicus fuscus_, Méhely, Magyarország denevéreinek
     monographiája (Monographia Chiropterorum Hungariae), pp.
     206, 338, 1900.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Eastern part of state.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 23, as
     follows: ADAMS CO.: Hastings, 1 (Hastings Museum, Hastings,
     Nebraska). CASS CO.: 1 mi. NE Louisville, 6; Plattsmouth, 1
     (Univ. Nebr. State Mus.). SARPY CO.: 1/2 mi. W Meadow, 15
     (Univ. Nebr. State Mus., 7).

_Remarks._--We have observed this bat hibernating in the limestone
quarries of Cass and Sarpy counties, where it was commonly found in
drill holes or clinging to the ceiling or walls. We have always found
this bat to be solitary while in hibernation, with one exception. On
January 31, 1949, a male and female were found in the same drill hole
in the Cass County quarry. The jolt of being knocked from the hole
separated the two bats, and upon examination the penis of the male was
noted to be extended and erected, indicating that the pair might have
been in the act of copulation.


~Eptesicus fuscus pallidus~ Young

Big Brown Bat

     _Eptesicus pallidus_ Young, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci.
     Philadelphia, p. 408, October 2, 1908, type from Boulder,
     Boulder Co., Colorado.

     _Eptesicus fuscus pallidus_, Miller, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus.,
     79:62, December 31, 1912.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Western half of state.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 34, as
     follows: CHERRY CO.: Ft. Niobrara Game Reserve, 19 (Nebr.
     Game, Forestation and Parks Comm., 17); Valentine, 2 (Univ.
     Nebr. Dept. Zool.). DAWES CO.: 10 mi. S Chadron, 1 (Univ.
     Mich. Mus. Zool.). KNOX CO.: Niobrara, 1. SHERIDAN CO.: 15
     mi. N Rushville, 2. SIOUX CO.: Glen, 1 (Univ. Nebr. State
     Mus.); Monroe Canyon, 5-1/2 mi. N, 2-1/2 mi. W Harrison, 1
     (Nebr. Game, Forestation and Parks Comm.); Warbonnet Canyon,
     7 (Univ. Nebr. State Mus.).

_Remarks._--A colony of approximately 100 of these bats was discovered
in the unused portion of a barn loft at Ft. Niobrara Game Reserve on
August 11, 1948. Although no temperature readings were taken, it was
estimated that the temperature was more than 100° F. in the loft. The
bats were congregated on rafters at the north end of the barn and when
disturbed, only a few members of the colony dropped from the rafters to
fly. Most of the bats crawled to new retreats between the rafters and
the corrugated iron roof of the building.


~Lasiurus borealis borealis~ (Müller)

Red Bat

     _Vespertilio borealis_ Müller, Natursyst. Suppl., p. 20,
     1776, type from New York.

     _Lasiurus borealis_ [_borealis_], Miller, N. Amer. Fauna,
     13:105, October 16, 1897.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--State-wide in suitable habitat.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 14, as
     follows: LANCASTER CO.: Lincoln, 13 (Univ. Nebr. State Mus.,
     11; Univ. Nebr. Dept. Zool., 1). RICHARDSON CO.: 3 mi. SE
     Rulo, 1 (Nebr. Game, Forestation, and Parks Comm.).

     Additional records (Swenk, 1908:139): CUMING CO.: West
     Point. DOUGLAS CO.: Omaha. LANCASTER CO.: Lincoln. OTOE CO.:
     Nebraska City. RICHARDSON CO.: Humboldt.


~Lasiurus cinereus cinereus~ (Beauvois)

Hoary Bat

     _Vespertilio cinereus_ (misspelled _linereus_) Beauvois,
     Catal. Raisonné Mus. Peale, Philadelphia, p. 18, 1796, type
     from Philadelphia, Philadelphia Co., Pennsylvania.

     _Lasiurus cinereus_, H. Allen, Smithsonian Misc. Coll.,
     17:21, June, 1864.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--State-wide in suitable habitat.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimens examined, 11, as
     follows: CLAY CO.: Inland, 1 (Hastings Museum, Hastings,
     Nebraska). CUSTER CO.: Broken Bow, 2 (Univ. Mich. Mus.
     Zool.); Victoria Springs, 1 (Univ. Mich. Mus. Zool.). FURNAS
     CO.: Wilsonville, 1 (Hastings Museum, Hastings, Nebraska).
     LANCASTER CO.: Lincoln, 6 (Univ. Nebr. State Mus., 5; Univ.
     Nebr. Dept. Zool., 1).

     Additional records: CUMING CO.: West Point (Swenk,
     1908:139). DOUGLAS CO.: Omaha (Swenk, 1908:139). GAGE CO.:
     Beatrice (Swenk, 1908:139). LANCASTER CO.: Lincoln (Swenk,
     1908:139). County undesignated: Loup Fork (Miller,
     1897:114).


~Tadarida mexicana~ (Saussure)

Mexican Free-tailed Bat

     _Molossus mexicanus_ Saussure, Revue et Magasin de Zoologie,
     Ser. 2, 12:283, July, 1860, type from Cofre de Perote,
     13,000 feet, state of Veracruz, Mexico.

     _Tadarida mexicana_, Miller, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus., 128:86,
     April 29, 1924.

     _Distribution in Nebraska._--Known only from Lincoln,
     Lancaster County.

     _Records of occurrence._--Specimen examined, 1, as follows:
     LANCASTER CO.: Lincoln, 1 (Univ. Nebr. State Mus.).

     Additional record (Zimmer, 1913:665): LANCASTER CO.:
     Lincoln.

_Remarks._--The Mexican free-tailed bat is probably rare in Nebraska.
The single specimen examined by us was obtained on June 27, 1931, from
a downtown business building in Lincoln. According to the label on the
specimen, it died in captivity on June 29 after giving birth to one
young on June 28. The bat reported by Zimmer (_loc. cit._) was also
taken in the business district of Lincoln. It was obtained on August
15, 1913.

In addition to the bats named above, six other kinds possibly occur in
Nebraska. These, along with an indication of the part of the state in
which each is to be looked for, are as follows:

     _Myotis grisescens_ Howell, southeastern part of state.

     _Myotis sodalis_ Miller and Allen, southeastern part of
     state.

     _Myotis thysanodes thysanodes_ Miller, northwestern part of
     state.

     _Nycticeus humeralis humeralis_ (Rafinesque), southeastern
     part of state.

     _Corynorhinus rafinesquii pallescens_ (Miller), northwestern
     part of state.

     _Tadarida molossa_ (Pallas), any part of state.


LITERATURE CITED

ALLEN, H.
    1864. Monograph of the bats of North America. Smithsonian Misc.
          Coll., 165:xxiii + 85, June, 1864.

FRUM, W. G.
    1946. Abnormality in dentition of _Myotis lucifugus_. Jour.
          Mamm., 27:176, May 14, 1946.

MILLER, G. S., JR.
    1897. Revision of the North American bats of the family
          Vespertilionidae. N. Amer. Fauna, 13:1-138, October 16, 1897.

MILLER, G. S., JR., and G. M. ALLEN
    1928. The American bats of the genera _Myotis_ and _Pizonyx_.
          Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus., 144:viii + 218, May 25, 1928.

QUAY, W. B.
    1948. Notes on some bats from Nebraska and Wyoming. Jour. Mamm.,
          29:181-182, May 14, 1948.

SIMPSON, G. G.
    1945. The principles of classification and a classification of
          mammals. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 85:xvi + 350,
          October 5, 1945.

STEPHENS, T. C.
    1945. Say's bat in Nebraska. Jour. Mamm., 26:92, February 27, 1945.

SWENK, M. H.
    1908. A preliminary review of the mammals of Nebraska. Proc. Nebr.
          Acad. Sci., 8:61-144, 1908.

    1915. The birds and mammals of Nebraska. Nebr. Blue Book and
          Historical Register, pp. 851-855, 1915.

    1918. The birds and mammals of Nebraska. Nebr. Blue Book and
          Historical Register, pp. 407-411, December, 1918.

    1919. The birds and mammals of Nebraska. Univ. Nebr. Contrib.
          Dept. Ent., 23:1-21, March 1, 1919.

    1920. The birds and mammals of Nebraska. Nebr. Blue Book and
          Historical Register, pp. 479-483, December, 1920.

TAYLOR, W. P.
    1919. Notes on mammals collected principally in Washington and
          California between the years 1853 and 1874 by Dr. James Graham
          Cooper. Proc. Calif. Acad. Sci., 9:69-121, July 12, 1919.

ZIMMER, J. T.
    1913. A northwardly record of the free-tailed bat. Science (NS),
          38:665-666, November 7, 1913.

_Transmitted, March 27, 1952._


24-2965



       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Italicized text is shown within _underscores_.

Bold text is shown within ~tildes~.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of An Annotated Checklist of Nebraskan
Bats, by Olin L. Webb and J. Knox Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNOTATED CHECKLIST--NEBRASKAN BATS ***

***** This file should be named 31325-8.txt or 31325-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/3/2/31325/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
