The Project Gutenberg EBook of Taxonomy of the Chipmunks, Eutamias
quadrivittatus and Eutamias umbrinus, by John A. White

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Taxonomy of the Chipmunks, Eutamias quadrivittatus and Eutamias umbrinus

Author: John A. White

Release Date: February 12, 2010 [EBook #31267]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAXONOMY--CHIPMUNKS EUTAMIAS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                      Taxonomy of the Chipmunks,
            Eutamias quadrivittatus and Eutamias umbrinus

                                  BY

                            JOHN A. WHITE


                  University of Kansas Publications
                      Museum of Natural History

           Volume 5, No. 33, pp. 563-582, 6 figures in text
                           December 1, 1953


                         University of Kansas
                               LAWRENCE
                                 1953




     UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

        Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
                         and Robert W. Wilson

           Volume 5, No. 33, pp. 563-582, 6 figures in text

                           December 1, 1953


                         UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                           Lawrence, Kansas


                              PRINTED BY
                   FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
                            TOPEKA, KANSAS
                                 1953

                               24-8966




                      Taxonomy of the Chipmunks,
            Eutamias quadrivittatus and Eutamias umbrinus

                                  By

                            JOHN A. WHITE


The differences in anatomy and color between many species of chipmunks
are subtle, and refined techniques are required to discover them.
When "measuring" chipmunks taxonomically, it is necessary to use a
"chipmunk scale" and not, for example, a "pocket-gopher scale." In
explanation, some species of pocket gophers closely allied to each
other, and even some subspecies of the same species, differ markedly
in color and in size and shape of parts of the skeleton; comparable
differences are not so pronounced among many species of chipmunks.


                          HISTORICAL SUMMARY

Merriam (1905) was the first to show clearly that _Eutamias
quadrivittatus_ is a distinct species, and pointed out that _E.
amoenus operarius_ (= _E. minimus operarius_) is a small species
which resembles, and is found in some areas together with, _E.
quadrivittatus_.

Howell (1929) placed under _E. quadrivittatus_ the following
subspecies: _E. q. quadrivittatus_, _E. q. hopiensis_, _E. q.
inyoensis_, _E. q. frater_, _E. q. sequoiensis_, and _E. q.
speciosus_.

Hardy (1945) placed _E. adsitus_ under _E. quadrivittatus_ as _E. q.
adsitus_, and Kelson (1951) placed _E. umbrinus_ under _E.
quadrivittatus_ as _E. q. umbrinus_.

Johnson (1943) re-established _E. speciosus_ as a separate species,
and in California left only _E. q. inyoensis_ in _E. quadrivittatus_.

Thus, since 1943 the recognized subspecies of _E. quadrivittatus_ have
been: _E. q. quadrivittatus_, _E. q. hopiensis_, _E. q. inyoensis_,
_E. q. nevadensis_, _E. q. umbrinus_, and _E. q. adsitus_.


               METHODS, MATERIALS, AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

    Capitalized color terms, which are used in descriptions and
    comparisons, are of Ridgway, "Color Standards and Color
    Nomenclature," Washington, D. C., 1912.

    In the synonymy of each subspecies there appears only the
    first usage of a name, second the first usage of the name
    combination now employed unless a new combination is proposed
    by me, and third pure synonyms. The last is recognizable as
    such because the type locality is appended to each.

    Unless otherwise specified, all specimens are in the Museum
    of Natural History, University of Kansas. The various
    collections of institutions and of private persons are
    indicated by the following symbols:

    AM--American Museum of Natural History.
    BS--United States Biological Surveys Collection.
    CM--Colorado Museum of Natural History.
    DC--Collection of Donald R. Dickey (now the collection of the
            University of California at Los Angeles).
    FC--Collection of James S. Findley.
    KU--Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas.
    MM--Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan.
    NM--United States National Museum.
    UU--Museum of Zoology, University of Utah.
    WC--Collection of Edward R. Warren, Colorado College.

    Of the external measurements, only the total length and
    the length of the tail are recorded in table 1. Some field
    collectors measured the ear from the notch and others from
    the crown; most collectors measured the length of the hind
    foot to the nearest millimeter rather than in tenths of a
    millimeter, as would have been desired. Consequently, I
    decided against using the lengths of the ear and hind foot in
    the study here reported on.

    The measurements of the skull were made as shown in figure 1.

    [Illustration: FIG. 1. Dorsal view of skull and a lateral and
    a medial view of the right lower jaw to show points between
    which measurements of the skull were taken. × 1-3/4. Based on
    _Eutamias ruficaudus ruficaudus_, from 6 mi. S St. Mary, 6500
    ft., Glacier Co., Montana. A to A'--greatest length of skull;
    B to B'--length of nasals; C to C'--zygomatic breadth; D to
    D'--least interorbital constriction; E to E'--cranial
    breadth; F to F'--inner mandibular length; G to
    G'--condylo-alveolar length of mandible.]

    A total number of 434 specimens are listed as examined in
    this study, and additionally, numerous other specimens were
    superficially examined in the United States Biological
    Surveys Collection. Bacula of each of the named kinds of
    chipmunks in this paper, were examined.

    Whenever two or more samples are stated to be significantly
    different, the meaning is that the difference is
    statistically significant.

    The geographic distribution of each subspecies and the
    localities of specimens or series of specimens are plotted on
    the map (fig. 2).

    When comparisons were made to ascertain specific and
    subspecific differences, only adults, or animals in which the
    enamel was worn through on the permanent P4 and p4 were used.
    Within this age range, only specimens in comparable pelage
    were used to ascertain differences in color.

    Miss Viola S. Schantz of the United States Fish and Wildlife
    Service, Mr. Alfred Bailey of the Colorado Museum of Natural
    History, Dr. W. H. Burt of the Museum of Zoology of the
    University of Michigan, Dr. Stephen D. Durrant of the Museum
    of Zoology of the University of Utah, Dr. Robert M. Stabler,
    curator of the Warren Collection of Colorado College, and Mr.
    James S. Findley, generously loaned specimens for my use.
    Doctors E. Raymond Hall, Rollin H. Baker, Robert W. Wilson,
    Keith R. Kelson, E. Lendell Cockrum, and other friends and
    associates have given valued suggestions and assistance. My
    wife, Alice M. White, made the illustrations and helped me
    record and analyze the data.

    Assistance with field work is acknowledged from the Kansas
    University Endowment Association, the National Science
    Foundation, and the United States Navy, Office of Naval
    Research, through contract No. NR161 791.


                  ACCOUNTS OF SPECIES AND SUBSPECIES

                    =Eutamias quadrivittatus= (Say)

_Diagnosis._--Size medium; general tone of upper parts tawny; cranial
breadth averaging between 16.0 and 16.8 mm.; baculum distinguishable
from that of any other species by the combination of width of base
less than 1/4 of length of shaft, shaft having a maximum diameter of
more than 1/4 mm., and height of keel 1/4 of length of tip.


        =Eutamias quadrivittatus quadrivittatus= (Say)

        _Sciurus quadrivittatus_ Say, in Jones, Long's
        Expedition to Rocky Mountains, 2:45, 1823.

        _Eutamias quadrivittatus_, Miller and Rehn, Proc.
        Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 30:43, December 27, 1901.

        _Tamias quadrivittatus gracilis_ J. A. Allen, Bull.
        Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 3:99, June 1890, Type from
        San Pedro, Santa Fe Co., New Mexico.

        _Eutamias quadrivittatus animosus_ Warren, Proc.
        Biol. Soc. Washington, 22:105, June 25, 1909. Type
        from Irwin Ranch, Las Animas County, Colorado.

    _Type._--None designated; from along Arkansas River, about 26
    mi. below Canon City, Fremont County, Colorado; obtained on
    July 18, 1820.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; dorsal dark stripes blackish;
    sides Cinnamon to Clay Color; crown Light Drab; baculum
    large.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Head Cinnamon, shaded on
    crown to Light Drab; ocular stripe Fuscous Black, with
    Cinnamon along margins; other facial stripes Fuscous mixed
    with Cinnamon; ears Fuscous Black, Ochraceous-Tawny on
    anterior margin, grayish white on posterior margin and on
    postauricular patch; dark dorsal stripes black with
    Ochraceous-Tawny along margins; outer pair of dark stripes
    often mainly Tawny; light dorsal stripes grayish white, outer
    pair usually creamy white; sides Ochraceous-Tawny, shaded in
    the region of the shoulder with Cinnamon; rump and thighs
    Cinnamon-Buff mixed with Smoke Gray; antipalmar surfaces of
    forefeet Cinnamon-Buff; antiplantar surfaces of hind feet
    Pinkish Buff; dorsal surface of tail Fuscous Black, overlaid
    with Pinkish Buff; ventral surface of tail Ochraceous-Tawny,
    Fuscous Black along margin, Pinkish Buff along outermost
    edge; underparts creamy white. _Skull_: Large; braincase well
    inflated; zygomatic arches strong and slightly appressed to
    skull. _Baculum_: Large; long and slender.

    _Comparisons._--From _E. q. hopiensis_, the only other
    subspecies in this species, _E. q. quadrivittatus_ differs
    in: Dorsal dark stripes blackish; crown grayer; rump and
    thighs grayer; general tone of upper parts darker.

_Remarks._--Specimens from the Chuska Mountains, Zuni Mountains, and
Blanco, New Mexico, are intergrades between _E. q. quadrivittatus_ and
_E. q. hopiensis_, but are referable to _E. q. quadrivittatus_.

In north-central Colorado _E. umbrinus_ occurs in the spruce and pine
forests at higher altitudes, while to the south and east of this area
_E. q. quadrivittatus_ occurs in growths of piñon in lower, semiarid
areas. In the northern half of New Mexico and in south-central
Colorado, _E. q. quadrivittatus_ occurs not only in semiarid habitats
but also in the moist habitats of the forests of higher altitudes.
Ecologically, _E. umbrinus_ thus replaces _E. q. quadrivittatus_ in
north-central Colorado. This ecological replacement is comparable to
the ecological replacement of _Thomomys bottae_ by _T. talpoides_ in
Utah as shown by Durrant (1952:156).

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 130.

    =Colorado=: _Larimer Co._: Arkins, 1 BS. _Jefferson Co._: W
    spur Lookout Mountain, near Golden, 1 WC. _Gunnison Co._:
    Sapinero, 3 BS. _Saguache Co._: 5 mi. N and 22 mi. W Saguache
    10,000 ft., 1; 21 mi. W and 3 mi. N Saguache, 1. _Fremont
    Co._: 18 mi. S and 7 mi. W Colorado Springs, 1; Arkansas
    River, "about" 26 mi. below Canon City, 15 BS. _San Juan
    Co._: Silverton, 1 BS. _Mineral Co._: 3 mi. E Creede, 1.
    _Alamosa Co._: Sangre de Cristo Range, 24 mi. E Hooper, 2 CM.
    _La Plata Co._: 2 mi. NE Bondad 6,100 ft., 1; Bondad, 15 mi.
    S Durango 6,050 ft., 1. _Archuleta Co._: Chromo, 1 CM. _Las
    Animas Co._: Trinidad, 6 BS. _Baca Co._: unspecified, 1.

    =New Mexico=: _San Juan Co._: Blanco, 1 BS; Chuska Mountains,
    8 BS. _Rio Arriba Co._: 8 mi. N El Rito, 1; 4 mi. N El Rito,
    5; Rim Rock, El Rito, 2; 2 mi. E El Rito, 7,000 ft., 1; 2 mi.
    SE El Rito, 1; 6 mi. E and 1/2 mi. S Truchas, 8,500 ft., 1; 2
    mi. S and 4 mi. W Coyote, 8,100 ft., 1; unspecified, 2. _Taos
    Co._: 3 mi. N Taos Pueblo, 5 BS; 23 mi. S and 6 mi. E Taos,
    8,750 ft., 2. _Union Co._: Emery Peak, 1 BS; Folsom, 3 BS;
    Sierra Grande, 8 BS; unspecified, 2. _McKinley Co._: Bear
    Ridge, Zuni Mountains, 9 BS. _Sandoval Co._: Bear Canyon, W
    foothills, Sandia Mountains, 3 BS; W foothills, near S end,
    Sandia Mountains, 7 BS. _Santa Fe Co._: San Pedro, 7 BS. _San
    Miguel Co._: Canadian River, 4 mi. NW Tucumcari, 1 BS.
    _Valencia Co._: Mount Taylor, San Mateo Mountains, 10 BS.

    =Oklahoma=: _Cimarron Co._: Kenton, 1 BS.


        =Eutamias quadrivittatus hopiensis= Merriam

        _Eutamias hopiensis_ Merriam, Proc. Biol. Soc.
        Washington, 18:165, June 29, 1905.

        _Eutamias quadrivittatus hopiensis_, Howell, Jour.
        Mamm. 3:184, August 4, 1922.

    _Type._--Female, adult, skull and skin, No. 67768 U. S. Nat.
    Mus.; from Keams Canyon, Painted Desert, Arizona; obtained on
    July 27, 1894, by A. K. Fisher.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; dorsal dark stripes tawny; crown
    Drab-Gray; baculum of same proportions as in _E. q.
    quadrivittatus_ but smaller.

    [Illustration: FIG. 2. Localities of specimens examined and
    probable geographic ranges of the subspecies of _Eutamias
    quadrivittatus_ and _Eutamias umbrinus_. The symbols for
    locality records are as follows: circles, precise localities;
    triangles, localities known only to county.

    Guide to subspecies:
      1. _E. q. quadrivittatus_
      2. _E. q. hopiensis_
      3. _E. u. umbrinus_
      4. _E. u. adsitus_
      5. _E. u. sedulus_
      6. _E. u. inyoensis_
      7. _E. u. nevadensis_
      8. _E. u. fremonti_
      9. _E. u. montanus_]

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Head Drab-Gray, with Snuff
    Brown around margin of crown; facial stripes Sayal Brown with
    small blackish patches around eye; ears Ochraceous Tawny
    anteriorly and Pinkish Buff posteriorly; dorsal stripes
    Tawny, median one sometimes blackish; median pair of dorsal
    light stripes grayish white, outer pair creamy white; sides
    Ochraceous Tawny; rump and thighs Cinnamon Buff washed with
    Pale Smoke Gray; antipalmar and antiplantar surfaces of feet
    Pinkish Cinnamon; dorsal surface of tail Fuscous Black;
    ventral surface of tail Ochraceous Tawny, Fuscous Black along
    margin, Cinnamon Buff along outermost edge; underparts creamy
    white. _Skull_: As in _E. q. quadrivittatus_. _Baculum_: Same
    proportions as in _E. q. quadrivittatus_ but smaller.

    _Comparisons._--See under the account of _E. q.
    quadrivittatus_.

_Remarks._--Topotypes of this subspecies are intergrades between it
and _E. q. quadrivittatus_.

In a large part of the geographic range of _E. q. hopiensis_ there are
numerous, massive outcrops of Mesozoic sandstones, which tend to form
cliffs, that are brightly colored with many shades of red. The color
which is characteristic of _E. q. hopiensis_ seems to be helpful in
adapting this subspecies to this habitat of red sandstone, for these
chipmunks are generally found in the rubble and among the piñon at the
base of the cliffs. At many places in Utah above these cliffs of red
sandstone there are forests predominantly composed of yellow pine.
Kelson (1951:42-43) states that "these two habitats are in immediate
juxtaposition, the transition from one to the other often occurring in
only a few feet ..." and again, "No one to my knowledge, has found any
evidence in specimens from Utah of interbreeding of _E. q. hopiensis_
with either _E. q. adsitus_ [= _E. umbrinus adsitus_] or _E. q.
umbrinus_ [= _E. u. umbrinus_]." Benson (1935:449) states, "On Navajo
Mountain these chipmunks [_E. q. hopiensis_] were most in evidence on
rock outcrops surrounded by brush at the lower edge of the yellow pine
zone. One was seen at about 9,500 feet in a south-facing rock outcrop
near the spruce-fir forest, but no chipmunk of any kind was seen in
the forest itself." This suggests that where only _E. q. hopiensis_
occurs on a mountain this subspecies goes higher than on a mountain
where _E. u. adsitus_ also occurs. This same relationship between
_E. q. quadrivittatus_ and the subspecies of _E. umbrinus_ that occurs
in north-central Colorado was pointed out in the account of _E. q.
quadrivittatus_.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 68.

    =Utah=: _Uintah Co._: E side of confluence of Green and
    White rivers, 1 mi. SE Ouray, 4,700 ft., 3 UU. _Grand Co._:
    Colorado River above Moab, 1 UU; side canyon of Colorado
    River above Moab, 1 UU; Moab, up Colorado River, 1 UU; Moab,
    4,500 ft., 4 UU; Moab Bridge over Colorado River, 3,995 ft.,
    Moab, 1 UU; Colorado River, 5 mi. E Moab Bridge, 4,000 ft., 1
    UU. _Wayne Co._: Fruita, 1 UU.

    =Colorado=: _Moffat Co._: 11 mi. W and 11 mi. N Rangely,
    6,000 ft., 3. _Rio Blanco Co._: White River, 5 BS. _Eagle
    Co._: McCoy, 2 BS. _Mesa Co._: 1-1/2 mi. S Loma, 4,600 ft.,
    1. _Gunnison Co._: 1 mi. E Somerset, 6,100 ft., 1. _Montrose
    Co._: 1 mi. E Naturita, 5,900 ft., 1. _Dolores Co._: 1 mi. N
    Cahone, 6,900 ft., 1. _Montezuma Co._: 1 mi. S Cortez, 5,000
    ft., 1; Mesa Verde, 25 mi. SW Mancos, 7,000 ft., 2 BS.

    =Arizona=: _Navajo Co._: Keams Canyon, 80 mi. N Holbrook, 15
    BS. _Apache Co._: Summit, 8,000 ft., Luka Chukai Mountains,
    15 mi. E Luka Chukai Navajo School, 8 BS; Wheatfield Creek, W
    slope Tunicha Mountains, 7,000 ft., 3 BS.


                  =Eutamias umbrinus= (J. A. Allen)

_Diagnosis._--Size medium; pelage dark; sides dark; narrow cranial
breadth; baculum distinguishable from that of any other species (E.
palmeri excepted) by the combination of width of base more than 1/3 of
length of shaft, distal 1/2 of shaft laterally compressed, and keel
1/4 of length of tip.


        =Eutamias umbrinus umbrinus= (J. A. Allen)

        _Tamias umbrinus_ J. A. Allen, Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat.
        Hist. 3:96, June, 1890.

        _Eutamias umbrinus_, Miller and Rehn, Proc. Boston
        Soc. Nat. Hist. 30:45, December 27, 1901.

    _Type._--Male, adult, skull and skin, No. 186463 U. S. Nat.
    Mus., Biol. Surv. Coll.; from Blacks Fork, about 9,500 ft.,
    Uinta Mountains, Utah; obtained on September 19, 1888, by
    Vernon Bailey; original No. 228.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; general tone of upper parts dark
    and shadowy; skull relatively small.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Head Pale Smoke Gray; facial
    stripes Fuscous Black to Snuff Brown; ear Fuscous Black;
    posterior margin of ear and postauricular patch grayish
    white; median dorsal dark stripe black with Sayal Brown along
    margins; lateral pair of dorsal dark stripes Sayal Brown or
    Fuscous Black mixed with Sayal Brown; outermost pair of
    dorsal dark stripes nearly absent; sides Sayal Brown mixed
    with Cinnamon; rump and thighs Sayal Brown mixed with
    Smoke Gray; antipalmar and antiplantar surfaces of feet
    Cinnamon-Buff; ventral surface of tail Ochraceous Tawny or
    Sayal Brown, with Fuscous Black around margin and Pinkish
    Buff around outermost edge; underparts creamy white with
    dark gray underfur. _Skull_: Large, with moderately inflated
    braincase and well developed zygomata. _Baculum_: One of the
    largest in the species.

    _Comparisons._--From _Eutamias umbrinus adsitus_, the
    subspecies to the south on the Wasatch Range, _E. u.
    umbrinus_ differs in: Sides lighter; rump browner; hairs
    around outermost edge of tail tawnier (in freshly molted
    tails); shorter inner mandibular length.

    From _E. u. inyoensis_, the subspecies to the west in central
    and northeastern Nevada and in northwestern Utah, _E. u.
    umbrinus_ differs in: General tone of upper parts lighter;
    sides lighter; total length more; interorbital region
    broader.

    For comparisons with _E. u. sedulus_, _E. u. fremonti_, and
    _E. u. montanus_, see the accounts of those subspecies.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 55.

    =Wyoming=: _Uinta Co._: 9 mi. S Robertson, 8,000 ft., 15;
    10 mi. S and 1 mi. W Robertson, 8,700 ft., 5; 11-1/2 mi. S
    and 2 mi. E Robertson, 9,200 ft., 1; 2 mi. E and 12 mi. S
    Robertson, Ashley Nat. For., 1; 13 mi. S and 2 mi. E
    Robertson, 9,200 ft., 1.

    =Utah=: _Rich Co._: Monte Cristo, 18 mi. W Woodruff, 8,000
    ft., 2 UU. _Summit Co._: 13-1/2 mi. S and 2 mi. E Robertson
    [Wyoming], 4; 1 mi. N Bridger Lake R. S., 9,400 ft., 4.
    _Wasatch Co._: Snake Creek Canyon, 3 mi. NW Midway, 6,000
    ft., 1 UU. _Uintah Co._: Paradise Park, 21 mi. W and 15 mi.
    N Vernal, 10,050 ft., 20.


        =Eutamias umbrinus adsitus= J. A. Allen

        _Eutamias adsitus_ J. A. Allen, Brooklyn Institute
        Mus. Sci. Bull. 1:118, March 31, 1905.

    _Type._--Unsexed adult, skull and skin, No. 28728 Amer. Mus.
    Nat. Hist.; from Briggs Meadow, 10,000 ft., Beaver Mountains,
    Utah; obtained on August 20, 1904, by George P. Engelhardt.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; sides dark; general tone of upper
    parts dark; dorsal light and dark stripes strongly
    contrasting.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Head Cinnamon mixed with
    grayish white; stripe on margin of crown Verona-Brown or
    Bister; ocular stripe Fuscous Black mixed with Sayal Brown;
    submalar stripe Sayal Brown; ear Fuscous, Sayal Brown along
    anterior margin and Smoke Gray along posterior margin
    and on postauricular patch; median dorsal stripe black;
    lateral dorsal dark stripes Fuscous Black mixed with
    Russet; outermost dorsal dark stripes slightly darker or
    indistinguishable from sides in color; dorsal light stripes
    grayish white with Mikado-Brown along margins; outermost pair
    of dorsal light stripes nearly pure white; sides Russet mixed
    with Cinnamon or Ochraceous-Tawny; rump and thighs Smoke Gray
    mixed with Cinnamon-Buff, with a larger or smaller number of
    Fuscous Black hairs; antipalmar and antiplantar surfaces of
    feet Cinnamon-Buff; dorsal surface of tail black; ventral
    surface of tail Sayal Brown to Tawny; underparts white with
    dark underfur. _Skull_ and _Baculum_: As in _E. u. umbrinus_.

    _Comparisons._--From _E. u. inyoensis_, the subspecies to the
    west, _E. u. adsitus_ differs in: General tone of upper parts
    darker; sides darker; interorbital region wider; skull
    significantly deeper.

    For comparison with _E. u. umbrinus_, _E. u. sedulus_, and
    _E. u. montanus_, see the accounts of those subspecies.

_Remarks._--Specimens from West Rim, Zion National Park, 6,500 ft.,
Washington County, Utah, seem to be intergrades between _E. u.
adsitus_ and _E. u. inyoensis_, and are referable to _E. u. adsitus_.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 34.

    =Utah=: _Beaver Co._: Britts Meadow, Beaver Range Mountains,
    8,500 ft., 13 BS. Wayne Co.: Donkey Lake, Boulder Mountain,
    10,000 ft., 4 UU. _Garfield Co._: Wildcat R. S., Boulder
    Mountain, 8,700 ft., 5 UU.

    =Arizona=: _Coconino Co._: De Motte Park, Kaibab Plateau, 3 BS;
    Bright Angel, Kaibab Plateau, 9 BS.


        =Eutamias umbrinus sedulus= new subspecies

    _Type._--Male, adult, skull, skin, and baculum, No. 158181 U.
    S. Nat. Mus. Biol. Surv. Coll.; from Mount Ellen, Henry
    Mountains, Garfield County, Utah; obtained on October 13,
    1908 by W. H. Osgood; original No. 3667.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; general tone of upper parts dark
    reddish-brown; ventral surface of tail Ochraceous-Orange;
    sides Mars Yellow.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Crown Drab-Gray mixed with
    Fuscous; upper facial stripe Fuscous Black mixed with Sudan
    Brown; ocular stripe Sudan Brown mixed with black; submalar
    stripe Sudan Brown slightly mixed with black; anterior margin
    of ear Sudan Brown slightly mixed with black; hairs inside
    pinna, posteriorly, Warm Buff; posterior margin of ear and
    postauricular patch creamy white; median dorsal dark stripe
    black with Antique Brown along margins; lateral dorsal dark
    stripes black mixed with Antique Brown; outermost dorsal dark
    stripes Xanthine Orange slightly mixed with black; median
    dorsal light stripes Pale Smoke Gray; outermost dorsal light
    stripes white slightly mixed with gray; rump and thighs Smoke
    Gray; sides Mars Yellow; dorsal surface of tail black mixed
    with Warm Buff; ventral surface of tail Ochraceous-Orange,
    with black around margin, and Warm Buff around outermost
    edge; antipalmar and antiplantar surfaces of feet
    Ochraceous-Buff; underparts creamy white with dark underfur.
    _Skull_: Large; braincase moderately inflated; zygomata
    strong. _Baculum_: As in _E. u. umbrinus_.

    _Comparisons._--From _E. u. umbrinus_, the subspecies from
    the Uinta and northern Wasatch Mountains of Utah, _E. u.
    sedulus_ differs in: General tone of upper parts lighter;
    sides lighter.

    From _E. u. adsitus_, the subspecies from the southern
    Wasatch Range in Utah and Kaibab Plateau in Arizona, _E. u.
    sedulus_ differs in: Sides lighter; general tone of upper
    parts markedly lighter.

    From _E. u. inyoensis_, the subspecies from central and
    northeastern Nevada, and western and northwestern Utah, _E.
    u. sedulus_ differs in: Sides lighter (less grayish); general
    tone of upper parts tawnier.

    For comparison with _E. u. montanus_, see the account of that
    subspecies.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 7 BS, all from the type
    locality.


        =Eutamias umbrinus inyoensis= Merriam

        _Eutamias speciosus inyoensis_ Merriam, Proc. Biol.
        Soc. Washington, 11:202, 208, July 1, 1897.

    _Type._--Male, adult, skull and skin, No. 29387/41462 U. S.
    Nat. Mus. Biol. Surv. Coll.; from Black Canyon, 8,200 ft.,
    White Mountains, Inyo County, California; obtained on July
    7, 1891, by E. W. Nelson; original No. 1069.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; sides light; general tone of
    upper parts light; baculum one of largest in species.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Head Smoke Gray mixed with
    Pink-Cinnamon; upper two pairs of facial stripes Fuscous
    Black or black; submalar stripe Sayal Brown; ear Fuscous or
    Chaetura-Drab, posterior margin and postauricular patch
    buffy white; median dorsal dark stripe black with Sayal
    Brown along margins; lateral dorsal dark stripes black
    mixed with Sayal Brown or Mikado Brown; outermost dorsal
    dark stripes Sayal Brown or Mikado Brown mixed with black;
    sides Ochraceous-Tawny or Tawny; thighs Cinnamon-Buff mixed
    with Smoke Gray; antipalmar and antiplantar surfaces of feet
    Cinnamon-Buff; ventral surface of tail Cinnamon-Buff or
    Ochraceous-Tawny with Fuscous Black around margin and
    Pinkish Buff around outermost edge; underparts creamy white.
    _Skull_: Large; zygomata strong; braincase moderately
    inflated. _Baculum_: One of largest in species.

    _Comparisons._--For comparisons with _E. u. umbrinus_, _E.
    u. adsitus_, _E. u. sedulus_, and _E. u. nevadensis_, see
    the accounts of those subspecies.

_Remarks._--The baculum in _E. u. inyoensis_ is like that in _E.
palmeri_.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 46.

    =Nevada=: _Elko Co._: Head Ackler Creek, N end Ruby Mountains,
    1; Steels Creek, N end Ruby Mountains, 1; Summit Secret
    Pass, 6,200 ft., Ruby Mountains, 2; Three Lakes, Ruby
    Mountains, 11; Long Creek, S fork, Ruby Mountains, 4;
    Harrison Pass R. S., Green Mountain Canyon, 1; W side Ruby
    Lake, 6 mi. N Elko Co. line, 3; W side Ruby Lake, 3 mi. N
    Elko Co. line, 8. _White Pine Co._: Willow Creek, 2 mi. S
    White Pine Co. line, Ruby Mountains, 6; W side Ruby Lake, 3
    mi. S White Pine Co. line, 5; Overland Pass, E slope Ruby
    Mountains, 8 mi. S White Pine Co. line, 2.

    =Utah=: _Boxelder Co._: Head of George Creek and Clear Creek,
    5 mi. S Stanrod, Raft River Mountains, 8,500 ft., 2 UU.


        =Eutamias umbrinus nevadensis= Burt

        _Eutamias quadrivittatus nevadensis_ Burt, Jour.
        Mamm. 12:299, August 24, 1931.

    _Type._--Male, adult, skull and skin, No. 15884 Donald R.
    Dickey Collection; from Hidden Forest, Sheep Mountains, 8,500
    ft., Clark County, Nevada; obtained on July 13, 1929, by W.
    H. Burt; original No. 2337.

    _Diagnosis._--Size medium; general tone of upper parts
    grayish; baculum one of the largest of species.

    _Description._--"General tone of upperparts grayish; median
    dorsal stripe, extending from crown between ears to rump,
    black faintly bordered with 'verona brown'; lateral dark
    dorsal stripes similar to median stripe, but with anterior
    one-third deeply suffused with 'verona brown'; central light
    dorsal stripes grayish, slightly lighter than head and rump;
    lateral stripes white; head and rump 'pale smoke gray';
    postauricular patch grayish white, a narrow margin extending
    up posterior border of ear; anterior portion of ear 'fuscous
    black' mixed with 'verona brown' at base and bordered by
    light gray; ocular stripe black grading into 'verona brown'
    in front of ear; submalar stripe nearly obsolete, 'sayal
    brown'; sides of body grayish washed with 'verona brown';
    feet grayish very faintly washed with 'pinkish buff'; dorsal
    surface of tail black overlaid with 'tilleul buff'; ventral
    surface of tail 'cinnamon buff' narrowly bordered by black
    then by 'tilleul buff'; ventral surface of body white." (Burt
    1931:299.) Skull similar to that of _E. u. inyoensis_ but
    differing as indicated below.

    _Comparisons._--From _E. u. inyoensis_, the subspecies to the
    north, _E. u. nevadensis_ differs in: Paler and grayer
    throughout; tawny areas restricted; gray areas clearer and
    less suffused; dark facial markings narrower and less
    distinct; ventral surface of tail distinctly paler; feet
    lighter, clearer gray; nasals extend farther posteriorly with
    respect to premaxillae (Burt _loc. cit._).

    From _E. u. adsitus_, the subspecies to the northeast, _E. u.
    nevadensis_ differs in: Narrower dorsal stripes and facial
    markings; paler coloration of head, rump, sides, feet, and
    ventral surface of tail (Burt _op. cit._: 299-300).

_Remarks._--The differences between _E. umbrinus nevadensis_ and _E.
palmeri_, as shown by Burt (_op. cit._) and Hall (1946), are such that
one might expect _E. palmeri_ to be a subspecies of _E. umbrinus_.
However, having only the structure of the baculum as evidence
additional to that summarized by Hall (_op. cit._), I follow him in
according _E. palmeri_ specific status.

    _Specimens examined._--None.


        =Eutamias umbrinus fremonti= new subspecies

    _Type._--Male, adult, skull, skin, and baculum, No. 41790
    Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.; from 31 mi. N Pinedale, 8,025
    ft., Sublette County, Wyoming; obtained on July 8, 1951, by
    Rollin H. Baker; original No. 1596.

    _Diagnosis._--Size large; sides Capucine Yellow; antiplantar
    surface of hind feet Raw Sienna; postauricular patch grayish
    white; baculum as in _E. u. umbrinus_.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Crown Cinnamon-Buff mixed
    with gray; upper facial stripe Sepia; ocular stripe
    Chaetura-Drab; submalar stripe Fuscous Black mixed with Sayal
    Brown; ear black; anterior margin of ear Mars-Yellow,
    posterior margin grayish white; hairs inside posterior
    portion of pinna Dresden-Brown; postauricular patch Pale
    Smoke Gray; median dorsal dark stripe black; lateral dorsal
    dark stripe black mixed with Sayal Brown; outermost dorsal
    dark stripe obsolete, Buckhorn-Brown mixed with black; median
    pair of dorsal light stripes grayish mixed with
    Buckhorn-Brown; outer pair of dorsal light stripes creamy
    white; sides Buckhorn-Brown; rump Pale Smoke Gray mixed with
    Saccardo's Umber; dorsal surface of tail black mixed with
    Buckhorn-Brown; ventral surface of tail Sayal Brown;
    outermost edge of tail Light Buff; antipalmar surface of
    forefeet Warm Buff; antiplantar surface of hind foot
    Ochraceous-Tawny; underparts creamy white with dark underfur.
    _Skull_: Large, with strong zygomata; braincase well
    inflated. _Baculum_: As in _E. u. umbrinus_.

    _Comparisons._--From _E. u. umbrinus_, the subspecies from
    the Uinta and northern Wasatch Mountains in Utah, _E. u.
    fremonti_ differs in: Sides darker; antiplantar surfaces of
    feet darker; postauricular patch grayer; crown more grayish;
    skull slightly larger.

    From _E. ruficaudus ruficaudus_, the species and subspecies
    from western Montana, _E. u. fremonti_ differs in: General
    tone of upper parts, sides, underside of tail, and feet, all
    darker in coloration; baculum shorter and proportionally
    twice as wide at base.

    For comparison with _E. u. montanus_, see the account of that
    subspecies.

_Remarks._--The geographic ranges of _E. umbrinus fremonti_ and
_E. ruficaudus ruficaudus_ are allopatric and no specimens have ever
been taken in the intermediate area to indicate whether or not
these two species anywhere occur together. The bacula in the two
species differ to the same degree as those of _E. quadrivittatus_ and
_E. umbrinus_. The differences between _E. u. fremonti_ and _E. r.
ruficaudus_ are such that in my opinion, _E. ruficaudus_ is a distinct
species.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 58.

    =Montana=: _Park Co._: Beartooth Mountains, 2 BS.

    =Idaho=: _Bonneville Co._: Big Hole Mountains, 9,000 ft.,
    near Irwin, 1 BS.

    =Wyoming=: _Yellowstone Park_, 2. Park Co.: 16-1/4 mi. N and
    17 mi. W Cody, 5,625 ft., 2. _Teton Co._: 1 mi. E and 1/4 mi.
    N Togwotee Pass, 9,800 ft., 2; Amphitheatre Lake, Teton Park,
    1 MM; Flat Creek, 4 MM; head of Cache Creek, 4 MM; Jackson,
    Upper Arizona Creek, 2 MM; Flat Creek-Granite Creek divide, 6
    MM; Flat Creek Pass, 1 MM; Flat Creek-Gravel Creek divide, 2
    MM. _Lincoln Co._: La Barge Creek, 9,000 ft., 2 BS. _Fremont
    Co._: Togwotee Pass, 12; 12 mi. N and 3 mi. W Shoshoni, 4,650
    ft., 1; Mosquito Park R. S., 9,500 ft., 17-1/2 mi. W and
    2-1/2 mi. N Lander, 1; 17 mi. S and 6-1/2 mi. W Lander, 8,450
    ft., 3. _Sublette Co._: 31 mi. N Pinedale, 8,025 ft., 2; W
    side Barbara Lake, 10,300 ft., 8 mi. S and 3 mi. W Fremont
    Peak, 4; 19 mi. W and 2 mi. S Big Piney, 7,700 ft., 5.


        =Eutamias umbrinus montanus= new subspecies

    _Type._--Male, adult, skull, skin, and baculum, No. 20105
    Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.; from 1/2 mi. E and 3 mi. S
    Ward, 9,400 ft., Boulder County, Colorado; obtained on August
    1, 1947, by E. L. Cockrum; original No. 721.

    _Diagnosis._--Size large; sides Clay Color; antipalmar and
    antiplantar surfaces of feet Cinnamon-Buff; baculum as in E.
    u. umbrinus.

    _Description._--_Color pattern_: Crown Raw Sienna mixed with
    gray; upper facial stripe and ocular stripe black mixed with
    Sepia; submalar stripe Snuff Brown mixed with black; ear
    black or Sepia, anterior margin Ochraceous-Tawny, posterior
    margin and postauricular patch grayish white; hairs inside
    posterior part of pinna Cinnamon-Buff; median dorsal dark
    stripe black with Sayal Brown along margins; lateral dark
    stripes black mixed with Sayal Brown; outermost dorsal dark
    stripes obsolete, Sayal Brown mixed with black; median pair
    of dorsal light stripes Pale Smoke Gray mixed with Clay
    Color; outer pair of dorsal light stripes creamy white; sides
    Clay Color; rump and thighs Neutral Gray; dorsal surface of
    tail black mixed with Cinnamon-Buff; ventral surface of tail
    Ochraceous-Tawny; hairs around margin of tail Cinnamon-Buff
    or Ochraceous-Tawny; antipalmar and antiplantar surfaces of
    feet Cinnamon-Buff; underparts creamy white with dark
    underfur. _Skull_: Large; zygomata strong; braincase well
    inflated. _Baculum_: As in _E. u. umbrinus_.

    _Comparisons._--From _E. quadrivittatus quadrivittatus_, the
    subspecies and species to the south, _E. u. montanus_ differs
    in: General tone of upper parts darker; braincase
    significantly narrower; baculum shorter and markedly wider at
    base.

    From _E. u. umbrinus_, the subspecies from the Uinta and
    northern Wasatch Mountains, _E. u. montanus_ differs in:
    General tone of upper parts brighter (less tawny); sides more
    tawny; skull slightly larger.

    From _E. u. sedulus_, the subspecies from the Henry Mountains
    of Utah, _E. u. montanus_ differs in: Sides darker; general
    tone of upper parts darker.

    From _E. u. fremonti_, the subspecies from the mountains of
    western and northwestern Wyoming, _E. u. montanus_ differs
    in: General tone of upper parts lighter; hairs around
    outermost edge of tail tawnier.

_Remarks._--Howell (1929:83) stated that the specimens of _E.
quadrivittatus quadrivittatus_ (= _E. umbrinus montanus_) from Estes
Park, Long's Peak, and Gold Hill, all in Colorado, "average somewhat
darker on the back and sides than typical _quadrivittatus_; the light
dorsal stripes are also somewhat duller and the dark stripes less
blackish, thus showing an approach to the characters of _umbrinus_."
Now there are more specimens of _E. u. montanus_ from the mountains of
north-central Colorado than were available to Howell. He was not aware
of the striking difference between the bacula of _E. quadrivittatus_
and _E. umbrinus_, and the constancy of this difference between all
the subspecies of one species and those of the other.

Although the geographic range of _E. u. umbrinus_ is closer to the
ranges of _E. u. fremonti_ and _E. u. montanus_ than to the geographic
range of _E. u. adsitus_, _E. u. umbrinus_ seems to be more closely
related to _E. u. adsitus_ than to _E. u. fremonti_ or _E. u.
montanus_. This observation may be explained by the presence of
continuous habitat for _E. umbrinus_ between the ranges of _E. u.
umbrinus_ and _E. u. adsitus_, whereas _E. u. fremonti_ and _E. u.
montanus_ are each separated from _E. u. umbrinus_ by areas unsuitable
for occupancy by _E. umbrinus_. It must be noted, however, that no
actual intergrades between _E. u. umbrinus_ and _E. u. adsitus_ are
known.

    _Specimens examined._--Total number, 36.

    =Wyoming=: _Albany Co._: 3 mi. ESE Brown's Peak, 10,000 ft.,
    2; 3-1/2 mi. S Wood's Landing, 1.

    =Utah=: _Uintah Co._: PR Springs, 7,950 ft., 43 mi. S Ouray,
    Uintah-Grand county line, 1 UU.

    =Colorado=: _Jackson Co._: Mount Zirkel, 10,000 ft., on
    trail, 2 WC; Buffalo Pass, 10,380 ft., 1 WC; Buffalo Pass
    road, 10,130 ft., 1 WC. _Larimer Co._: 2 mi. E Log Cabin,
    7,450 ft., 1 WC; Estes Park, 7,600 ft., 1; 1-1/2 mi. SW Estes
    Park, 1; 2-1/2 mi. SW Estes Park, 2; 3-1/2 mi. SW Estes Park,
    1; 12 mi. SW Estes Park, 1. _Rio Blanco Co._: 1 mi. NW Pagoda
    Peak, 10,400 ft., 1. _Boulder Co._: Long's Peak, 7 BS; 1 mi.
    NE Ward, 10,000 ft., 1; 3 mi. S Ward, 9,000 ft., 5; 1/2 mi. E
    and 3 mi. S Ward, 9,400 ft., 1; 1 mi. S Gold Hill, 8,200 ft.,
    1. _Clear Creek Co._: Davidson Mine, 3 mi. SW Idaho Springs,
    1; Georgetown, 1 CM. _Jefferson Co._: Silver Plume, 1 CM.
    _Park Co._: Tarryall Creek Camp, 8,700 ft., 1 WC. _Gunnison
    Co._: S side Crested Butte Mountain, 9,500 ft., 1 WC; mouth
    of Virginia Basin, Gothic, 1 FC.


                              DISCUSSION

The chipmunks that heretofore have been assigned to the species
_Eutamias quadrivittatus_ are here assigned to two species, _E.
quadrivittatus_ and _E. umbrinus,_ for the following reasons:

1. The baculum of _E. quadrivittatus_ differs from that of _E.
umbrinus_ in having a narrow base (see figs. 3, 4). This difference
permits any specimen which has an associated baculum to be readily
identified to species.

2. The cranial breadth in the subspecies of _E. quadrivittatus_ is
significantly larger than in the subspecies of _E. umbrinus_.

3. Specimens of _E. umbrinus_ are darker than any specimen of _E.
quadrivittatus_.

4. Where the geographic ranges of _E. quadrivittatus_ and _E.
umbrinus_ come close to one another (probably they meet at some
places), _E. umbrinus_ occupies a higher position in terms of
life-zones. Wherever either of these two species, but not the other,
occurs on a mountain the species occupies both the higher and lower
life-zones.

    [Illustration: FIGS. 3 and 4. Baculum of _Eutamias
    quadrivittatus quadrivittatus_, No. 35648/47919 BS; from
    Canon City, Fremont Co., Colorado. Figure 3, lateral view of
    right side; figure 4, dorsal view.

    FIG. 5. Baculum of _Eutamias umbrinus umbrinus_, No. 38062;
    from Paradise Park, 21 mi. W and 15 mi. N Vernal, 10,050 ft.,
    Uintah Co., Utah. Lateral view of right side.

    FIG. 6. Baculum of _Eutamias umbrinus montanus_, No. 20105;
    from 1/2 mi. E and 3 mi. S Ward, 9,400 ft., Boulder Co.,
    Colorado. Dorsal view.]

The differences between _E. quadrivittatus_ and _E. umbrinus_ are as
great as, or greater than, between many species of chipmunks, such as
between _E. minimus_ and _E. amoenus_, and between _E. quadrivittatus_
and _E. cinereicollis_.

Although I know of no ecological differences between _E. umbrinus_
and _E. ruficaudus_, the morphological differences, as for example,
differences in the structure of the baculum, and differences in color
pattern, lead me to maintain _E. ruficaudus_ and _E. umbrinus_ as
separate species.

The present distribution of these two species is attributable to the
uplift of the Rocky Mountains in the Pleistocene. That the uplift of
the Rocky Mountains and the erosion which produced the present-day
relief took place in Pleistocene times is supported by the evidence
found by several geologists such as Hunt and Sokoloff (1950:109-123).

The present geographic distribution of _E. umbrinus_ and _E.
quadrivittatus_ conceivably came about as follows: _E. umbrinus_-like
chipmunks were present, before the uplift of the major chains of
mountains, on isolated, low mountain ranges that were not covered with
glaciers (such as the laccolithic mountains that occur in Utah) in
Pleistocene time, while _E. quadrivittatus_-like chipmunks were
present in the central parts of New Mexico, Colorado, and southern
Wyoming. With the advent of uplift, the habitats in the central
parts of these states were changed from a plains-like habitat to
a habitat that resembled the forest habitats that exist today.
_E. umbrinus_-like chipmunks then invaded this newly formed habitat
and displaced any _E. quadrivittatus_-like chipmunks that were less
well adapted to live there. The Colorado River probably served
as a barrier that kept the _E. umbrinus_-like chipmunks and _E.
quadrivittatus_-like chipmunks separated up to this time. Invasion of
the new forest-niche by _E. umbrinus_-like chipmunks may have taken
place through the Uinta Mountains of northeastern Utah, after the
glaciers disappeared from these mountains, since the Colorado River
probably prevented any eastward migration farther south.


                               TABLE 1

       Average and Extreme Measurements in Millimeters of Adult
             _Eutamias quadrivittatus_ and _E. umbrinus_

  KEY
  A: Greatest length of skull
  B: Zygomatic breadth
  C: Cranial breadth
  D: Length of nasals
  E: Total length
  F: Length of tail
  G: Length of lower tooth-row
  H: Condylo-alveolar length of mandible

======================================================================
             |  A   |  B   |  C   |  D   |  E  |   F   |  G   |  H
-------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. q. quadrivittatus_, Canon City, Fremont Co.,
             | Colorado.
             |
Mean     (7) | 35.7 | 19.3 | 16.2 | 11.0 | 222 |  99.4 | 5.40 | 18.98
Min   [Male] | 35.7 | 19.1 | 15.9 | 10.6 | 216 |  93.0 | 5.32 | 18.65
Max          | 35.8 | 19.8 | 16.5 | 11.6 | 230 | 104.0 | 5.49 | 19.41
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (3) | 35.9 | 19.9 | 16.5 | 10.9 | 231 |  99.0 | 5.42 | 19.10
Min [Female] | 35.6 | 19.9 | 16.5 | 10.7 | 200 |  98.0 | 5.39 | 18.85
Max          | 36.2 | 19.9 | 16.6 | 11.2 | 232 | 100.0 | 5.49 | 19.28
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. q. hopiensis_, Moab, Grand Co., Utah.
             |
Mean    (11) | 34.4 | 19.4 | 16.3 | 10.0 | 212 |  90.7 | 5.19 | 18.36
Min   [Male] | 33.5 | 19.2 | 15.9 |  9.3 | 208 |  85.0 | 4.92 | 17.80
Max          | 35.4 | 20.0 | 16.8 | 10.5 | 220 |  96.0 | 5.38 | 18.96
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (5) | 34.9 | 19.6 | 16.4 | 10.5 | 219 |  94.4 | 5.16 | 18.58
Min [Female] | 34.2 | 19.3 | 15.9 | 10.1 | 210 |  85.0 | 5.13 | 18.00
Max          | 35.7 | 20.1 | 16.6 | 10.7 | 228 | 104.0 | 5.20 | 19.19
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. umbrinus_, Mts. S Robertson, Uintah Co.,
             | Wyoming.
             |
Mean    (11) | 34.7 | 18.9 | 15.7 | 10.9 | 218 |  96.2 | 5.13 | 18.04
Min   [Male] | 34.3 | 18.3 | 15.6 | 10.3 | 215 |  81.0 | 4.79 | 17.57
Max          | 35.2 | 19.4 | 16.0 | 11.7 | 228 | 112.0 | 5.42 | 18.59
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (4) | 35.1 | 19.2 | 15.9 | 11.0 | 224 |  96.4 | 5.17 | 18.46
Min [Female] | 34.9 | 18.6 | 15.7 | 10.3 | 204 |  90.0 | 5.11 | 18.31
Max          | 35.4 | 20.0 | 16.2 | 11.8 | 234 | 100.0 | 5.22 | 18.98
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. adsitus_, Britts Meadow, Beaver Co., Utah.
             |
Mean     (6) | 34.8 | 18.9 | 15.5 | 10.8 | 214 |  89.6 | 5.16 | 18.07
Min   [Male] | 34.3 | 18.5 | 15.3 | 10.4 | 203 |  73.0 | 4.64 | 17.69
Max          | 35.4 | 19.6 | 16.1 | 11.3 | 225 |  95.0 | 5.34 | 18.70
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (6) | 35.1 | 19.5 | 16.0 | 11.0 | 228 |  96.5 | 5.11 | 18.75
Min [Female] | 33.9 | 18.9 | 15.9 | 10.6 | 215 |  95.0 | 5.00 | 18.51
Max          | 36.2 | 20.0 | 16.3 | 11.8 | 233 |  98.0 | 5.33 | 19.40
             |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. sedulus_,  Mt. Ellen, Henry Mts., Garfield Co.,
             | Utah.
             |
Mean     (5) | 34.7 | 18.7 | 15.6 | 10.7 | 218 |  93.0 | 5.21 | 18.74
Min   [Male] | 33.5 | 18.4 | 15.4 | 10.1 | 213 |  89.0 | 5.09 | 18.48
Max          | 35.5 | 19.1 | 15.9 | 11.2 | 224 |  97.0 | 5.28 | 19.38
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (2) | 34.9 | 19.4 | 16.1 | 11.1 | 227 |  98.0 | 5.24 | 18.74
Min [Female] | 34.9 | 19.3 | 16.1 | 11.0 | 224 |  96.0 | 5.07 | 19.24
Max          | 34.9 | 19.5 | 16.1 | 11.3 | 231 | 100.0 | 5.42 | 19.80
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. inyoensis_, Ruby Mts., Elko and White Pine
             | Cos., Nev.
             |
Mean    (12) | 34.4 | 19.0 | 15.7 | 10.5 | 208 |  89.5 | 5.15 | 18.12
Min   [Male] | 33.5 | 18.6 | 15.2 | 10.0 | 196 |  85.0 | 5.01 | 17.32
Max          | 35.4 | 19.6 | 16.1 | 11.5 | 220 | 100.0 | 5.37 | 18.81
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (5) | 34.9 | 19.4 | 15.7 | 10.5 | 215 |  92.8 | 5.19 | 18.63
Min [Female] | 34.4 | 19.1 | 15.4 | 10.4 | 204 |  86.0 | 5.04 | 18.50
Max          | 35.2 | 19.7 | 16.0 | 10.7 | 226 | 102.0 | 5.33 | 18.80
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. nevadensis_, Measurements of the type
             | (Burt 1931:300).
             |
      [Male] | 34.8 | 19.3 | 16.2 | 11.0 | 205 |  89.0 | ...  | ...
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. fremonti_, Togwotee Pass, Fremont Co., Wyoming.
             |
Mean     (8) | 35.6 | 19.3 | 15.9 | 11.4 | 223 |  99.0 | 5.34 | 19.17
Min   [Male] | 35.2 | 18.9 | 15.8 | 11.1 | 216 |  95.0 | 5.22 | 18.72
Max          | 36.5 | 19.7 | 16.1 | 11.8 | 243 | 111.0 | 5.57 | 19.78
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (6) | 35.3 | 19.6 | 15.9 | 11.3 | 229 | 101.0 | 5.40 | 19.02
Min [Female] | 34.5 | 19.3 | 15.7 | 10.9 | 223 |  92.0 | 5.35 | 18.37
Max          | 36.0 | 20.0 | 16.5 | 12.0 | 239 | 110.0 | 5.44 | 19.51
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
             +------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------
             |
             | _E. u. montanus_, Boulder Co., Colorado.
             |
Mean     (5) | 35.2 | 18.8 | 15.5 | 10.8 | 226 |  96.0 | 5.20 | 18.29
Min   [Male] | 34.7 | 18.4 | 15.2 | 10.1 | 215 |  93.0 | 5.03 | 17.80
Max          | 36.8 | 19.4 | 16.2 | 11.5 | 232 | 115.0 | 5.53 | 19.36
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
Mean     (6) | 35.7 | 19.1 | 15.6 | 10.9 | 226 |  98.0 | 5.28 | 18.67
Min [Female] | 35.1 | 18.8 | 15.1 | 10.3 | 215 |  89.0 | 5.06 | 18.09
Max          | 36.5 | 19.5 | 16.0 | 11.6 | 231 | 105.0 | 5.58 | 19.35
             |      |      |      |      |     |       |      |
-------------+------+------+------+------+-----+-------+------+-------


                           LITERATURE CITED

  BENSON, S. B.
    1935.  A biological reconnaissance of Navajo Mountain, Utah. Univ.
           California Publ. Zool., 40:439-455, December 31.

  BURT, W. H.
    1931.  Three new subspecies of chipmunks of the genus Eutamias
           from Nevada. Jour. Mamm., 12:298-301, August 24.

  DURRANT, S. D.
    1952.  Mammals of Utah, taxonomy and distribution. Univ. Kansas
           Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist., 6:1-549, 91 figs., 30 tables, August
           10.

  HALL, E. R.
    1946.  Mammals of Nevada. Univ. California Press, Berkeley,
           California, pp. xi + 710, 11 pls., 485 figs., July 1.

  HARDY, R.
    1945.  The taxonomic status of some chipmunks of the genus
           Eutamias in southwestern Utah. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
           58:85-87, June 30.

  HOWELL, A. H.
    1929.  Revision of the American chipmunks (genera _Tamias_ and
           _Eutamias_). U. S. Dept. Agric., Bur. Biol. Surv., N. Amer.
           Fauna, 52:1-157, 10 pls., 9 figs., November 30.

  HUNT, C. B., and SOKOLOFF, V. P.
    1950.  Pre-Wisconsin soil in the Rocky Mountain region, a progress
           report. U. S. Geol. Survey, Prof. Paper, 221-G:109-123.

  JOHNSON, D. H.
    1943.  Systematic review of the chipmunks (genus Eutamias) of
           California. Univ. California Publ. Zool., 48:63-148, 6
           pls., December 24.

  KELSON, K. R.
    1951.  Speciation in rodents of the Colorado River drainage. Univ.
           Utah Biol. Ser., 11(3): vii + 125, 10 figs., February 15.

  MERRIAM, C. H.
    1905.  Two new chipmunks from Colorado and Arizona. Proc. Biol.
           Soc. Washington, 18:163-166, June 29.

    _Transmitted June 26, 1953._


                               24-8966





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Taxonomy of the Chipmunks, Eutamias
quadrivittatus and Eutamias umbrinus, by John A. White

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAXONOMY--CHIPMUNKS EUTAMIAS ***

***** This file should be named 31267-8.txt or 31267-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/6/31267/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
