The Project Gutenberg EBook of Subspeciation in Pocket Gophers of Kansas,
[KU. Vol. 1 No. 11], by Bernardo Villa-R and E. Raymond Hall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Subspeciation in Pocket Gophers of Kansas, [KU. Vol. 1 No. 11]

Author: Bernardo Villa-R
        E. Raymond Hall

Release Date: July 7, 2011 [EBook #36653]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POCKET GOPHERS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Matthew Wheaton
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









    SUBSPECIATION IN POCKET GOPHERS OF KANSAS

    By BERNARDO VILLA-R. and E. RAYMOND HALL


    University of Kansas Publications
    Museum of Natural History

    Volume 1, No. 11, pp. 217-236
    November 29, 1947

    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
    LAWRENCE
    1947

    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY
    Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, H. H. Lane, and Edward H. Taylor
    Volume 1, No. 11, pp. 217-236
    Published November 29, 1947

    UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
    Lawrence, Kansas

    PRINTED BY
    FRED VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
    TOPEKA, KANSAS
    1947

    21-8188




Subspeciation in Pocket Gophers of Kansas

By BERNARDO VILLA-R. AND E. RAYMOND HALL


Several full species of the genus _Geomys_ have been recorded from
Kansas. The purpose of the study now reported upon was to determine the
present taxonomic status of these animals and the distribution of each
within the boundaries of Kansas. No pocket gopher of any kind has been
reported from the southeastern part of the state; in all other parts
_Geomys_ is locally common.




HISTORY


The first published reference that we have found to pocket gophers of
Kansas is Prof. Spencer F. Baird's (1857:377, 380) mention of two
specimens from Fort Riley. One he identified as _Geomys bursarius_ (p.
377) and the other (p. 380) he doubtfully referred to _Geomys
breviceps_. Both specimens were obtained by Dr. W. A. Hammond. J. A.
Allen (1874:49) reported pocket gophers from Kansas under the generic
name "Geomys?". Professor M. V. B. Knox (1875:21) published a list of
Kansas mammals in which he used the names _Geomys bursarius_ Shaw and
_Geomys breviceps_ Baird, the last one for the specimen taken by Dr.
Hammond, at Fort Riley. Baker (1889:57) employed the name _Geomys
bursarius_ Rich. for the gopher "found along the hundredth meridian,
between N latitude 38° 30' and 39° 30'." He reported this animal as
common in western Kansas. Merriam (1895:129) recorded _G. bursarius_ and
_G. lutescens_ from Kansas. Allen (1895:265) recorded five specimens of
_Geomys lutescens_ collected between September 16 and October 13 at Long
Island, Phillips County, Kansas, by W. W. Granger. Since that time
several papers, some of them dealing mostly with habits of pocket
gophers, have been published in which reference is made to _Geomys_ in
Kansas. Hibbard (1933:240) recognized three species: _G. bursarius_, _G.
lutescens_, and _G. breviceps llanensis_. In 1944 (74-75) he recorded
_Cratogeomys_ from Meade County, on the basis of two skulls dug out of
the ground, and he recognized the same three full species of the genus
_Geomys_ that he did in 1933, along with two additional subspecies.

Specimens to the total number of 335 from Kansas have been available
for the present study of the five subspecies recognized. The reason for
arranging all of the named kinds as subspecies of a single species is
that intergradation has been found to occur between every pair of kinds
having contiguous geographic ranges. The characters previously thought
by some writers constantly to differentiate, say, _Geomys lutescens_ of
western Kansas from _Geomys bursarius_ of eastern Kansas, prove not to
do so; instead, in areas geographically intermediate between the
geographic ranges of the two kinds, the pocket gophers are intermediate
in morphological characters and therefore are regarded as intergrades.
Intergradation of this kind here is accepted as the criterion of
subspecies, and lack of such intergradation as the criterion of species.
Search for structural characters, distinctive of the different kinds,
additional to those characters noted by other writers, has resulted in
the finding of a few such characters but they too are subject to
intergradation. Therefore the several kinds are arranged as subspecies
of a single species which takes the name _Geomys bursarius_ because it
is the oldest available name. Detailed comment on specimens showing
intergradation are to be found in the accounts of _G. b. bursarius_ and
_G. b. major_.




METHODS AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


The series with the largest number of individuals from one restricted
locality was selected for initial study. These individuals were
segregated by sex, and specimens of each sex were arranged from oldest
to youngest. Each series was divided into age-groups, and within a given
age-group of one sex from one locality of what was considered as one
species, estimation was made of the amount of individual variation.
Thus, it was possible when comparing different kinds of pocket gophers
to use only one age class of one season of one sex.

Age was estimated to some extent by size of animal and nature of its
pelage. The immature pelage is grayer and the hair is more crinkled than
in adults. A more certain guide to age, however, is furnished by the
skull. With increasing age some sutures disappear, the rostrum increases
in length and the ridges marking the limits of the temporal muscles come
to fuse and eventually, in males, form a high sagittal crest.

  Cranial measurements were taken as follows:

  Basilar length.--From the anteriormost inferior border of the
  foramen magnum to a line connecting the posteriormost margins
  of the alveoli of the first upper incisors.

  Length of the nasals.--The greatest length of the nasals.

  Zygomatic breadth.--The greatest distance across the zygomatic
  arches.

  Mastoid breadth.--The greatest distance across the mastoids.

  Breadth of rostrum.--Width, perpendicular to long axis of the
  skull.

  Interorbital constriction.--The least distance between the
  orbits.

  Maxillary tooth row.--The greatest length of the upper
  molariform tooth row at the alveolar border.

  Extension of premaxillae posterior to nasals.--From the
  posteriormost border of the nasals to the posterior end of the
  extension of a premaxilla.

  Depth of skull.--From the median suture of the frontals, on the
  dorsal surface of the skull to the median suture of the
  palatines at the level of the first molar (not premolar).

  Length of rostrum.--From the anterior border of the nasal to
  the maxilla at the lateral end of the hamulus of the lacrimal.

  In the list of specimens examined, localities are arranged by
  counties from west to east, beginning at the northwestern
  corner of the state; specimens in each county are arranged from
  north to south. If several localities are in the same latitude,
  the westernmost is listed first. Capitalized color terms are
  after Ridgway, Color Standards and Color Nomenclature,
  Washington, D. C., 1912.

  [Illustration: FIG. 1.  Map showing the geographic distribution of the
  five subspecies of the Mississippi Valley pocket gopher, _Geomys
  bursarius_, in Kansas, with insert showing range of the species.]

  In connection with this study each of the authors acknowledges
  assistance from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation
  and one of us (Villa) is grateful for assistance also to Drs.
  Isaac Ochoterena and Roberto Llamas of the Biological Institute
  of Mexico. For the loan of specimens we are grateful to Dr.
  William B. Davis, of the Agricultural and Mechanical College of
  Texas; Dr. G. C. Rinker, of Hamilton, Kansas; and Mr. A. J.
  Kirn, of Somerset, Texas. Unless otherwise indicated, specimens
  are in the University of Kansas Museum of Natural History.




    ACCOUNTS OF SUBSPECIES

    =Geomys bursarius lutescens=, Merriam


    _Geomys bursarius lutescens_ Merriam, North Amer. Fauna, 4:51,
    October 8, 1890; Scheffer, Technical Bull., U. S. Dept. Agric.,
    224:6, January, 1931.

    _Geomys lutescens_ Merriam, North Amer. Fauna, 8:127-29,
    January 31, 1895; Lantz, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 19:175,
    1905; Lantz, Kansas State Agric. College Bull., 129:335, April,
    1905; Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 36:240, 1933; Black,
    30th Bienn. Rept. Kansas State Board Agric., 35:182, 1937;
    Swenk, Missouri Valley Fauna, 2:1, February 1, 1940; Allen,
    Kansas State Teachers College, Emporia, Bull. Inf. in Educ., 20
    (no. 5):15, May, 1940; Hooper, Occas. Papers Mus. Zoöl., Univ.
    Michigan, 420:3, June 28, 1940.

    _Geomys lutescens lutescens_, Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad.
    Sci., 47:74, 1944.

  _Type locality._--Sandhills on Birdwood Creek, Lincoln County,
  western Nebraska.

  _Distribution in Kansas._--Northwestern Kansas, eastward
  certainly to Ellis County, southward certainly to Scott County.

  _Description._--Animals with total length averaging no more
  than 272 mm.; length of vertebrae of tail averaging no more
  than 92; hind foot averaging no more than 35. Color: In autumn
  pelage, upper parts Light Ochraceous-Buff becoming Buckthorn
  Brown in middorsal region and there forming a faint
  longitudinal band; sides Pale Yellow Orange. In summer,
  Buckthorn Brown on upper parts with a dorsal band, especially
  distinct on specimens from Ellis and Trego counties; specimens
  from farther west lack the distinct dorsal band. Underparts
  Gray Drab and sometimes whitish, usually whitish in young
  specimens; basal color of pelage Deep Neutral Gray; fore and
  hind feet whitish. Skull: Zygomatic arch broadly and squarely
  spreading anteriorly; temporal impressions uniting to form a
  low sagittal crest in adult males, but in adult females and in
  young males the impressions usually remain apart; shape of
  interparietal varying from subquadrate in young specimens to
  subtriangular or triangular in adults; in some young specimens
  the interparietal is reduced to a minute, ovoid bone.

_Comparisons._--See comparisons in the accounts of other subspecies
occurring in Kansas.

_Remarks._--In his monographic revision of the pocket gophers, Merriam
(1895:129) recorded 3 "typical or nearly typical" specimens from Trego
County, and 18 "non typical" specimens as follows: Garden Plain,
Sedgwick County, 4; Belle Plain, Sumner County, 5; Cairo, Pratt County,
6; Kiowa, Barber County, 2; and Ellis, Ellis County, 1. A detailed
discussion of Merriam's account of the distribution of _Geomys
lutescens_ in Kansas is given by Swenk (1940:11-12).

Judging by specimens in the University of Kansas Museum of Natural
History, _G. bursarius lutescens_ in Kansas is restricted to the
northwestern part of the state, reaching southward certainly to Scott
County and eastward certainly to Ellis County; precise limits of
distribution of this subspecies are unknown. Additional collecting is
necessary to determine where the range of _lutescens_ meets the ranges
of the other subspecies. The specimens studied are remarkably uniform.
One specimen obtained in October, in Trego County, is slightly lighter
colored than any other from Kansas. In other characteristics it agrees
with specimens from northwestern Kansas and from the type locality.

  _Specimens examined._--Total number 32, as follows: _Cheyenne
  County_: 23 mi. (by road) NW St. Francis, 3. _Rawlins County_:
  2 mi. NE Ludell, 10. _Logan County_: 5 mi. W Elkader, 3; no
  locality more precise than county, 1. _Trego County_: Wakeeney,
  4; 12 mi. S Collyer, Perrington Ranch, 3; no locality more
  precise than county, 5. _Scott County_: 4 mi. S Scott City, 2.
  _Ellis County_: Hays State College Campus, Hays, 1.


    =Geomys bursarius majusculus= Swenk

    _Geomys bursarius majusculus_ Swenk, Missouri Valley Fauna,
    1:6, December 5, 1939; Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci.,
    47:74, 1944.

    _Geomys bursarius_, Baird, Expls. and surveys for a railroad
    route from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean, pt. 1,
    Mammals, 377, 1857; Merriam, North Amer. Fauna, 8:120, January,
    1895; Lantz, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 19:175, 1905; Lantz,
    Kansas State Agric. College Bull., 129:335, April, 1905;
    Scheffer, Kansas State Agric. College Ento. and Zoöl. Dept.
    Bull., 172:199, September, 1910; Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad.
    Sci., 36:240, 1933; Allen, Kansas State Teachers College
    Emporia Bull. Inf. Stud. in Educ., 20 (no. 5):15, May, 1940.

    _Geomys bursarius bursarius_, Black, 30th Bienn. Rept. Kansas
    State Board Agric., 35:181, 1937.

    _Geomys breviceps_, Baird, Expls. and surveys for a railroad
    route from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean, pt. 1,
    Mammals, 380, 1857.

   _Type locality._--Lincoln, Lancaster County, Nebraska.

   _Distribution in Kansas._--Northeastern Kansas, westward
   certainly to Clay and Marion counties and southward certainly
   to Greenwood County.

   _Description._--Color: Upper parts Mummy Brown in fresh
   appearing pelage of February but in more worn pelage of March
   more reddish being near (16') Prout's Brown; top of head and
   sometimes back darker than rest of upper parts; underparts
   usually with some whitish anteriorly; fore and hind feet and
   approximately distal half of tail white. Size: Large, total
   length averaging more than 280 mm. in males and 257 in females;
   hind foot averaging 35 mm. or more in males. Skull: Large;
   rostrum averaging more than twice as long as wide; sagittal
   crest high in males and barely present in females; occiput
   vertical when skull is laid top down; least width of braincase
   less than
   distance from alveolus of upper incisor to middle of lateral
   border of P^4 at alveolar border.

_Comparisons._--From _Geomys bursarius lutescens_, _majusculus_ differs
as follows: Color darker, Mummy Brown to Prout's Brown instead of
Buckthorn Brown. In both sexes: head and body a fifth to a sixth longer;
hind foot 5 to 6 per cent longer; skull averaging larger in all parts
measured except that premaxillae (in each subspecies) extend equally far
posteriorly to nasals; diastema longer in relation to basilar length;
rostrum longer relative to its width; sagittal crest higher; rostrum
often more depressed distally; angle of suture between maxilla and jugal
more obtuse.

From _G. b. bursarius_, according to Swenk (1939:6), _majusculus_
differs in larger size.

From _G. b. illinoensis_, _majusculus_, according to Komarek and Spencer
(1931:405), differs in brownish instead of slate-gray coloration and in
two cranial characters as follows: Nasals straight-sided instead of
shaped like an hour-glass, and superficial canals on palatine extending
anteriorly beyond first molar, and from there anteriorly more or less
separated. The first of these characters does not always hold;
occasional individuals of _majusculus_, for example some from Douglas
County, have the nasals shaped like an hour-glass.

From _G. breviceps dutcheri_, _majusculus_ differs in larger size (hind
foot more than 33 mm. in males, and 29 in females; basilar length more
than 42 mm. in males and 36 in females); dorsal exposure of jugal longer
than width of rostrum measured between ventral margins of infraorbital
foramina.

From _G. bursarius major_ of southcentral Kansas (for example Harvey
County), _majusculus_ differs in slightly darker color, being Mummy
Brown instead of Prout's Brown; size larger (in males total length more
than 284 mm., hind foot 35 or more, basilar length of skull more than
42, and in females total length 265 or more, hind foot averaging 33 or
more, and basilar length 40 or more).

Skull: Averaging larger in all parts measured, except that premaxillae
do not extend so far posteriorly to nasals in either males or females;
interorbital constriction slightly narrower in adult females; temporal
ridges forming a more prominent sagittal crest in adult males (sagittal
crest barely present in some adult males of _major_ from Harper County).

_Remarks._--In employing the subspecific name _majusculus_ we are
following Swenk (1939:6) who on the basis of larger size differentiated
the animals from southeastern South Dakota, the eastern parts of
Nebraska and Kansas, and the western and southern parts of Iowa, from
_G. bursarius bursarius_ to which he assigned a more northern geographic
range. In the absence of comparative materials of the northern
subspecies we cannot make an independent decision on the validity of
_majusculus_ and recognize that if it is inseparable from _G. b.
bursarius_ the latter name will apply to specimens from northeastern
Kansas. We are the more uncertain about applying the name _majusculus_
to specimens from eastern Kansas because they average smaller than
topotypes. Only at the northeasternmost locality in Kansas (3 mi. N
Cummings, Atchison County) do specimens average as large as topotypes of
_majusculus_. Farther southward they become progressively smaller in
eastern Kansas, and we interpret this as intergradation with the still
smaller subspecies _major_, to the southwest. The average external
measurements of two adult males from Atchison County are: 321-99-35.
Thirty-six miles farther south, in Douglas County, 16 adult males
average 289-80-36. From Hamilton, Greenwood County, 80 miles farther
southwest, nine adult males average 284-83-35. The maximum total length
recorded at these three localities is: Atchison County, 342 (1 of 2
specimens), Douglas County, 308 (1 of 16 specimens), Greenwood County,
357 (in coll. of Dr. Glenn C. Rinker and 1 of 15 males of all ages
involved). It will be seen, therefore, that although there is a trend to
smaller average size toward the southward, the maximum of 357
millimeters total length at Hamilton exceeds the maximum of 352
millimeters recorded by Swenk (1939:3) among 86 males at Lincoln where
the recorded average is largest.

Four specimens from Salina (Debold Farm) are intermediate structurally,
as they are also geographically, between _G. b. majusculus_ on the one
hand and _Geomys bursarius lutescens_ and _Geomys bursarius major_ on
the other hand. In color they agree with _majusculus_, as they do also
in width of nasals posteriorly, in more obtuse angle of the rostrum and
maxillary arm of the zygomatic arch. They agree with _G. b. lutescens_
in having the occiput inclined anterodorsally, and are intermediate
between _majusculus_ and _lutescens_, but nearer the latter in size of
skull and in length of the rostrum relative to its width.

  _Specimens examined._--Total number, 148, as follows: _Clay
  County_: 6 mi. SW Clay Center, 3. _Jackson County_: 10-1/2 mi.
  WSW Holton, 1; no locality more precise than county, 1.
  _Atchison County_: 3 mi. N Cummings, 2. _Jefferson County_:
  Oskaloosa, 1. _Leavenworth County_: Fort Leavenworth
  (Government Hill, 2; Engineer Hill, 1), 6; no locality more
  precise
  than county, 19. _Saline County_: Salina, Debold Farm, 4 (coll.
  of A. J. Kirn). _Morris County_: 1-1/2 mi. N Council Grove, 3.
  _Douglas County_: 1 mi. NW Midland, 2; 1 mi. N Lawrence, 1;
  2-1/2 mi. W Lawrence, 2; 1 mi. W K. U. Campus, 2; 1 mi. W
  Lawrence, 2; 1/2 mi. W Lawrence, 2; "W K. U. Campus," 2; K. U.
  Campus, 4; Lawrence, 23; South Lawrence, 1; 1/2 mi. SW K. U.
  Campus, 2; Southwest K. U. Campus, 1; Haskell Institute, 1;
  4-1/2 mi. S Lawrence, 1; 7 mi. SW Lawrence, 6; 7-1/2 mi. SW
  Lawrence, 1; 8 mi. SW Lawrence, 1; 10 mi. S Lawrence, 1; 11 mi.
  SW Lawrence, 3; no locality more precise than county, 15.
  _Marion County_: 1-1/2 mi. NE Lincolnville, 6; 4 mi. SE
  Lincolnville, 1; 6 mi. S Lincolnville, 1. _Greenwood County_:
  Hamilton, 1; 1/2 mi. S Hamilton, 4; 1 mi. S Hamilton, 4; 4 mi.
  S and 14 mi. W Hamilton, 6; 8 mi. SW Toronto, 1; 8-1/2 mi. SW
  Toronto, 5; no locality more precise than county, 6.


    =Geomys bursarius jugossicularis= Hooper

    _Geomys lutescens jugossicularis_ Hooper, Occas. Papers Mus.
    Zoöl., Univ. Michigan, no. 420: 1, June 28, 1940; Hibbard,
    Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., vol. 47, p. 75, 1944.

    _Type locality._--Lamar, Prowers County, Colorado.

    _Distribution in Kansas._--Extreme southwestern part of state,
    northward certainly to Hamilton County and south certainly to
    Morton and Seward counties.

    _Description._--A yellowish-cinnamon colored animal, with body
    of medium size, zygomatic plate of maxilla deep and mastoid
    process small.

_Comparisons._--Differs from _Geomys bursarius industrius_ in slightly
lighter color; occiput not strongly inclined anterodorsally.

From _G. b. lutescens_, _jugossicularis_ differs in less buffy
coloration and deeper zygomatic plate of maxilla.

_Remarks._--_G. bursarius jugossicularis_ and _G. bursarius industrius_
intergrade in the southern part of Meade County. Some specimens from
this area show a coloration resembling that of _G. b. jugossicularis_;
nevertheless, one specimen from Morton County has the occiput
anterodorsally inclined as in _G. b. industrius_.

  Specimens examined from Hamilton County correspond closely to _G. b.
  jugossicularis_; they agree with it both in color and in cranial
  characters.

     _Specimens examined._--Total number, 20, distributed as
     follows: _Hamilton County_: 1 mi. E Coolidge, Conard Farm, 4.
     _Morton County_: 12 mi. NE Elkhart, 2; Cimarron River, 12 mi. N
     Elkhart, 4; no locality more precise than county, 6. _Seward
     County_: 1 mi. E Arkalon, 4.


    =Geomys bursarius industrius=, new subspecies

    _Geomys lutescens_ Merriam, North Amer. Fauna, 8:127, January
    31, 1895.

    _Geomys breviceps llanensis_, Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad.
    Sci., 36:240, 1933; Black, 30th Bienn. Rept. Kansas State Board
    Agric., 35:181. 1937.

    _Geomys lutescens jugossicularis_ Hooper, Occas. Papers Mus.
    Zoöl., Univ. Michigan, 420:1, June 28, 1940.

  _Type._--Male, adult, skin and skull, no. 14083 Museum of
  Natural History, University of Kansas; from 1-1/2 miles north
  of Fowler, Meade County, Kansas; obtained December 30, 1941, by
  H. H. Hildebrand, original number 16.

  _Distribution in Kansas._--Southwestern Kansas from Meade
  County eastward certainly to Pratt and Clark counties; from
  Pawnee County southward probably to the Oklahoma boundary.

  _Diagnosis._--Size of body medium; color of upper parts Cinnamon
  Brown; skull with occiput strongly inclined anterodorsally in
  males.

  [Illustration: FIG. 2. Three views of the skull of the type
  specimen of _Geomys bursarius industrius_. A. Lateral view; B.
  Dorsal view; C. Ventral view. All natural size.]

  _Description._--Color: Upper parts Cinnamon Brown, slightly
  reddish, but in some specimens collected in September, in
  Pawnee County, near (15´ _i_) Ochraceous-Tawny; underparts
  usually Wood Brown, somewhat whitish anteriorly; forefeet
  white; hind feet and approximately distal half of tail whitish.
  Size: Medium (see measurements), total length averaging not
  more than 271 mm. in males and 254 in females; hind foot
  averaging not more than 35 mm. in males and less than 32 in
  females. Skull: In males, least width of braincase equal to
  distance from alveolus of incisor to anterior border of
  alveolus of first upper molar, occiput strongly inclined
  anterodorsally, temporal impressions usually united in a low
  sagittal crest, zygomatic arch heavy and curved at level of
  jugal bone. In adult females least width of braincase
  approximately equal to distance from alveolus of incisor to
  anterior border of alveolus of first upper molar (not
  premolar); occiput less inclined anterodorsally
  than in males; temporal ridges not forming a sagittal crest. In
  young females the width of the braincase is more than the
  distance between the alveoli of the incisor and first molar.

_Comparisons._--_G. lutescens industrius_ differs from _G. lutescens
lutescens_ in: Color darker; least width of braincase not equal to
(usually more than) the distance from the alveolus of incisor to the
anterior border of the alveolus of the first upper molar.

_G. lutescens industrius_ differs from _G. lutescens jugossicularis_ in:
Color slightly darker, the former being Cinnamon Brown instead of
Vinaceous Cinnamon, with hairs basally Deep Neutral Gray in upper parts
and underparts. Skull: Jugular part of zygomatic arch more curved
(convex dorsally) and occiput far more inclined anterodorsally; lower
part of mastoidal ridge more prominent.

For comparison with _G. l. major_, see account of that subspecies.

_Remarks._--Judging from the known specimens of this subspecies, it has
the smallest geographic range of any of the subspecies in Kansas, but
additional collecting in Hodgeman County and counties to the north and
west of it may extend the known range in those directions; collecting in
Comanche County and in adjoining parts of Oklahoma may extend the known
range to the southward.

The anterodorsal inclination of the occiput in males is the one cranial
character in which _industrius_ differs from all of the subspecies with
adjoining geographic ranges. The existence of this unique (among
adjoining subspecies) cranial character is the principal reason for
according subspecific status to this animal. Although it has other
characters which are fairly uniform over a considerable geographic area,
these other characters, namely, Cinnamon Brown color of the upper parts
and medium size of the body, after all, are conditions intermediate
between those in _jugossicularis_ to the west and those in the darker
and larger animals assigned to _major_ to the eastward. Considering the
intermediate geographic position of _industrius_, the color and size are
approximately what a person would predict by study of only the animals
to the west and those to the east. Therefore, the color and size
probably are indicative of intergradation between _jugossicularis_ and
_major_. Still, there is the anterodorsally inclined occiput in
males--a character of a unique sort--and this influences us to give
subspecific status to this animal with full recognition of the fact that
it is a "weak" subspecies as compared with any one of the adjoining
subspecies.

Hooper (1940:2) in naming as new _Geomys lutescens jugossicularis_
referred to his new subspecies a skin-only from Meade County State Park.
Our more abundant material from there shows the cranial conformation to
be that of _industrius_ to which we accordingly assign the specimens.
However, with only a skin available, we, too, would have used the name
_jugossicularis_ because the color is paler than in other specimens of
_industrius_ and this paleness indicates intergradation between the two
named subspecies. Specimens from Pratt County are slightly darker than
_industrius_ thereby indicating intergradation between _industrius_ and
_major_.

  _Specimens examined._--Total number, 58, distributed as
  follows: _Pawnee County_: Jct. Pawnee and Arkansas rivers,
  Larned, 6; 1 mi. S and 1 mi. E Larned, 7. _Edwards County_: 1
  mi. W and 3-1/2 mi. S Kinsley, 1. _Kiowa County_: Rezeau Ranch,
  5 mi. N Belvidere, 2. _Pratt County_: Pratt, 14; no locality
  more precise than county, 1. _Meade County_: 3-1/2 mi. NE
  Fowler, 2; 2 mi. N Fowler, 2; 1-1/2 mi. N Fowler, 2; 1-1/4 mi.
  N and 3/4 mi. E Fowler, 2; 7 mi. N Meade, Cudahy Ash Pit, 2; 13
  mi. SW Meade, 9; State Lake, 2; State Park, 4. _Clark County_:
  7 mi. SW Kingsdown, E. A. Stephenson Ranch, 1; 6 mi. S
  Kingsdown, 1.


    =Geomys bursarius major= Davis

    _Geomys lutescens major_ Davis, Texas Agric. Exp. St., Bull.
    no. 590:32, August, 1940; Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci.,
    47:75, 1944.

    _Geomys lutescens_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna, 8:129, January 31,
    1895.

    _Geomys breviceps llanensis_, Lantz, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 20
    (pt. 2): 215, 1907; Hibbard, Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 36:240,
    1933; Black, 30th Bienn. Rept. Kansas State Board Agric.,
    35:182, 1937; Swenk, Missouri Valley Fauna, 2:12, February 1,
    1940.

  _Type locality._--Eight miles west of Clarendon, Donley County,
  Texas.

  _Distribution in Kansas._--Southcentral Kansas, northward
  certainly to Ellsworth County, westward certainly to Stafford
  and Barber counties and eastward to Cowley County.

  _Description._--Color: Upper parts varying from Brussels Brown
  in some specimens to nearly Prout's Brown, especially in
  specimens from central part of state. Top of head, and
  sometimes back, darker than rest of upper parts, but no well
  defined black stripe; underparts varying from whitish to nearly
  Buffy Brown; fore and hind feet and approximately distal half
  of tail white. Size: Large (see measurements). Skull: Sagittal
  crest absent in females and barely present in males; least
  width of braincase more than distance from alveolus of incisor
  to middle of lateral border of P^4 at alveolar border. Length
  of auditory bulla (from anteroventral edge of paroccipital
  process of exoccipital to hamulus of peterygoid), in each sex,
  more than 8 mm.; occiput usually vertical when skull is laid
  top down; zygomatic arch broadly and squarely spreading,
  divergent anteriorly; rostrum averaging less than twice as long
  as wide.

_Comparisons._--From _G. bursarius lutescens_, _major_ differs in color
darker, premaxillae extending slightly farther posteriorly; temporal
impressions usually forming a more well-marked sagittal crest in males;
ventral side of zygomatic arch, at level of jugal bone, more curved.

From _G. bursarius majusculus_, _major_ differs in slightly lighter
color, smaller size of body; in males, total length less than 284 mm.;
hind foot 34 or less; basilar length of skull less than 42; in females
total length less than 264, hind foot no more than 33, and basilar
length less than 39.

From _G. bursarius industrius_, _major_ differs in color, being Prout's
Brown, instead of Cinnamon Brown (less Fuscous); body averaging 10 per
cent longer; total length in males from 9 to 9.7 per cent longer, hind
foot 9.7 per cent longer on the average; skull averaging larger in all
parts measured. Occiput less inclined anterodorsally; top nearly flat,
less arched than that of _G. b. industrius_; auditory bulla averaging
slightly larger and less inflated.

_Remarks._--Specimens of this subspecies from Norman, Cleveland County,
Oklahoma, and Canton, Dewey County, Oklahoma, and most of those from
Kansas, are more Fuscous than topotypes and tend toward _G. bursarius
majusculus_. Specimens from McPherson County have a darker dorsal stripe
resembling that of _G. bursarius majusculus_. One adult from Little Salt
Marsh, Stafford County, is pale, closely resembling topotypes.

Most of the cranial characters, nevertheless, are constant in all
available specimens, except that in specimens of each sex from the type
locality the basilar length averages 4 to 5 per cent shorter. In the
constancy of size of the relatively large auditory bullae and in the
nearly flat dorsal profile of the cranial part of the skull, the
specimens from Kansas agree with the specimens from the type locality.

Specimens from Harper County have the occiput slightly inclined
anterodorsally and thus are reminiscent of _industrius_ which has an
even greater inclination of the occiput. Probably the appearance in
dilute fashion of this character in Harper County is properly to be
interpreted as intergradation with _industrius_. If so, the actual
intergradation may be to the northwest _via_ Pratt County since
specimens from Barber County, immediately west of Harper and lying
between Harper County and the range of _industrius_, do not have the
occiput so inclined.

Of a pair of adults from eight miles west of Rosalia, Butler County,
the female is indistinguishable in color from adults of _G. b.
industrius_ from northern Meade County and from two specimens from
eleven miles west of Clarendon, Donley County, Texas, near the type
locality of _G. b. major_. The male from eight miles west of Rosalia is
darker as compared either with _G. b. industrius_ or _G. b. major_ and
the coloration of the upper parts resembles those in _G. b._
_majusculus_; the underparts are only slightly paler than the upper
parts as in _majusculus_. Measurements of the skulls are intermediate
between the averages for _G. b. majusculus_ and those for _G. b. major_.
These specimens from eight miles west of Rosalia are intermediate
structurally, and since they are intermediate geographically between _G.
b. majusculus_ and _G. b. major_, they suggest intergradation of the two
subspecies. The specimens in question are referred to _major_ because
the size is nearer that of _major_. It is mainly the intermediate nature
of these two specimens from Butler County, and the intermediate nature
of the specimens from McPherson County, Kansas, that have caused us to
treat _G. b. majusculus_ as only subspecifically distinct from the more
western subspecies, _major_.

  _Specimens examined._--Total number, 77, as follows: _Ellsworth
  County_: 2 mi. S Ellsworth, 1. _McPherson County_: Smoky Hill
  River, 1 mi. S and 1/2 mi. W Lindsborg, 5; 1/2 mi. E McPherson,
  1. _Stafford County_: Little Salt Marsh, 12; no locality more
  precise than county, 3. _Reno County_: 8 mi. N and 1 mi. E
  Haven, 2. _Harvey County_: 1 mi. E and 1/2 mi. N Halstead, 1;
  Halstead, 3. _Butler County_: 8 mi. W Rosalia, 2. _Barber
  County_: near South Bridge, Sun City, 1; 2 mi. S Sun City, 1;
  Wells Ranch, Aetna, 5; "1 mi. W Aetna," 3; near South Bridge,
  Aetna, 1; near Bridge, 1 mi. S Aetna, 2. _Harper County_: 4-1/2
  mi. NE Danville, 8; 1 mi. N Harper, 11; 3 mi. S Harper, 1.
  _Cowley County_: 3 mi. SW Arkansas City, 4; 3 mi. SE Arkansas
  City, 9; 3 mi. S Arkansas City, 1.




    MEASUREMENTS OF ADULT MALES OF GEOMYS


    (In millimeters)

    Key for table headings in table on this page.

    N:  Number of individuals averaged or catalogue number
    L:  Total length
    T:  Length of tail
    H:  Length of hind foot
    B:  Basilar length
    Na: Length of nasals
    Z:  Zygomatic breadth
    M:  Mastoid breadth
    Rb: Breadth of rostrum
    I:  Interorbital constriction
    A:  Alveolar length of maxillary tooth row
    E:  Extension of premaxilla posterior to nasals
    S:  Depth of skull
    Rl: Length of rostrum

    ======+===+====+====+====+====+====+====+====+===+===+===+====+=====
      N   |L  | T  | H  | B  | Na | Z  | M  | Rb | I | A | E | S  | Rl
    ------+---+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+---+---+----+-----
                         _G. b. lutescens_; topotypes
    5 ave.|266|82.0|34.2|40.0|17.7|30.5|26.8|11.5|6.7|8.6|3.9|17.1|20.8
      min.|257|76.0|33.0|38.3|16.0|29.1|26.1|11.2|6.3|8.1|3.5|16.2|19.1
      max.|276|91.0|36.0|42.4|20.3|31.7|27.5|11.9|6.9|9.2|4.2|17.7|23.6

                     2 mi. NE Ludell, Rawlins Co., Kansas
     12088|272|92.0|35.0|43.2|19.1|32.3|27.7|11.3|6.6|8.4|2.8|18.0|22.1

                   _G. b. majusculus_; Douglas Co., Kansas
          |   |    |    |    |    |[A] |    |    |   |   |   |    |
  16 ave. |289|79.8|36.3|47.1|21.0|34.1|30.4|12.1|6.8|9.3|3.7|18.5|24.9
     min. |273|70.0|32.0|44.7|18.9|30.5|27.5|11.1|6.5|8.2|2.9|17.3|22.9
     max. |308|95.0|55.0|49.9|23.2|38.0|34.5|13.5|7.6|10.3|5.7|20.0|28.1

                  _G. b. jugossicularis_; Morton Co., Kansas
    4 ave.|265|82.0|34.2|40.7|16.9|30.0|27.9|10.7|6.0|8.6|5.2|17.3|21.2
      min.|250|68.0|30.0|38.5|16.1|29.0|27.5|10.5|5.5|8.2|4.7|16.4|20.2
      max.|285|92.0|37.0|42.4|17.4|31.1|28.4|11.0|6.2|9.2|5.5|17.9|22.0

                    _G. b. industrius_; Meade Co., Kansas
    8 ave.|265|82.0|35.0|40.9|18.1|30.0|28.0|11.0|6.2|8.8|4.3|17.7|21.8
      min.|247|70.0|33.0|37.9|15.5|28.2|26.5| 9.9|5.7|8.0|2.9|16.8|19.5
      max.|280|90.0|36.0|43.4|21.0|32.4|29.5|11.6|7.0|9.1|5.2|19.1|24.2

             _G. b. major_; Wells Ranch, Aetna, Barber Co., Kansas
     11724|256|66.0|34.0|41.0|18.3|31.6|28.2|10.6|6.1|9.0|4.0|17.0|21.3

                      1 mi. W Aetna, Barber Co., Kansas
     11153|240|75.0|32.0|36.7|15.7|26.9|24.6| 9.9|5.9|8.8|4.0|15.0|19.5
     11152|240|65.0|32.0|36.0|14.2|26.1|25.4|10.9|5.6|8.5|5.0|15.5|18.5

                  3 mi. SE Arkansas City, Cowley Co., Kansas
          |   |    |    |    |[E] |    |    |    |   |   |   |    |
     12870|246|76.0|32.0|42.1|16.0|33.7|29.7|11.5|6.3|9.4|4.5|17.6|21.3

                  3 mi. SW Arkansas City, Cowley Co., Kansas
     12892|282|84.0|33.0|41.7|17.3|....|27.7|10.8|6.4|8.9|4.2|17.2|21.5
    ------+---+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+---+---+----+-----




    MEASUREMENTS OF ADULT FEMALES OF GEOMYS


    (In millimeters)

    Key for table headings in table on this page.

    N:  Number of individuals averaged or catalogue number
    L:  Total length
    T:  Length of tail
    H:  Length of hind foot
    B:  Basilar length
    Na: Length of nasals
    Z:  Zygomatic breadth
    M:  Mastoid breadth
    Rb: Breadth of rostrum
    I:  Interorbital constriction
    A:  Alveolar length of maxillary tooth row
    E:  Extension of premaxilla posterior to nasals
    S:  Depth of skull
    Rl: Length of rostrum

    ======+===+====+====+====+====+====+====+====+===+===+===+====+=====
      N   | L | T  | H  | B  | Na | Z  | M  | Rb | I | A | E | S  | Rl
    ------+---+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+---+---+----+-----
                              _G. b. lutescens_; topotypes
    6 ave.|233|72.3|31.1|35.3|15.0|25.9|23.7|10.4|6.1|8.3|3.7|15.4|18.4
      min.|215|63.0|30.0|33.5|13.9|24.6|21.8|10.1|5.6|8.1|2.9|14.8|17.3
      max.|254|76.0|32.0|37.0|16.8|26.7|24.8|10.7|6.6|8.5|4.5|16.2|19.8

                          2 mi. NE Ludell, Rawlins Co., Kansas
     11733|230|63.0|31.0|35.3|15.1|26.5|24.1| 9.3|6.1|7.5|2.4|15.0|18.2
     12155|245|70.0|30.0|35.6|14.6|25.2|24.1|10.6|6.4|7.5|3.1|14.9|18.2

                        _G. b. majusculus_; Douglas Co., Kansas
          |   |    |    |[B] |[B] |[A] |    |    |   |   |   |    |
  17 ave. |265|78.6|32.8|40.6|17.2|28.6|26.4|10.9|6.5|9.1|3.6|16.6|21.0
     min. |222|59.0|30.0|37.1|15.9|26.7|24.9|10.0|5.9|8.5|2.0|15.2|18.8
     max. |304|92.0|35.0|47.0|20.1|33.4|29.1|12.3|7.3|10.0|5.9|19.1|24.1

                       _G. b. jugossicularis_; Morton Co., Kansas
      5012|244|72.0|30.0|36.2|16.4|25.4|25.0|10.0|5.9|8.0|4.2|16.0|19.3
      5395|230|72.0|30.0|34.6|13.9|24.7|24.8| 9.8|5.8|8.0|4.5|15.2|17.5

                         _G. b. industrius_; Meade Co., Kansas
          |   |[C] |    |[D] |    |    |[D] |
   7 ave. |238|73.0|31.3|36.4|14.9|26.3|24.8|10.0|6.0|8.4|4.1|16.2|18.6
     min. |231|65.0|30.0|35.4|14.0|25.8|24.5| 9.5|5.6|8.1|3.6|15.5|17.5
     max. |256|75.0|32.0|37.8|16.1|27.8|25.9|10.3|6.5|8.7|4.7|17.6|19.9

                    _G. b. major_; 1 mi. S Aetna, Barber Co., Kansas
     10069|257|95.0|32.0|37.0|16.4|26.4|25.5|10.8|6.2|9.0|3.4|16.4|19.4

                               Aetna, Barber Co., Kansas
     10070|242|83.0|30.0|36.8|15.7|26.2|25.0|10.1|6.5|9.1|3.3|15.8|19.1

                         Wells Ranch, Aetna, Barber Co., Kansas
     12238|239|65.0|31.0|34.2|14.5|24.6|23.7| 9.6|6.0|8.0|3.6|15.2|17.7

                          1 mi. S.Sun City, Barber Co., Kansas
     11075|232|66.0|28.0|34.2|14.4|25.0|23.6| 9.9|5.9|8.0|3.4|15.0|17.0

                       3 mi. SW Arkansas City, Cowley Co., Kansas
     12872|242|66.0|30.0|38.1|15.0|28.0|26.2|10.3|6.3|7.8|4.5|16.1|19.1

                       3 mi. SE Arkansas City, Cowley Co., Kansas
     12894|230|82.0|30.0|38.5|15.5|28.0|25.6|10.0|6.7|8.7|4.0|16.6|19.5
     12893|246|83.0|32.0|36.5|14.2|25.6|24.8| 9.6|6.6|8.7|4.6|15.4|18.1
    ------+---+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+---+---+---+----+-----

[A] 15 averaged.

[B] 16 averaged.

[C] 6 averaged.

[D] 5 averaged.

[E] approximate.




SUBSPECIES OF THE SPECIES GEOMYS BURSARIUS


If _Geomys lutescens major_ Davis is correctly judged to intergrade with
_Geomys bursarius majusculus_ Swenk, the name for the full species will
be _Geomys bursarius_ because _bursarius_ is the oldest name among those
available. Some new combinations of names are required. According to our
present understanding, the eleven kinds of pocket gophers named below
are properly to be arranged as subspecies of the species _Geomys
bursarius_:

  _Geomys bursarius bursarius_ (Shaw). Type from unknown locality
  in Upper Mississippi Valley.

  _Geomys bursarius majusculus_ Swenk. Type from Lincoln,
  Lancaster County, Nebraska.

  _Geomys bursarius hylaeus_ Blossom. Type from 10 mi. S Chadron,
  Dawes County, Nebraska.

  _Geomys bursarius levisagittalis_ Swenk. Type from Spencer,
  Boyd County, Nebraska.

  _Geomys bursarius vinaceus_ Swenk. Type from Scottsbluff,
  Scotts Bluff County, Nebraska.

  _Geomys bursarius lutescens_ Merriam. Type from Sandhills on
  Birdwood Creek, Lincoln County, Nebraska.

  _Geomys bursarius illinoensis_ Komarek and Spencer. Type from 1
  mi. S Momence, Kankakee County, Illinois.

  _Geomys bursarius jugossicularis_ Hooper. Type from Lamar,
  Prowers County, Colorado.

  _Geomys bursarius industrius_ new subspecies. Type from 1-1/2
  mi. N Fowler, Meade County, Kansas.

  _Geomys bursarius major_ Davis. Type from 8 mi. W Clarendon,
  Donley County, Texas.

  _Geomys bursarius llanensis_ Bailey. Type from Llano, Llano
  County, Texas.




LITERATURE CITED


ALLEN, J. A.
  1874. Notes on the mammals of portions of Kansas, Colorado,
  Wyoming and Utah. Part I. On the mammals of middle and western
  Kansas. Bull. Essex Inst., 6 (no. 2):43-52. February, 1874.

  1895. List of mammals collected in the Black Hills region of
  South Dakota and in western Kansas by Mr. Walter W. Granger
  with field notes by the collector. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist.,
  7:259-274. August 21, 1895.

ALLEN, P.
  1940. Kansas mammals. Kansas State Teachers College, Emporia,
  Bull. Inf. Stud. in Educ., Number 20 (no. 5):l-62. May, 1940.

BAKER, A. B.
  1889. Mammals of western Kansas. Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci.,
  11:56-58 (for 1887-88).

BAIRD, S. F.
  1857. Explorations and surveys for a railroad route from the
  Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean. War Department.
  Mammals, Part I, xxxii + 757, pls. 17-60, 35 figs. in text,
  1857.

BLACK, J. D.
  1937. Mammals of Kansas. Thirtieth Bienn. Rept. Kansas State
  Board of Agric., 35:116-217.

DAVIS, W. B.
  1940. Distribution and variation of pocket gophers (Genus
  Geomys) in the southwestern United States. Texas Agric. Exp.
  Station, Bull., 590:1-38, 6 figs. in text. October 23, 1940.

HIBBARD, C. W.
  1933. A revised check list of Kansas mammals. Trans. Kansas
  Acad. Sci., 36:230-249.

  1944. A checklist of Kansas mammals, 1943. Trans. Kansas Acad.
  Sci., 47:61-88.

HOOPER, E. T.
  1940. A new race of pocket gopher of the species Geomys
  lutescens from Colorado. Occas. Papers, Mus. Zoöl., Univ.
  Michigan, 420:1-3. June 28, 1940.

KNOX, M. V. B.
  1875. Kansas Mammalia. Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 4:18-22.

KOMAREK, E. V. , and SPENCER, D. A.
  1931. A new pocket gopher from Illinois and Indiana. Journ.
  Mamm., 12:404-408, 1 pl., 1 fig. in text. November 11, 1931.

LANTZ, D. E.
  1905. Kansas mammals in their relations to agriculture. Kansas
  State Agric. College Bull., 129:331-404. April, 1905.

  1905. A list of Kansas mammals. Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci.,
  19:171-178.

  1907. Additions and corrections to the list of Kansas mammals.
  Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci., 20 (pt. 2):214-217.

MERRIAM, C. H.
  1890. Descriptions of twenty-six new species of North American
  mammals. N. Amer. Fauna, 4: v + 60, 3 pls., 3 figs. in text.
  October 8, 1890.

  1895. Monographic revision of the pocket gopher Family
  Geomyidae.... N. Amer. Fauna, 8:1-258, 19 pls. and
  frontispiece, 71 figs. in text, 4 maps. January 31, 1895.

SCHEFFER, T. H.
  1910. The pocket gopher. Kansas State Agric. Coll. Ent. and
  Zoöl. Dept., Bull., 172:197-233, illustrated. September, 1910.

  1931. Habits and economic status of the pocket gophers. U. S.
  Dept. Agric., Tech. Bull., 224:1-27, 8 pls., 2 figs. in text.
  January, 1931.

SWENK, M. H.
  1939. A study of local size variations in the prairie pocket
  gopher (Geomys bursarius), with description of a new subspecies
  from Nebraska. Missouri Valley Fauna, 1:1-8. December 5, 1939.

  1940. A study of subspecific variation in the yellow pocket
  gopher (Geomys lutescens) in Nebraska, and the geographical and
  ecological distribution of the variants. Missouri Valley Fauna,
  2:1-12. February 1, 1940.

_Transmitted May 30, 1947._


  PRINTED BY
  FRED VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
  TOPEKA, KANSAS
  1947
  21-8188




Transcriber Notes:


Minor typographical errors were corrected without notice.

Italic words and phrases are marked _like this_.

Bold words and phrases are marked  =like this=.

Small caps are converted to all upper case, LIKE THIS.

Superscripts in text are indicated by use of the caret, like this ^4.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Subspeciation in Pocket Gophers of
Kansas, [KU. Vol. 1 No. 11], by Bernardo Villa-R and E. Raymond Hall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POCKET GOPHERS ***

***** This file should be named 36653-8.txt or 36653-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/6/5/36653/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Matthew Wheaton
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
