The Project Gutenberg EBook of Two New Pocket Gophers from Wyoming and
Colorado, by E. Raymond  Hall and H. Gordon Montague

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Two New Pocket Gophers from Wyoming and Colorado

Author: E. Raymond  Hall
        H. Gordon Montague

Release Date: June 17, 2009 [EBook #29141]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO NEW POCKET GOPHERS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Val Wooff, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note.

The layout of the column headings in the table at the end of this text
has been changed for ease of reading. Otherwise the text remains
unchanged.






          Two New Pocket Gophers from Wyoming
                    and Colorado

                         BY

         E. RAYMOND HALL and H. GORDON MONTAGUE





           University of Kansas Publications

              Museum of Natural History

             Volume 5, No. 3, pp. 25-32

                 February 28, 1951




               University of Kansas

                     LAWRENCE

                       1951





 UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

    Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Edward H. Taylor,
            A. Byron Leonard, Robert W. Wilson

                Volume 5, No. 3, pp. 25-32

                   February 28, 1951




                  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS

                    Lawrence, Kansas




                      PRINTED BY
            FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
                    TOPEKA, KANSAS
                        1951


                       23-6627





      Two New Pocket Gophers from Wyoming and Colorado

                         BY

         E. RAYMOND HALL AND H. GORDON MONTAGUE


In the academic year of 1947-48 Montague studied the geographic
variation in _Thomomys talpoides_ of Wyoming. His study was based upon
materials then in the University of Kansas Museum of Natural History.
Publication of the results was purposely delayed until previously
reported specimens from certain adjacent areas, especially in Colorado,
could be examined. In the autumn of 1950 one of us, Hall, was able to
examine the specimens from Colorado; also, the specimens from Wyoming
accumulated in the past two seasons of field work in Wyoming were
examined by Hall. A result of these studies is the recognition of two
heretofore unnamed subspecies of the northern pocket gopher in
southeastern Wyoming.

Grateful acknowledgment is made of the opportunity to study the
Coloradon specimens in the Biological Surveys Collection of the United
States National Museum, and of the financial assistance from the Kansas
University Endowment Association which permitted the field work in
Wyoming.

Descriptions and names for the two new subspecies are given below:


=Thomomys talpoides rostralis= new subspecies

_Type._--Female, adult, skull and skin, no. 17096 Mus. Nat. Hist., Univ.
Kansas; from 1 mi. E Laramie, 7164 ft., Albany County, Wyoming; obtained
on July 16, 1945, by C. Howard Westman; original no. 320.

_Range._--Southern Wyoming and south in the mountains of Colorado to the
Arkansas River but not including the Colorado River drainage except in
Grand County and part of Routt County.

_Diagnosis._--Size medium (see measurements); upper parts ranging from
between Cinnamon-Rufous and Hazel (capitalized terms are of Ridgway,
Color Standards and Color Nomenclature, Washington, D. C., 1912) in the
eastern part of the range to between Argus Brown and Brussels Brown in
the western part of the range; sides Cinnamon-Rufous; throat whitish;
remainder of under-parts whitish, in many specimens tipped with
Ochraceous-Buff; feet and tail whitish; rostrum long; nasals ordinarily
truncate posteriorly; temporal ridges nearly parallel; interpterygoid
space broadly V-shaped.

_Comparisons._--From _Thomomys talpoides clusius_ (topotypes), _T. t.
rostralis_ differs in: Body longer; color more reddish (lighter with
less brownish and more ochraceous); rostrum both longer and broader,
actually and also in relation to length of the skull; skull broader
interorbitally; upper molariform tooth-row longer; tympanic bullae less
inflated. For comparison with _T. t. attenuatus_ to the east, see the
account of that subspecies.

From _Thomomys talpoides macrotis_ (topotypes) to the southeast, _T. t.
rostralis_ differs in: Body shorter; upper parts slightly more
ochraceous and less grayish; skull averaging smaller in all measurements
except that interorbital region is broader and rostrum and upper
molariform tooth-row are longer; nasals truncate versus emarginate, and
consistently shorter; basilar length consistently less in specimens of
equal age; mastoidal breadth less in 16 of 17 specimens of _rostralis_;
temporal ridges parallel instead of divergent posteriorly; exposed parts
of upper incisors shorter; tympanic bullae more angular
antero-laterally.

From _Thomomys talpoides fossor_ (specimens from Rico, Silverton, Hermit
and Pagosa Springs, all in Colorado), the subspecies to the southward,
_T. t. rostralis_ differs in: Longer body; lighter color of upper parts;
nasals truncate rather than rounded posteriorly; temporal ridges more
nearly parallel (less divergent posteriorly); rostrum longer (averaging
longer and broader); skull wider across zygomatic arches in 11 of 12
specimens of _rostralis._

_Remarks._--Geographic variation is evident in the material examined. In
the initial study, one of us, Montague, separated the material from the
Medicine Bow Range in Wyoming as a subspecies different from that at
Laramie and the adjoining mountains to the eastward because of the
darker color of the western animals and the smaller size of males.
Acquisition of more material from still farther west (Sierra Madre) in
Wyoming and the examination of material in the United States Biological
Surveys Collection from Colorado discloses that there is a cline of
increasing intensity of color from the geographic range of _T. t.
cheyennensis_ at Pine Bluffs, Wyoming, westward to the eastern side of
the Sierra Madre at a locality three miles east and five miles north of
Savery, Wyoming. A further deterrent to setting apart the animals of the
Medicine Bow Mountains as a separate subspecies is the large size of
males from the North Platte River Valley southeast of Saratoga. The
males from the valley of the North Platte are intermediate in size
between those from the Medicine Bow Mountains and those from the Laramie
River Valley. Females from the same places are available in longer
series and show less variation. If there is a difference in size in the
females, those from the mountains are larger than those from lower
elevations on either side.

The examination that one of us, Hall, has made of the related materials
from Colorado reveals, as we supposed would be the case, that a large
area formerly assigned to the geographic range of _Thomomys talpoides
fossor_ is to be assigned to the geographic range of the newly named
_Thomomys talpoides rostralis._ It should be added that, at this
writing, the lack of ideally complete material from southwestern
Colorado leaves some doubt as to the range of variation properly to be
included within the geographic range of _T. t. fossor._ Consequently,
study of a larger number of specimens from more localities in Colorado
may show that the boundary between the geographic ranges of _T. t.
fossor_ and _T. t. rostralis_ should be shifted from where we have
tentatively placed it.

_Specimens examined._--Total number, 168. Unless otherwise indicated,
those from Colorado are in the United States National Museum, Biological
Surveys Collection, and those from Wyoming are in the Museum of Natural
History of the University of Kansas.

=Colorado.= _Routt Co._: Hahns Peak, 2; Hayden, 1. _Jackson Co._ Pearle,
North Park, 9000 ft., 2; Canadian Creek, North Park, 6; 5 mi. E Canadian
Creek, 1; Rabbit Ear Mts., Arapaho Pass, 5. _Larimer Co._: Elkhorn, 7000
ft., 1; Estes Park, 7. _Grand Co._: Coulter, 4. _Boulder Co._: Longs
Peak, 3; Gold Hill (the skin only; skull does not belong), 1; 3 mi. S
Ward, 9000 ft., 10 (K. U.); 5 mi. W Boulder, 7. _Gilpin Co._: Blackhawk
(U. S. N. M.), 2. _Jefferson Co._: Golden, 1; Golden foothills, 7300
ft., 1. _Park Co._: Como, South Park, 9800 ft., 1. _El Paso Co._:
Cascade, 1 (too young for certain sub-specific identification).

=Wyoming.= _Carbon County_: 13 mi. E and 6 mi. S Saratoga, 8500 ft., 1;
14 mi. E and 6 mi. S Saratoga, 8800 ft., 1; 7 mi. S and 11 mi. E
Saratoga, 5; 8 mi. S and 6 mi. E Saratoga, 10; 10 mi. N and 14 mi. E
Encampment, 8000 ft., 2; 10 mi. N and 16 mi. E Encampment, 8000 ft., 1;
8 mi. N and 16 mi. E Encampment, 8400 ft., 10. _Albany Co._: 2-1/4 mi.
ESE Browns Peak, 10300 ft., 7; 3 mi. ESE Browns Peak 10000 ft., 5; 2 mi.
S Browns Peak, 10600 ft., 7; 3 mi. S Browns Peak, 1; 2 mi. E and 1/2 mi.
S Medicine Bow Peak, 10800 ft., 2; 5 mi. N Laramie, 7200 ft., 1; 1 mi. E
Laramie, 7164 ft., 18; Laramie Mts., 10 mi. E Laramie (8500 ft., 2; 9000
ft., 1), 3 (U. S. B. S.); 5-1/2 mi. ESE Laramie, 8500 ft., 4; 8 mi. E
and 4 mi. S Laramie, 8600 ft., 5; 8 mi. E and 6 mi. S Laramie, 8500 ft.,
1; 15 mi. SE Laramie, Pole Mtn., 8200 ft., 3 (U. S. B. S.); 1 mi. SSE
Pole Mtn., (8250 ft., 4; 8350 ft., 6), 10; 1 mi. S Pole Mtn., 8350 ft.,
2; 2 mi. SW Pole Mtn., 8300 ft., 6; 2-1/2 mi. S Pole Mtn., 8340 ft., 1;
3 mi. S Pole Mtn., 1; Woods P. O., 2 (U. S. N. M.); Fort Russell, 1 (U.
S. N. M.); Sherman, 2 (U. S. N. M.).

_Additional records._--Bailey (N. Amer. Fauna, 39:101, 112, November 15,
1915) has recorded the following specimens, which on geographic grounds,
would presumably be referable to _Thomomys talpoides rostralis._
COLORADO: Estes Park (referred by Bailey, p. 101, to _T. t. clusius_),
1; Colorado City, 1; Colorado Springs, 2-1/2 mi. N, 6000 ft., 1;
Colorado Springs, east of Palmer Park, 1; Montgomery, 3; Nederland, 4;
Teller County Divide, 1. These specimens have not been examined by us.


=Thomomys talpoides attenuatus= new subspecies

_Type._--Male, adult, skull and skin, no. 15095 Mus. Nat. Hist., Univ.
Kansas; from 3-1/2 mi. W Horse Creek Post Office, 7000 ft., Laramie
County, Wyoming; obtained on July 16, 1945, by Henry W. Setzer; original
no. 629.

_Range._--Southeastern Wyoming from Niobrara County south into Weld
County, Colorado.

_Diagnosis._--Size small; color pale (whitish); skull smooth and,
relative to its length, slender; rostrum relatively long; nasals
truncate posteriorly; middle parts of zygomatic arches straight;
temporal ridges low and more widely separated in middle extent than at
anterior or posterior ends; tympanic bullae rounded and moderately
inflated; interpterygoid space V-shaped.

_Comparisons._--From _Thomomys talpoides bullatus_ (topotypes) to the
northward, _T. t. attenuatus_ differs in smaller size, lighter (less
brownish, more whitish) color, smaller and slenderer skull. In detail,
some cranial features diagnostic of _attenuatus,_ when compared with
_bullatus,_ are: Anterolateral angle of zygoma less nearly a right
angle; temporal ridges bowed outward at middle, instead of straight, and
farther apart posteriorly than anteriorly instead of nearly parallel;
sides of basioccipital nearly straight instead of concave.

From _Thomomys talpoides cheyennensis_ (holotype and Wyoming specimens
from: Pine Bluff; 1 mi. W Pine Bluffs, 5000 ft.; 12 mi. N and 1/2 mi. W
Pine Bluffs) to the eastward, _T. t. attenuatus_ differs in smaller size
throughout and more slender skull. The two subspecies are
indistinguishable in color.

From _Thomomys talpoides macrotis_ (topotypes) to the southward, _T. t.
attenuatus_ differs in smaller size, slightly lighter (less brownish and
more whitish) color, smaller and slenderer skull.

From _Thomomys talpoides rostralis_ (specimens from the type locality)
to the westward, _T. t. attenuatus_ differs in smaller size; lighter
(grayer, less brownish) color, smaller and less angular skull.

From _Thomomys talpoides clusius_ (topotypes) to the northwestward, _T.
t. attenuatus_ differs in shorter body, slightly grayer color, less
width across mastoid region of skull, smaller tympanic bullae, and more
obtuse anterolateral angle on zygoma.

_Remarks._--This subspecies is of smaller size than any of the
geographically adjoining subspecies. Intergradation with _T. t.
cheyennensis_ is shown by specimens from two miles south and nine and
one-half miles east of Cheyenne, Wyoming. Intergradation with _T. t.
bullatus_ or _T. t. clusius_ or both is suggested by the larger size of
the specimen from five miles southwest of Wheatland, Wyoming. Although
large, this skull has the slender proportions of _attenuatus_ to which
the specimen is tentatively referred. Although the specimens from Avalo,
Colorado, are typical _attenuatus,_ the specimen from Pawnee Buttes,
Colorado, is somewhat larger than typical _attenuatus_ and suggests
intergradation with the subspecies to the southward, for example, at
Flagler, Colorado.

_Specimens examined._--Total number, 44, and unless otherwise indicated
in the Museum of Natural History of the University of Kansas.

=Wyoming.= _Niobrara County_: 10 mi. N Hatcreek Post Office, 5300 ft.,
1. _Platte Co._: 5 mi. SW Wheatland, 1 (U. S. B. S.). _Goshen Co._:
Little Bear Creek, 20 mi. SE Chugwater, 1 (U. S. B. S.). _Laramie Co._:
5 mi. W and 1 mi. N Horse Creek P. O., 7200 ft., 1; 3-1/2 mi. W Horse
Creek P. O., 7000 ft., 6; 2-1/5 mi. W Horse Creek P. O., 6600 ft., 1; 2
mi. W Horse Creek P. O., 6600 ft., 2; Horse Creek 6500 ft., 1; 3 mi. E
Horse Creek P. O., 6400 ft., 5; 6 mi. W Islay, 2 (U. S. B. S.); 2 mi. S
and 1/2 mi. E Pine Bluffs, 5200 ft., 1; 7 mi. W

Cheyenne, 6500 ft., 1; Cheyenne, 7 (U. S. N. M.); 1 mi. S and 4-1/2 mi.
E Cheyenne, 5200 ft., 1; 2 mi. S and 9-1/2 mi. E Cheyenne, 5200 ft., 3;
Arcola, 5200 ft., 4.

=Colorado.= _Weld Co._: Pawnee Buttes, 5300 ft., 1 (U. S. B. S.). _Logan
Co._: Chimney Canyon, 10 mi. NE Avalo, 5100 ft., 5 (U. S. B. S.).

_Museum of Natural History, University of Kansas, Lawrence. Transmitted
January 15, 1951._




TABLE 1. MEASUREMENTS, IN MILLIMETERS, OF TWO SUBSPECIES OF THOMOMYS
TALPOIDES.
______________________________________________________________________

  Column A  Catalogue number or number of averaged individuals
  Column B  Sex
  Column C  Total length
  Column D  Length of tail
  Column E  Basilar length
  Column F  Length of hind foot
  Column G  Zygomatic breadth
  Column H  Least interorbital constriction
  Column I  Mastoidal breadth
  Column J Length of nasals
  Column K Breadth of rostrum
  Column L Length of rostrum
  Column M Alveolar length if maxilliary tooth-row


   A    |  B   | C | D | E  | F  | G  | H  | I  | J  | K  | L  |  M

                    _T. t. rostralis,_ from type locality

 17092  |Male  |220|56 |28  |33.2|23.7|6.4 |19.5|15.5|8.1 |17.5| 8.2
 17095  |Male  |228|68 |30  |33.3|  - |6.5 |18.8|15.0|7.4 |17.3| 7.3
 17091  |Male  |212|56 |27  |33.0|22.8|6.5 |18.7|14.2|8.5 |16.2| 7.6
 Average|Male  |220|60 |28.3|33.2|23.2|6.5 |19.0|14.9|8.0 |17.0| 7.7
 9 av.  |Female|214|56 |27.1|31.6|22.4|6.5 |18.5|14.4|7.8 |16.8| 7.9
 min.   |Female|198|45 |25  |30.0|20.7|6.2 |17.7|13.2|7.4 |15.4| 7.1
 max.   |Female|230|72 |28.5|33.5|23.3|7.0 |19.8|14.9|8.1 |17.7| 8.4

                    _T. t. attenuatus,_ from type locality

 15095  |Male  |202|61 |26  |30.1|21.2|6.6 |18.2|13.6|7.3 |16.0| 7.0
 15094  |Male  |189|56 |24  |29.7|20.1|5.7 |17.2|12.4|7.2 |14.8| 6.9

                  from 2-1/2 mi. W Horse Creek P. O., 6600 ft.

 15100  |Male  |196|58 |27  |30.2|21.7|6.1 |18.4|14.5|7.5 |16.3| 7.0
 3 av.  |Male  |196|58 |25.7|30.0|21.0|6.1 |17.9|13.5|7.3 |15.7| 7.0

                           from type locality

 15096  |Female|203|59 |26  |30.0|  - |6.1 |18.0|14.1|7.3 |16.3| 6.8
 15098  |Female|192|69 |26  |28.8|19.8|5.5 |17.2|12.0|6.7 |14.7| 7.3

                          Horse Creek, 6500 ft.

 15103  |Female|181|58 |25  |29.6|19.5|5.9 |16.3|13.0|6.9 |15.2| 7.0

                   3 mi. E Horse Creek P. O., 6400 ft.

 15107  |Female|190|54 |27  |30.5|20.5|6.0 |17.9|13.5|7.3 |16.4| 6.8
 15106  |Female|192|55 |26  |30.8|21.5|6.5 |18.2|12.7|7.6 |15.5| 7.0
 5 av.  |Female|192|59 |26  |29.9|20.3|6.0 |17.5|13.1|7.2 |15.6| 7.0






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Two New Pocket Gophers from Wyoming
and Colorado, by E. Raymond  Hall and H. Gordon Montague

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO NEW POCKET GOPHERS ***

***** This file should be named 29141.txt or 29141.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/1/4/29141/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Val Wooff, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
