The Project Gutenberg EBook of Geographic Variation in Red-backed Mice
(Genus Clethrionomys) of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region, by E. Lendell Cockrum and Kenneth L. Fitch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Geographic Variation in Red-backed Mice (Genus Clethrionomys) of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region

Author: E. Lendell Cockrum
        Kenneth L. Fitch

Release Date: June 4, 2010 [EBook #32679]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RED-BACKED MICE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Tom Cos, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                      Geographic Variation
              in Red-backed Mice (Genus Clethrionomys)
               of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region

                                 BY

              E. LENDELL COCKRUM and KENNETH L. FITCH


                University of Kansas Publications
                      Museum of Natural History

          Volume 5, No. 22, pp. 281-292, 1 figure in text
                         November 15, 1952

                        UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
                              LAWRENCE
                                1952







  ~University of Kansas Publications, Museum of Natural History~

      Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
               Edward H. Taylor, Robert W. Wilson

          Volume 5, No. 22, pp. 281-292, 1 figure in text
                         November 15, 1952

                      ~University of Kansas~
                        Lawrence, Kansas

                             PRINTED BY
                   FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
                           TOPEKA, KANSAS
                                1952
                     [Illustration: Union Label]
                              24-4369




                        Geographic Variation
              in Red-backed Mice (Genus Clethrionomys)
               of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region

                                 BY

               E. LENDELL COCKRUM and KENNETH L. FITCH


In the course of the preparation of a synopsis of the North American
terrestrial microtines by one of us (Cockrum), and the completion of a
Master's thesis on the geographical variation of the red-backed mice
of Wyoming by the other (Fitch) we had occasion to study the
red-backed mice of the southern Rocky Mountain region (see figure 1).
Results of these studies are the recognition of two heretofore unnamed
subspecies of the red-backed mouse in the southern Rocky Mountain
region, and a clarification of the taxonomic status of two additional
kinds.


+Clethrionomys gapperi galei+ (Merriam)

1890. _Evotomys galei_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna, 4:23, October 8.

1931. _Clethrionomys gapperi galei_, Hall, Univ. California Publ.
   Zool., 37:6, April 10.

1897. _Evotomys gapperi galei_, Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
   11:126, May 13.

_Type locality._--Ward, 9500 feet, Boulder County, Colorado.

_Range._--The Rocky Mountains of extreme southern Alberta, Montana,
northwestern and southern Wyoming, and north and central Colorado.


_Remarks._--_C. g. galei_, with the largest geographic range of any
of the Rocky Mountain subspecies, is also the most variable. Three
principal areas of geographic variation were found. These areas are:
The mountains of north-central Colorado and southern Wyoming (this
area includes the type locality); the Big Horn area probably northwest
into Montana (no adult specimens from Montana or Alberta examined);
and the Teton area which includes the mountains east and southeast of
Yellowstone National Park. Specimens from these areas have noticeable
differences in pelage, but no constant cranial differentiation could
be detected. Specimens from the Medicine Bow Mountains of southern
Wyoming have a more reddish dorsal stripe, and more buff and less gray
on the sides than either of the northern geographic variants. The
dorsal stripe continues farther anteriorly and is better defined
through its entire length. There are fewer differences between the two
northern geographic variants than between either one of them and the
southern variant. Specimens from the Teton Mountains, however, have
grayer sides, and the outer margin of the ear is tipped with chestnut
(little or no chestnut shows on the ears of the specimens from the Big
Horn Mountains); the dorsal stripe is less distinct (with slightly
more gray throughout) than in either of the other geographic variants
of the one subspecies.

Three specimens (two adults) are available from the Little Medicine
Range in Converse County (22 miles south and 24.5 miles west of
Douglas, 7600 feet), Wyoming. Although red-backed mice probably are
found in the mountains of Natrona and Albany counties, the population,
in the Little Medicine Range is somewhat isolated. In coloration these
mice are lighter than any of the three geographic variants described
above; the dorsal stripe is narrower; the sides are more buffy; the
dorsal stripe does not project anteriorly beyond the ears as it does
in the specimens from the Medicine Bow Mountains; and the face is
grayer. These specimens resemble the population in the Big Horn
Mountains to the north more than the population in the Medicine Bow
Mountains.

The specimens from the Little Medicine Range, the Big Horn Range, and
the Tetons are possibly subspecifically distinct from the southern
specimens. Examination of specimens now allocated to _galei_ from
Montana and Alberta should aid in revealing whether the northern
animals are an unnamed subspecies.

_Specimens examined._--Total, 167, distributed as follows and unless
otherwise stated, in the collection of the University of Kansas Museum
of Natural History:

+Wyoming+: _Park County_: 28 mi. N and 3 mi. W Cody, 7200 ft., 1. _Big
Horn County_: Medicine Wheel Ranch, 28 mi. E Lovell, 9000 ft., 22;
17-1/2 mi. E and 4-1/2 mi. S Shell, 1. _Teton County_: Moran, 6244
ft., 4; Moran, 3 (James Findley Collection); 2-3/4 mi. E Moran, 6300
ft., 1; 3-3/4 mi. E and 1 mi. S Moran, 6200 ft., 10. _Washakie
County_: 9 mi. E and 9 mi. N Tensleep, 8200 ft., 3; 9 mi. E and 4 mi.
N Tensleep, 7000 ft., 1. _Johnson County_: 4 mi. W and 1 mi. S
Klondike, 6500 ft., 1; 6-1/2 mi. W and 2 mi. S Buffalo, 5620 ft., 1.
_Lincoln County_: 3 mi. N and 11 mi. E Alpine, 5650 ft., 1. _Sublette
County_: 31 mi. N Pinedale, 8025 ft., 1. _Fremont County_: Togwotee
Pass, 5 (James Findley Collection); 20-1/2 mi. W and 2 mi. S Lander,
1; Mocassin [=Moccasin] Lake, 19 mi. W and 4 mi. N Lander, 10,100 ft.,
3; 18 mi. W and 3 mi. N Lander, 1; Mosquito Park Ranger Station,
17-1/2 mi. W and 2-1/2 mi. N Lander, 9500 ft., 10; 6-1/2 mi. W and 17
mi. S Lander, 8450 ft., 4; 5-1/2 mi. W and 22 mi. S Lander, 8800 ft.,
3. _Converse County_: 22 mi. S and 24-1/2 mi. W Douglas, 7600 ft., 3.
_Carbon County_: 18 mi. SW Rawlins, 7500 ft., 2; 19 mi. E and 8 mi. N
Encampment, 9150 ft., 4; 19-1/2 mi. E and 6 mi. N Savery, 8800 ft., 1;
11 mi. E and 6 mi. N Savery, 8400 ft., 1; 14 mi. E and 6 mi. N Savery,
1. _Albany County_: 3 mi. ESE Browns Peak, 10,000 ft., 59.

+Colorado+: _Rio Blanco County_: 9-1/2 mi. SW Pagoda Peak, 7700 ft.,
2. _Boulder County_: 2-1/2 mi. S Estes Park, 8400 ft., 2; 3 mi. S
Ward, 8. _Clear Creek County_: 2 mi. S Idaho Springs, 8000 ft., 1.
_Gunnison County_: Gothic, 8 mi. N Crested Butte, 6 (James Findley
Collection).

_Additional records._--+Colorado+: _Rio Blanco Co._: 25 mi. NE Meeker
(Cary, N. Amer. Fauna, 33:120, 1911). _El Paso Co._: Lake Moraine,
10,250 ft. (Warren, Mammals of Colorado, p. 224, 1942).


[Illustration: Map Geographic Range Clethrionomys gapperi]

~Fig. 1.~--Geographic ranges of the subspecies of
     _Clethrionomys gapperi_ in the southern Rocky Mountains.

[Map Numbers For shaded areas.]
1. _C. g. galei_        3. _C. g. uintaensis_  5. _C. g. limitis_
2. _C. g. brevicaudus_  4. _C. g. gauti_       6. _C. g. arizonensis_


+Clethrionomys gapperi brevicaudus+ (Merriam)

1891. _Evotomys gapperi brevicaudus_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna, 5:119,
   July 30.

1897. _Evotomys brevicaudus_, Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
   11:129, May 13.

1942. _Clethrionomys gapperi brevicaudus_, Bole and Moulthrop, Sci.
   Publ. Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist., 5:153, September 11.

_Type locality._--Three miles N Custer, 6000 ft., South Dakota.

_Range._--The Black Hills of South Dakota and Wyoming.


_Remarks._--Merriam (N. Amer. Fauna, 5:119, July 30, 1891) named this
subspecies on the basis of two specimens collected in the Black Hills
of South Dakota in July, 1888, and assigned it to the species
_Evotomys_ [= _Clethrionomys_] _gapperi_. He reported the diagnostic
characteristics as: "Similar to _E. gapperi_, but with larger ears and
shorter tail. The hazel of the dorsal area is not so bright as in
_gapperi_; the sides are the same golden brown." Of the cranial and
dental characteristics he wrote: "Much as in _E. gapperi_."

Bailey (Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 11:129, May 13, 1897), in his
"Revision of the American voles of the genus _Evotomys_," with one
additional specimen available, raised the Black Hills population to
specific status, re-emphasizing the shortness of the tail, and
pointing out a few slight cranial differences ("zygomatic arches low
and flaring out, so that the inner instead of the outer side shows in
top view; auditory bullae as large as in _gapperi_, but less
rounded").

Bailey (_loc. cit._) remarked that: "though based on so scanty
material, the characters distinguishing the species are fairly
pronounced. Its range is isolated and widely separated from that of
any other members of the genus by open prairie country and a wide belt
of the Transition zone. There seems to be no valid reason for
considering it a subspecies."

Additional specimens have been taken in recent years from the Black
Hills of South Dakota and northeastern Wyoming. This material has shed
light on the relationships and morphological characteristics of the
red-backed mice of this region. Bole and Moulthrop (Sci. Publ.
Cleveland Mus. Nat. Hist., 5:153, September 11, 1942) listed, as
comparative material, eight specimens from Bull Springs, Custer
County, South Dakota, under the name _Clethrionomys gapperi
brevicaudus_ (Merriam). They gave no reason for arranging
_brevicaudus_ as a subspecies of _C. gapperi_.

Twenty adults (11 skins and skulls, 9 skulls only) from Pennington
County, South Dakota (specimens in the University of Michigan
Museum of Zoology), have the following measurements (averages of
external measurements based on 11 specimens only): Total length, 142
(123-155); tail, 35 (30-39); hind foot, 19.5 (18.6-21.0); basal
length, 23.3 (21.7-24.5); condylobasilar length, 23.3 (21.9-24.5);
zygomatic breadth, 13.7 (12.9-14.7); lambdoidal breadth, 11.7
(11.3-12.9); alveolar length upper cheek-teeth, 5.5 (5.2-5.8);
interorbital breadth, 3.9 (3.6-4.1); length of nasals, 7.7 (7.1-8.5);
breadth of rostrum, 3.2 (2.9-3.6); and length of incisive foramina,
5.0 (4.6-5.3).

Measurements of the type and one "more fully adult topotype" (as given
by Bailey, _op. cit._) are: Total length, 125, 130; tail length, 31,
32; hind foot, 19, 19; basal length, 21.2, 21.8; length of nasals,
6.6, 7.0; zygomatic breadth, 12.5, 12.8; mastoid breadth, 11.3, 11.0;
alveolar length of upper molar series, 5.4, 5.3. In every measurement
the figures for Bailey's specimens are smaller than the average of the
same measurement in the 20 adults from Pennington County, and, in most
measurements, are even lower than the minimum of the latter series.
Therefore, we conclude that the material available to Merriam (_op.
cit._) and Bailey (_op. cit._) consisted of only subadults.

In comparison with a series of 23 adult _Clethrionomys gapperi galei_
from 28 mi. E Lovell, Big Horn County, Wyoming, _C. g. brevicaudus_
has a slightly shorter tail, longer hind foot, greater basal and
condylobasilar lengths, greater zygomatic and lambdoidal breadths and
conspicuously longer nasals.

In comparison with three adult _C. g. loringi_ from Elk River,
Sherburne County, Minnesota, _C. g. brevicaudus_ has a greater total
length, longer hind foot, greater basal length, conspicuously greater
zygomatic and lambdoidal breadths, much longer nasals, and a narrower
rostrum.

_Clethrionomys gapperi brevicaudus_, although isolated geographically
and although morphologically more distinct than many of the currently
recognized subspecies of _C. gapperi_, is probably best arranged as a
subspecies of _C. gapperi_ rather than as a full species. In certain
characters, such as interorbital breadth and breadth of rostrum, it is
intermediate between _C. g. galei_ and _C. g. loringi_, but it
resembles _C. g. galei_ more than it does any other named kind.

_Specimens examined._--Total, 66. Unless otherwise indicated,
specimens from Wyoming are in the University of Kansas Museum of
Natural History and specimens from South Dakota are in the University
of Michigan Museum of Zoology. Specimens are distributed as follows:

+Wyoming+: _Crook County_: 3 mi. NW Sundance, 5900 ft., 3. _Weston
County_: 1-1/2 mi. E Buckhorn, 6150 ft., 21; 12 mi. SE Newcastle, 1
(Univ. Michigan).

+South Dakota+: _Pennington County_: 1/2 mi. E Rochford, 1; 17 mi. NW
Custer, 1; 16 mi. NW Custer, 20; 16 mi. SW Rapid City, 1; 3 mi. SE
Hill City, 2; 4 mi. SE Hill City, 13; 5 mi. SE Hill City, Harney Peak,
7240 ft., 1. _Custer County_: 1-1/2 mi. E Sylvan Lake, 1.




+Clethrionomys gapperi uintaensis+ Doutt

1897. _Evotomys gapperi galei_, Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
   11:127 (part from Uinta Mts. of Wyoming), May 13.

1941. _Clethrionomys gapperi uintaensis_ Doutt, Proc. Biol. Soc.
   Washington, 54:161, Dec. 8.

_Type locality._--Paradise Park, 10,050 feet, 45 miles by road
northwest Vernal, Uintah County, Utah.

_Range._--The Uinta Mountains of northern Utah and southwestern
Wyoming.


_Remarks._--From the description given by Doutt (Proc. Biol. Soc.
Washington, 54:161, 1941) in his original description of this
subspecies, it appears that he had available for comparisons, only
subadult specimens of _C. g. galei_. As judged from the material of
_C. g. uintaensis_ available to us (1 topotype, KU 38081, and 7
specimens from Uinta County, Wyoming, listed below) and from Doutt's
(_op. cit._) description and measurements, the subspecies _C. g.
uintaensis_ is but weakly differentiated from _C. g. galei_. No marked
cranial differences are evident between the two subspecies; the
differences in pelage noted by Doutt (_op. cit._:161), however
("Similar to _Clethrionomys gapperi galei_ from Ward, Colorado, but
head and cheeks grayer; sides and back paler; belly whiter."), do seem
to be valid.

On the basis of these differences in pelage and the geographic
isolation of the range, we judge that _uintaensis_ should be retained
as a subspecies of _C. gapperi_. It is clear, however, that _C. g.
uintaensis_ is less distinct from _C. g. galei_ than are the other
adjacent subspecies.

_Specimens examined._--Total, 8, all in the University of Kansas
Museum of Natural History, distributed as follows:

+Wyoming+: _Uinta County_: 9 mi. S Robertson, 8000-8400 ft., 3; 9 mi.
S and 2 mi. E Robertson, 8000 ft., 2; 11-1/2 mi. S and 2 mi. E
Robertson, 9200 ft., 1; 14 mi. S and 2 mi. E Robertson, 9000 ft., 1.

+Utah+: _Uintah County_: Paradise Park, 21 mi. W, 15 mi. N Vernal,
10,050 ft., 1.

_Additional, marginal records_ (Durrant, Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat.
Hist., 6:356, August 19, 1952).--+Utah+: _Rich Co._: Monte Cristo, 18
mi. W Woodruff, 8000 ft. _Salt Lake Co._: Emigration Canyon, 8 mi.
above forks, 6,000 ft.; Silver Lake Post Office (Brighton), 9,500 ft.
_Wasatch Co._: Wolf Creek Summit, 9,800 ft. _Daggett Co._: Beaver
Dams, 10,500 ft.




+Clethrionomys gapperi gauti+, new subspecies

_Type._--Male, adult, skin and skull; No. 133515, Biological Surveys
Collections, United States National Museum, from Twining, 10,700 ft.,
Taos County, New Mexico; obtained on August 7, 1904, by James H. Gaut,
original number 3086.

_Range._--The Rocky Mountains of north-central New Mexico and
south-central Colorado.

_Diagnosis._--A brightly colored _Clethrionomys gapperi_; dorsal
stripe near Chestnut (capitalized color terms after Ridgway, Color
Standards and Color Nomenclature, Washington, D. C., 1912) with an
underwash of near Light Ochraceous-Buff and a mixture of black-tipped
guard hairs giving an over-all effect of between Tawny and Russet;
braincase relatively large; zygomatic width and lambdoidal width
large; nasals long.

_Comparisons._--As compared with topotypes of _C. g. galei_, the color
is lighter, the dorsal reddish stripe slightly narrower, sides
brighter, with a wash of Light Ochraceous-Buff, grading ventrally into
a slight wash of Pale Ochraceous-Buff, instead of a silvery-white
venter characteristic of _C. g. galei_; zygomatic and lambdoidal
breadths are greater, nasals slightly shorter, auditory bullae
slightly more inflated, teeth larger, and braincase larger.

As compared with topotypes of _C. g. limitis_, _C. g. gauti_ is
darker, has a greater zygomatic breadth, longer upper tooth-row,
longer nasals, and narrower rostrum.

_Measurements._--External and cranial measurements of the type, and
the average and extreme measurements of four adult males and one adult
female from the type locality (including the type) and five miles
south of the type locality are: Total length, 144, 147 (140-152);
tail, 40, 42 (39-45); hind foot, 20, 19.3 (19-20); condylobasilar
length, 22.3, 22.9 (22.2-24.0); zygomatic breadth, 13.6, 13.7
(13.5-14.0); lambdoidal breadth, 11.9, 11.7 (11.4-12.0); alveolar
length of upper cheek-teeth, 5.1, 5.2 (5.1-5.4); interorbital breadth,
4.0, 3.9 (3.8-4.0); length of nasals, 7.0, 7.2 (7.0-7.6); breadth of
rostrum, 2.9, 3.1 (2.9-3.4); length of incisive foramina, 4.8, 5.1
(4.8-5.3).

_Remarks._--Two specimens from a locality 21 mi. W and 3 mi. N
Saguache, Saguache County, Colorado, although referred to this
subspecies on the basis of paler pelage, inflation of auditory bullae,
and heavier teeth, show characters of _C. g. galei_ in the narrowness
across the zygomata and lambdoidal crest. Four specimens from
Silverton (1 adult and 3 young adults) are referable to this
subspecies on the basis of color of pelage and cranial proportions but
are smaller than either _C. g. gauti_ or _C. g. galei_.

The specimen from Pecos Baldy, Pecos Mountain, San Miguel County, New
Mexico, referred by Bailey (N. Amer. Fauna, 52:192) to _Clethrionomys
gapperi galei_, is here referred to _C. g. gauti_ on geographical
grounds.

The name _gauti_ is proposed in honor of the collector of the type
specimen, James H. Gaut.

_Specimens examined._--Total, 14, distributed as follows and, unless
otherwise stated, in the Biological Surveys Collection:

+Colorado+: _Saguache County_: 21 mi. W and 3 mi. N Saguache, N 38°,
106° 31´, 9100 ft., 2 (Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.). _San Juan Co._:
Silverton, 4.

+New Mexico+: _Taos County_: Twining, 10,700 ft., 3; 5 mi. S Twining,
11,400 ft., 3. _Sandoval County_: Goat Peak, Jemez Mountains, 1.
_Colfax County_: 15 mi. SW Cimarron, 9000 ft., 1 (Amer. Mus. Nat.
Hist.).

_Additional records._--+New Mexico+: _San Miguel Co._: Pecos Baldy,
Pecos Mountain, 1 (Bailey, N. Amer. Fauna, 52:192, 1932).




+Clethrionomys gapperi limitis+ (Bailey)

1913. _Evotomys limitis_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 26:133,
   May 21.

_Type locality._--Willow Creek, a branch of the Gilita, 8500 ft.,
Mogollon Mountains, Catron County, New Mexico.

_Range._--Known from the Mogollon, San Mateo, and Magdalena mountains
of western New Mexico.


_Remarks._--Bailey (Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 26:133, May 21,
1913) described this animal as a species and gave as general
characteristics: "Size slightly larger than _E._ [= _Clethrionomys
gapperi_] _galei_; colors duller, grayer and less buffy; skull and
dentition heavier." He further characterized the skull as: "Larger,
heavier and conspicuously more ridged than in _galei_; bullae large
and especially deep; dentition heavy throughout." The type of _C.
limitis_, as judged from the measurements given by Bailey (_loc.
cit._), is an exceptionally old male.

Our comparison of six adult topotypes with a series of _C. g. galei_
from Wyoming (18 adults from 3 mi. SSE Browns Peak, 10,000 ft., Albany
County, in Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.) and with three near-topotypes
of _C. g. galei_ (3 mi. S Ward, 9000 ft., Boulder County, Colorado, in
Univ. Kansas Mus. Nat. Hist.) revealed that most of the differences
noted by Bailey (_loc. cit._) are not evident when individuals of
comparable ages are examined. Some specimens of _C. g. galei_ exceed
_C. limitis_ in ridging of the skull and size of the teeth although
conspicuous ridges and large teeth are supposedly distinctive of _C.
limitis_. The bullae, although averaging larger in _C. limitis_, can
be matched in size by those of specimens of _C. g. galei_ from
Wyoming.

The differences evident between _C. limitis_ and _C. g. galei_ are of
the kind and degree that serve to separate subspecies in the species
_Clethrionomys gapperi_ and, although actual evidence of
intergradation is lacking, we think that the relationships of
_limitis_ are better expressed by arranging it as a subspecies of _C.
gapperi_ than by retaining it as a full species.

_Specimens examined._--Total, 7, all in the Biological Surveys
Collection, distributed as follows:

+New Mexico+: _Catron County_: Willow Creek, 8500 ft., Mogollon
Mountains, 4. _Socorro County_: San Mateo Peak, 10,000 ft., San Mateo
Mountains, 2; Copper Canyon, 9000 ft., Magdalena Mountains, 1.




+Clethrionomys gapperi arizonensis+, new subspecies

_Type._--Female, adult, skin and skull; No. 158401, Biological Surveys
Collection, United States National Museum; from Little Colorado River,
8300 ft., White Mountains, Apache County, Arizona; obtained September
12, 1908, by C. Birdseye, original number 152.

_Range._--Known only from the White Mountains of eastern Arizona.

_Diagnosis._--Dorsal stripe near Chestnut, with an underwash of
between Tawny and Russet, and a mixture of black-tipped hairs,
resulting in an overall effect of near Chestnut. Skull wide across
zygomatic arches and narrow across mastoids; rostrum narrow and
posterior border of palate straight.

_Comparisons._--This subspecies needs close comparison only with the
adjacent subspecies _C. g. limitis_. As compared with topotypes of
_limitis_, _C. g. arizonensis_ has darker pelage, narrower rostrum,
greater width across zygomatic arches, lesser lambdoidal breadth,
longer nasals, wider palate, and more inflated auditory bullae. The
posterior border of the hard palate is straight in five skulls of the
series that are complete (two skulls have the palatal regions broken);
all _C. g. limitis_ examined have a median posterior projection on
the posterior border of the hard palate.

_Measurements._--External and cranial measurements of the type, and
the average and extreme measurements of three adult males and two
adult females from the type locality (including the type) are: Total
length, 160, 145.6 (137-160); tail, 44, 40.8 (37-46); hind foot, 18.5,
19.3 (18-20); condylobasilar length, 23.3, 22.8 (22.1-23.5); zygomatic
breadth, 13.8, 13.4 (12.6-13.8); lambdoidal breadth, 11.5, 11.4
(11.0-11.6); alveolar length upper cheek-teeth, 5.5, 5.4 (5.2-5.5);
interorbital breadth, 3.8, 3.9 (3.8-4.0); length of nasals, 7.6, 7.1
(6.9-7.6); breadth of rostrum, 3.1, 3.1 (3.0-3.2); length of incisive
foramina, 5.5, 5.2 (5.0-5.5).

_Remarks._--Hall and Davis (Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 47:55,
February 9, 1934) reported 12 specimens of red-backed mice from
Hannagan Meadow, 9500 to 9600 ft., and ten from Hannagan Creek, 8600
ft., all in Greenlee County, Arizona. Although they pointed out most
of the cranial differences here described as diagnostic of _C. g.
arizonensis_, they did not name the animals as new since they had no
seasonally comparable materials; thus they were unable to evaluate the
differences noted in pelage. We have not examined the material
referred to by Hall and Davis (_loc. cit._), but, on the basis of
their description, here refer it to _C. g. arizonensis_.

_Specimens examined._--Total, 7, all from the type locality and all in
the Biological Surveys Collection in the United States National
Museum.




Grateful acknowledgment is made of the opportunity to study the
specimens from New Mexico and Arizona in the Biological Surveys
Collection of the United States National Museum and the material from
South Dakota in the University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, as well
as for the financial support afforded one of us (Cockrum) by the
University of Kansas from its Research appropriation. Cockrum's work
was part of a larger investigation of the geographic distribution of
all North American native mammals, aided by a contract between the
Office of Naval Research, Department of the Navy, and the University
of Kansas (NR. 161-791). Also, assistance with some of field work was
given by the Kansas University Endowment Association.

_Transmitted June 21, 1952._

[Illustration: printers mark]
        24-4369


Transcriber's Notes.

This file was derived from scanned images.
The original text is presented.


Emphasis Notation:
     _text_ - italicized
     +text+ - bold
     ~text~ - small caps






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Geographic Variation in Red-backed
Mice (Genus Clethrionomys) of the Southern Rocky Mountain Region, by E. Lendell Cockrum and Kenneth L. Fitch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RED-BACKED MICE ***

***** This file should be named 32679-8.txt or 32679-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/6/7/32679/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Tom Cos, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
