The Project Gutenberg EBook of Subspeciation in the Meadow Mouse, Microtus
montanus, in Wyoming and Colorado, by Sydney Anderson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Subspeciation in the Meadow Mouse, Microtus montanus, in Wyoming and Colorado

Author: Sydney Anderson

Release Date: March 22, 2010 [EBook #31730]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEADOW MOUSE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Simon Gardner, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 7, No. 7, pp. 489-506, 2 figures in text

July 23, 1954




                    Subspeciation in the Meadow Mouse,
                      Microtus montanus, in Wyoming
                              and Colorado

                                  BY

                            SYDNEY ANDERSON


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS

LAWRENCE

1954


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, A. Byron Leonard,
Robert W. Wilson

Volume 7, No. 7, pp. 489-506, 2 figures in text

Published July 23, 1954


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS

Lawrence, Kansas


PRINTED BY

FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER

TOPEKA, KANSAS

1954

25-3560




Subspeciation in the Meadow Mouse, Microtus montanus, in Wyoming and
Colorado

BY

SYDNEY ANDERSON


_Microtus montanus_ reaches the eastern limits of its geographic
distribution in Wyoming and Colorado. There the mountains, but in
general not the lowlands, are occupied by this species. A certain
minimum of moisture may be of direct importance to the mouse and
certainly is indirectly important, because certain hydrophytic or
mesophytic grasses used by the mouse for food, for protection from
enemies, and for shelter from the elements are dependent on the
moisture. Areas suitable for _Microtus montanus_ are separated by
deserts that are dominated by sagebrush and other xerophytic plants or
by forests or rocky exposures at higher altitudes. A relatively small
percentage, probably less than ten per cent, of the total area even in
the more favorable parts of the range of the species is suitable for
occupancy. In these mice, as in other microtines (Elton, 1942; Piper,
1909), there are seasonal, and irregularly multiannual fluctuations in
population density, which sometimes are extreme. Consequently the mice
at some times seem to be absent from suitable habitats, and at some
other times occur there in amazingly large numbers.

Because the species is broken up into partly isolated, or at times
completely isolated, colonies or local populations it may be supposed
that various evolutionary forces such as selection and random genetic
drift operate to foster variation. The degree to which racial
distinction is attained may depend upon these forces and the time
available. In _Microtus montanus_ in the eastern Rocky Mountains the
degree of subspecific distinction is not great.

The study here reported upon is based on 1,187 specimens of _Microtus
montanus_ from Wyoming, Colorado, Idaho and Montana, and on work in the
field. I spent approximately four months in the field in this area, in
the summers of 1950, 1951, and 1952. The specimens studied were arranged
according to localities and the larger series were compared
statistically. Each of two series, totaling 136 specimens, was studied
intensively to ascertain the kind and range of variation within single
populations. Twenty-seven measurements, various proportions based on
these measurements, and differences in color were analyzed. Fifteen
characters, judged to be most significant, were selected for use in
comparing all series. In addition, certain characters that can not be
expressed easily by measurements, such as inflation of the auditory
bullae and the curvature of the zygomatic arch, were observed. The
studies by A. B. Howell (1924) of variation in _Microtus montanus
yosemite_ Grinnell in California and those by O. B. Goin (1943) of
_Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus_ (Ord) were useful. The external
measurements are from the collectors' field labels. The measurements of
the skull all were taken with dial calipers reading to a tenth of a
millimeter. The anteroposterior measurements of the skull all were taken
along the shortest line between the points specified below and are not
necessarily along a line parallel to the long axis of the skull. These
measurements were taken on the left side of the skull whenever possible.
Some of the skulls are damaged and therefore some measurements could not
be taken and are omitted in the computations. Measurements are in
millimeters.

The results of these studies were submitted to the Department of Zoology
and the Graduate School of the University of Kansas in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts (1952)
and are available in manuscript form at the Museum of Natural History
and the library of the University of Kansas.


EXPLANATION OF MEASUREMENTS

     Caudal index.--the length of the tail expressed as a percentage of
     the length of the head and body. The length of the head and body is
     the collector's measurement of total length less the length of the
     tail.

CRANIAL MEASUREMENTS OF LENGTH.

     Condylobasilar length.--from the exoccipital condyle to the most
     posterior point on the border of the alveolus of the upper incisor.

     Alveolobasilar length.--from the posterior border of the alveolus
     of the third upper molar to the posterior border of the alveolus of
     the incisor.

     Palatilar length.--from the anteriormost part of the posterior
     border of the bony shelf of the palate to the posteriormost part of
     the alveolus of the incisor.

     Alveolar length of upper molar tooth-row.--from the most posterior
     point of the alveolus of the third upper molar to the most anterior
     point of the alveolus of the first upper molar.

MEASUREMENTS OF BREADTH.

     Zygomatic breadth.--greatest transverse width.

     Interorbital breadth.--the breadth of the interorbital
     constriction.

     Lambdoidal breadth.--between the lateralmost points of the
     lambdoidal crest.

     Prelambdoidal breadth.--between the medialmost margins of the
     prominent fenestrae in the posterodorsal parts of the squamosal
     bones. To these fenestrae Howell (1924:995) applied the adjective
     "prelambdoidal," but other authors have used other names (see Hill,
     1935:127).

     Depth of braincase.--shortest distance from the ventral side of the
     cranium at the suture between the basioccipital and basisphenoid
     bones to the dorsal surface of the cranium (usually not
     perpendicular to the long axis of the skull).

The history of our knowledge of _Microtus montanus_ in this area begins
with the early work of the United States Bureau of Biological Survey
directed by C. H. Merriam (1891), and participated in by Vernon Bailey
(1900, 1917), Merritt Cary (1911, 1917), and others. The changes in
nomenclature which grew out of increased understanding of these mice
through additional collecting are expressed in the synonymies under the
accounts of subspecies. As a result of my studies two of the three
subspecific names previously proposed for mice from this area have been
retained although changes are proposed in the ranges assigned to the two
subspecies and two additional heretofore unrecognized subspecies are
named and described. Furthermore the additional specimens and my studies
of variation make modifications in the characterization of these
subspecies necessary. Not all of the samples here assigned to a single
subspecies are identical and I therefore list and discuss some of the
local variants.

     Numerous members of summer field parties from the Museum of Natural
     History at the University of Kansas collected most of the specimens
     studied and wrote field notes that have been helpful. I am grateful
     to these persons and to Professor E. R. Hall and Dr. R. H. Baker
     for their assistance and helpful suggestions. Specimens in the
     following museums were made available by their respective curators:
     Chicago Natural History Museum by Mr. Colin C. Sandborn, The Museum
     of Zoology at the University of Michigan by Dr. E. T. Hooper, The
     American Museum of Natural History by Mr. G. G. Goodwin, The United
     States National Museum by Dr. David H. Johnson and the Biological
     Surveys Collection by Miss Viola S. Schantz. A fellowship from the
     National Science Foundation made possible the studies at the
     museums other than at the University of Kansas.



=Microtus montanus nanus= (Merriam)

     _Arvicola (Mynomes) nanus_ Merriam, N. Amer. Fauna, 5:62, July 30,
     1891.

     _Microtus montanus nanus_, Hall, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     51:131, August 23, 1938.

     _Microtus nanus_, Bailey, N. Amer. Fauna, 17:30, June 6, 1900
     (part).

     _Microtus montanus caryi_ Bailey, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     30:29, February 21, 1917.

     _Microtus nanus nanus_, Cary, N. Amer. Fauna, 42:43, October 3,
     1917 (part).

     _Type._--Adult male No. 23853/31253, U. S. National Museum,
     Department of Agriculture collection, from Pahsimeroi Mountains,
     Custer County, Idaho; obtained by C. Hart Merriam and Vernon
     Bailey, September 16, 1890.

     _Range._--Idaho; southwestern Montana; most of the southwestern
     half of Wyoming; southward to central Colorado. See figure 1.

     _Comparisons._--Comparisons with subspecies named as new in this
     paper will be found in the accounts of those subspecies beyond.
     From _Microtus montanus fusus_ Hall, the subspecies to the south,
     _M. m. nanus_ from Idaho differs as follows: averages smaller;
     slightly darker and less reddish and less yellowish in color;
     slightly wider braincase (see measurement of prelambdoidal
     breadth); larger bullae.

     _Measurements._--Average (= arithmetical mean) measurements of 34
     specimens, both male and female, from several localities in eastern
     Idaho are: total length, 151; length of tail, 39; hind foot, 19.2;
     condylobasilar length of the skull, 25.0; zygomatic breadth, 15.0;
     alveolar length of upper molar tooth-row, 6.4; prelambdoidal
     breadth, 8.9; and lambdoidal breadth, 11.7.

     Average and extreme measurements of six adult males from near
     Pocatello, Bannock County, Idaho, and nine adult males from near
     Afton, Lincoln County, Wyoming, are, respectively, as follows:
     total length, 143(135-150), 163(143-179); length of tail,
     35.1(33-38), 42.8(36-49); caudal index, 32.0(28.0-33.1),
     35.7(30.6-41.9); hind foot, 18.9(18-20), 18.8(17-20);
     condylobasilar length of skull, 24.4(24.0-26.0), 25.6(24.5-26.2);
     alveolobasilar length, 14.1(13.7-14.5), 14.6(13.8-15.0); palatilar
     length, 13.2(12.9-13.6), 13.8(13.2-14.5); alveolar length of upper
     molar tooth-row, 6.3(6.1-6.5), 6.3(6.0-6.6); depth of braincase,
     7.7(7.5-7.9), 8.0(7.7-8.3); lambdoidal breadth, 11.4(11.0-11.7),
     12.0(11.3-12.7); prelambdoidal breadth, 9.1(8.6-9.4), 8.7(8.0-9.4);
     zygomatic breadth, 14.3(13.8-14.7), 15.3(14.4-16.3); interorbital
     breadth, 3.6(3.5-3.7), 3.5(3.3-3.7). The average length of the
     nasal bones in the series from Pocatello is 7.1 mm. The averages,
     which have not been included in Table 1, for three measurements of
     the series from Carbon County, Wyoming, are as follows (Encampment,
     males; Encampment, females; Savery, males; and Savery, females,
     respectively): alveolobasilar length, 14.4, 14.3, 14.5, 14.3;
     interorbital breadth, 3.5, 3.4, 3.5, 3.4; depth of braincase, 7.8,
     7.6, 7.9, 7.6. Additional measurements are included in Table 1 for
     other series.

_Discussion._--The name _Microtus montanus caryi_ Bailey is here placed
in synonymy under _M. m. nanus_ (Merriam). Vernon Bailey (1917) in his
description of _caryi_ made four assumptions that have been found to be
entirely or partly invalid. First, he assumed that this is an "extreme
variant which gradually changes in characters across Nevada and Utah,
and reaches its maximum variation in Wyoming." The differences pointed
out in subsequent descriptions of subspecies found in the above area do
not show a gradual change in any character, or in the number of
characters, nor is _caryi_ an extreme when compared with the other
subspecies. Second, _Microtus nanus_ was not, as Bailey assumed, a
different species than _Microtus montanus_. Third, he assumed that the
characteristics of adults of _nanus_ were adequately ascertainable from
the thirteen topotypes available to him. Subsequent sampling from Idaho
shows that the series of specimens available to Bailey was made up
mostly of young and subadult animals. Finally, _caryi_ does not occupy
as Bailey stated "the meadows along streams in the arid sagebrush
country of the Bear River, Green River, and Wind River valleys"
exclusively, or characteristically. When the localities from which the
species actually is known are plotted, it seems that the arid basin
serves as a barrier and that the species is more commonly and abundantly
found in montane meadows in the Transition and Canadian life-zones.

Certain samples, here assigned to _M. m. nanus_, that vary from the
average of the subspecies deserve comment. For example, mice from the
area in Wyoming southwest of the Green River (in the Uinta Mountains)
have relatively smaller feet, but are larger in both total length and
size of skull. Specimens from near Afton, Lincoln County, Wyoming, are
relatively large in both total length and size of skull. This series and
specimens from Teton County, Wyoming, are intermediate between _nanus_
from Idaho and the newly named subspecies from near Cody, Park County,
Wyoming, described below, in terms of both darkness and the amount of
reddish color. Mice from Laramie County are more richly reddish-brown.
The specimens from near Savery, in Carbon County, Wyoming, are darker.
The alveolobasilar length relative to the condylobasilar length is
smaller in the series from along Deer Creek, 16 mi. S, 11 mi. W Waltman,
Natrona County, Wyoming. The series from the southern tier of counties
in Wyoming and some of the specimens from Colorado have relatively wider
zygomatic arches. The specimens from southern Sweetwater County,
Wyoming, are relatively paler, have a relatively longer tail and longer
hindfeet, lesser condylobasilar length, and wider braincase. Most of
these variations are of questionable significance; they may be chance
variations owing to errors in sampling.

Much of the south-central part of the state is relatively low and
relatively arid. This area includes the arid basin of the Green River
and its major tributaries and the arid Red Desert along the continental
divide in Sweetwater County. This area might have acted as a barrier to
the mice; gene flow might have been prevented between the populations of
the western part of the state and those farther east in the Medicine Bow
Mountains and Laramie Mountains. Nevertheless geographic variations of
subspecific worth have not taken place. The barrier has either not been
of as long duration, or has not been so complete and effective, as the
other barriers in the state, namely the Absaroka Range, the Big Horn
Basin, the Shoshone Basin, and the valley of the North Platte River.
These four barriers presumably have led to the differentiation of the
two subspecies that are newly named beyond. Each of the two areas which
is set apart by these barriers and in which one of the newly named
subspecies has evolved is small; therefore there is a lesser amount of
suitable habitat available for each of the newly named mice than there
is for _M. m. nanus_. It is conceivable, therefore, that in periods of
adverse conditions in each of the small areas the size of the effective
breeding population may have been so small that random genetic drift
could have operated effectively, or that selection was more critical
than in a larger, more stable population. It is difficult to test these
possibilities because the selective value of the taxonomic characters is
unknown. The observed pattern of variation and facts of distribution
are, however, not contradictory to the above possibilities.

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 993, distributed as follows: All
     specimens unless otherwise indicated are in the University of
     Kansas Museum of Natural History. Specimens in other museums are
     labeled as follows: Chicago Natural History Museum (Chi);
     University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology (Mich); American Museum
     of Natural History (AMNH); United States National Museum (USNM);
     Biological Surveys Collection (USBS). Localities that are not
     represented in Fig. 1 because overlapping or crowding of the
     symbols would result are Italicized. Localities are arranged from
     north to south by states, within a state from northwest to
     southeast by counties, and within a county from north to south.

     WYOMING: _Yellowstone Park_: Canyon Camp, 1 (USBS); Lower Geyser
     Basin, 1 (USBS); Upper Yellowstone River, 2 (AMNH); _North end of
     Lake_, _Yellowstone National Park_, 2 (AMNH). _Teton Co._: Pacific
     Creek, 1 (USBS); _Big Game Ridge_, 3 (USBS 1, Mich 2); _Whetstone
     Creek_, 7 (Mich); Moran and environs (6 localities within a 5 mile
     radius), 28 (USBS 2, Mich 5); _S fork Buffalo River_, 7 (AMNH); 2
     mi. W pass, Black Rock Creek, 1 (USBS); _Jenny Lake_, 5 (Mich); Bar
     BC Ranch, 2½ mi. NE Moose, 6500 ft., 2; Teton Pass above Fish
     Creek, 1 (USBS); Jackson and environs, 142 (Mich 141); _Sheep
     Creek_, 2 (Mich). _Lincoln Co.: 13 mi. N, 2 mi. W Afton_, 2; _10
     mi. N, 2 mi. W Afton_, 4; _9½ mi. N, 2 mi. W Afton_, 3; 9 mi. N,
     2 mi. W Afton, 9; _7 mi. N, 1 mi. W Afton_, 12; Afton, 1 (USBS);
     Labarge Creek, 1 (USBS); Border, 6 (USBS); _Cokeville_, 2 (USBS); 6
     mi. N, 2 mi. E Sage, 1; Cumberland, 5 (USBS). _Sublette Co._: 34
     mi. N, 4 mi. W Pinedale, 1; _33 mi. N, 2 mi. W Pinedale_, 6; _32
     mi. N, 1 mi. W Pinedale_, 1; _31 mi. N Pinedale_, 4; Dell Creek, on
     Ferris Ranch, 7 (Mich); Horse Creek, 7800 ft., Merna, 4 (USBS); Big
     Piney, 1 (USBS). _Fremont Co._: 17½ mi. W, 2½ mi. N Lander,
     9500 ft., 3; _17 mi. W, 2 mi. N Lander, 9300 ft._, 4; Milford and
     environs (5 localities within a 1 mile radius), 23 (USBS 4); 15½
     mi. S, 7½ mi. W Lander, 9200 ft., 1; South Pass City, 8000 ft, 8
     (USBS); _23½ mi. S, 5 mi. W Lander, 8600 ft._, 7. _Natrona Co._:
     Deer Creek, 16 mi. S, 11 mi. W Waltman, 6950 ft., 44; 6 mi. S, 2
     mi. W Casper, 5900 ft., 4; _6-4/5 mi. S, 2 mi. W Casper, 6100 ft._,
     1; _7 mi. S, 2 mi. W Casper, 6370 ft._, 3; _10 mi. S Casper, 7750
     ft._, 33; Sun, 2 (USBS); _5 mi. W Independence Rock, 6000 ft._, 4;
     _5 mi. W, 1 mi. S Independence Rock_, 2. _Converse Co._: Beaver, 1
     (USBS). _Uinta Co.: 1½ mi. W, ½ mi. S Cumberland_, 6; _16 mi.
     S, 2 mi. W Kemmerer, 6700 ft._, 3; 10 mi. SW Granger, 3 (Mich);
     Fort Bridger, 6650 ft., 25 (USNM 6); 9 mi. S Robertson, 8000 ft.,
     9; _9½ mi. S, ½ mi. W Robertson, 8600 ft._, 1; _10 mi. S, 1
     mi. W Robertson, 8700 ft._, 25; _14 mi. S, 2 mi. E Robertson, 9000
     ft._, 5; 4 mi. S Lonetree, 1 (USBS). _Sweetwater Co._: Farson, 3;
     Bitter Creek, 3 (AMNH); Kinney Ranch, 21 mi. S Bitter Creek, 6800
     ft., 9 (USNM 1, AMNH 2); 32 mi. S, 22 mi. E Rock Springs, 7025 ft.,
     on Vermillion Creek, 15. _Carbon Co._: 18 mi. NNE Sinclair, 6500
     ft., 10; Bridgers Pass, 18 mi. SW Rawlins, 7500 ft., 7; Saratoga, 1
     (USBS); _6 mi. S, 13 mi. E Saratoga, 8500 ft._, 5; _6 mi. S, 14 mi.
     E Saratoga, 8800 ft._, 1; Lake Marie, 10,440 ft., 2; _1 mi. S Lake
     Marie_, 2; _½ mi. S, 2 mi. E Medicine Bow Peak, 10,800 ft._, 1;
     Encampment (12 localities from 10 mi. N, 14 mi. E to 9 mi. N, 3 mi.
     E Encampment and from 6500 to 8400 ft.), 63; ¼ mi. N Riverside,
     7380 ft., 2; S base Bridger Peak, 8800 ft., Sierra Madre Mountains,
     1; _2 mi. S Bridger Peak, 9300 ft._, 2; Savery (10 localities from
     8 mi. N, 21 mi. E to 4 mi. N, 8 mi. E Savery and from 7300 to 8800
     ft.), 80. _Albany Co._: _30 mi. N, 10 mi. E Laramie, 6760 ft._, 6;
     _29¾ mi. N, 9½ mi. E Laramie, 6350 ft._, 1; 26 mi. N, 4½
     mi. E Laramie, 6960 ft., 8; _26¾ mi. N, 6½ mi. E Laramie,
     6700 ft._, 3; _3 mi. N, 13 mi. E Laramie, 7500 ft._, 1; _7 mi. N, 2
     mi. E Laramie_, 1 (Chi); 5 mi. N Laramie, 7400 ft., 15; _Laramie_,
     4 (AMNH); _1 mi. E Laramie, 7160 ft._, 4; 7-7/10 mi. SSW Laramie,
     7200 ft., 4; 6½ mi. S, 8¾ mi. E Laramie, 8200 ft., 1;
     _Headquarters Park, 10,200 ft., Medicine Bow Mountains_, 3 (USBS);
     Centennial, 8120 ft., 1; _2¼ mi. ESE Brown's Peak, 10,300 ft._,
     3; _3 mi. ESE Brown's Peak, 10,000 ft._, 12; _2 mi. S Brown's Peak,
     10,600 ft._, 1; _Pole Mountain, 15 mi. SE Laramie_, 4 (USBS 3); _1
     mi. SSE Pole Mountain, 8350 ft._, 4; _2 mi. SW Pole Mountain, 8300
     ft._, 13; _3 mi. S Pole Mountain, 8100 ft._, 1; Sherman, 2 (AMNH).
     _Laramie Co._: 5 mi. N, 1 mi. W Horse Creek P. O., 7200 ft., 1;
     Meadow, 2 (USBS); 11 mi. N, 5½ mi. E Cheyenne, 5450 ft., 7; _7
     mi. W Cheyenne, 6500 ft._, 10; Cheyenne, 3 (USNM).

     COLORADO: _Moffat Co._: Lay, 6160 ft., 1 (AMNH). _Routt Co._:
     Wright's Ranch, Yampa, 7700 ft., 2; Gore Range, 8 mi. E Toponas,
     8000 ft., 2 (USBS). _Larimer Co._: _12½ mi. W, 1½ mi. S
     Rustic_, 1; 11 mi. W, 1 mi. S Rustic, 1; Cache La Poudre River, 1
     (Chi); _Estes Park_, 3 (USBS 1, AMNH 2); 19½ mi. W, 2½ mi. S
     Loveland, 7280 ft., 6; _16 mi. W Loveland, 6840 ft._, 1; 6 mi. W,
     ½ mi. S Loveland, 5200 ft., 1. _Rio Blanco Co._: Meeker, 1
     (USBS); _9½ mi. SW Pagoda Peak_, 7700 ft., 3; 5 mi. S Pagoda
     Peak, 9100 ft., 2. _Eagle Co._: Eagle, 1 (USBS); Pando, 2 (USBS).
     _Grand Co._: Mt. Whiteley, 2 (USBS); Arapahoe Pass, Rabbit Ear
     Mountains, 2 (USBS); Coulter (near Granby), 5 (USBS); _Arrowhead_
     (near Dale), 1 (USBS). _Boulder Co._: ¾ mi. N, 2 mi. W
     Allenspark, 8400 ft., 4; _3 mi. S Ward_, 9000 ft., 3; Nederland, 16
     (Chi). _Clear Creek Co._: Mt. McLellan, 2 (USBS); Berthoud Pass, 4.
     _Park Co._: Trout Creek Ranch, 2 mi. N Garo, 1 (USBS).

     Specimens examined of _M. m. nanus_ from eastern Idaho and Montana
     are as follows: IDAHO: _Custer Co._: Challis, 7 (USBS); Mill Creek,
     Challis Nat. Forest, 1 (USBS); Pahsimeroi Mts., 12 (USBS); Lost
     River Mts., 1 (USBS). _Fremont Co._: N fork Snake River, 10 mi. SW
     Island Park, 6200 ft., 2 (AMNH); Black Springs Creek, 4 mi. W
     Ashton, 5200 ft., 1 (AMNH); 5 mi. W St. Anthony, 5000 ft., 1
     (AMNH). _Camas Co._: Camas Prairie, Corral, 5100 ft., 2 (USBS).
     _Blaine Co._: Alturas Lake, 3 (USBS); _Sawtooth Lake_, 2 (USBS);
     Craters of the Moon, Laidlow Park, 2 (Mich); Ticura, 10 mi. S
     Picabo, 1 (USBS); 19 mi. NE Carey (Lava Lake), 8 (Mich). _Butte
     Co._: _26 mi. SW Arco_, 12 (Mich). _Bingham Co._: Shelley, 6
     (USBS). _Bonneville Co._: 10 mi. SE Irwin, 4 (USBS). _Owyhee Co._:
     Three Creeks, 3 (USBS). _Twin Falls Co._: Castleford Fenced Plot,
     11 mi. W, 9 mi. S Twin Falls, 1. _Minidoka Co._: _Heyburn_, 2
     (USBS). _Cassia Co._: 2 mi. S, 2 mi. W Burley, 5. _Bannock Co._:
     Pocatello, 23 (USBS 4); Swan Lake, 1 (USBS). _Bear Lake Co._:
     Montpelier Creek, 6700 ft., 3 (USBS). MONTANA: _Gallatin Co._: W.
     Fork of W. Fork, Gallatin River, 1 (USBS). _Park Co._: Lamar River,
     7000 ft., 1 (USBS); Gardiner, 1 (USBS). _Sweet Grass Co._: 14 mi. S
     Big Timber, 1 (USBS); _McLeod_, 1 (USBS); West Boulder Creek, 18
     mi. SE Livingston, 2 (USBS).


=Microtus montanus codiensis=, new subspecies

     _Type._--Female, adult, skin and skull; No. 27578, Museum of
     Natural History, University of Kansas, from 3⅕ mi. E and ⅗ mi.
     S Cody, 5020 ft., Park Co., Wyoming; obtained on August 11, 1948,
     by James W. Bee, original number 18-8-11-48.

     _Range._--In northwestern Wyoming eastward from the Absaroka and
     Wind River ranges into the western part of the Big Horn Basin.

     _Diagnosis._--A relatively large _Microtus montanus_; tail actually
     and relatively long; hind foot actually but not relatively large;
     skull large; zygomatic expanse actually and relatively large;
     alveolobasilar length relatively large; upper molar tooth-row
     relatively long; color relatively light, not reddish.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Geographic range of _Microtus montanus_ in
Wyoming, Colorado, and adjacent areas. The solid circles represent
localities from which specimens have been examined; the hollow circles
represent type localities. The ranges of subspecies in Utah are after
Durrant, 1952.

Guide to subspecies

1. _M. m. nanus_
2. _M. m. codiensis_
3. _M. m. zygomaticus_
4. _M. m. fusus_
5. _M. m. micropus_
6. _M. m. nexus_
7. _M. m. amosus_
8. _M. m. rivularis_
]

     _Comparisons._--As compared with the specimens of _M. m. nanus_
     from Idaho, the size is larger (see diagnosis and measurements).
     Certain proportions which differ from those of _nanus_ and which
     are not in close agreement with the observed differences with age
     in specimens of _nanus_ of a size comparable to _codiensis_ are
     relatively large alveolobasilar length, relatively long alveolar
     length of upper molar tooth-row, relatively wide-spreading
     zygomatic arches, and relatively long tail. The color in
     _codiensis_ is lighter than in _nanus_. As compared to the new
     subspecies named below from the Big Horn Mountains to the east,
     _codiensis_ is of similar size in head-body length, but has a
     relatively as well as actually longer tail; the hind foot averages
     longer; the upper molar tooth-row is relatively longer; the color
     is slightly paler and less grizzled; the bullae are larger and less
     flattened; the angle formed at the suture between the basioccipital
     and basisphenoid bones is less acute; and the region of the suture
     is less prominently elevated between the bullae when viewed from
     the ventral aspect. The pterygoid plates mesial and posterodorsal
     to the posterior end of the last upper molar are less fenestrated,
     and the incisive foramina are less constricted posteriorly.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Map showing the major barriers to _Microtus
montanus_ in Wyoming and Colorado; the barriers are the low areas named
on the map (the name "Black Hills" is on the map for another reason;
these hills are not a barrier). The major mountainous areas higher than
approximately 8000 feet in elevation in Wyoming, Colorado and Utah are
stippled. These mountainous areas include the habitat that is most
suitable for the montane meadow mouse. The Black Hills are unoccupied by
this species but these hills seem to be ecologically suitable for the
species.]

     _Measurements._--The average and the extremes for some measurements
     of 34 males and females, 27 from the type locality and 7 from other
     localities in the range assigned to this subspecies, are as
     follows: total length, 165 (146-186); length of tail, 44.2 (35-55);
     hind foot, 19.6 (17-21); condylobasilar length of the skull, 25.5
     (24.0-27.5); zygomatic breadth, 15.6 (14.7-16.6); alveolar length
     of upper molar tooth-row, 6.6 (6.2-7.0); prelambdoidal breadth, 8.8
     (8.1-9.5); lambdoidal breadth, 12.0 (11.2-12.8). As an indication
     of variability and for comparison with other series the coefficient
     of variability and two times the standard error of the mean for
     each measurement in this series are included in Table 1. The
     averages for some measurements of 27 topotypes are as follows:
     total length, 162; length of tail, 45.5; hind foot, 19.9;
     condylobasilar length, 25.6; palatilar length, 14.0; molar series,
     6.6; alveolobasilar length, 14.9; zygomatic breadth, 15.6;
     interorbital breadth, 3.5; lambdoidal breadth, 12.1; prelambdoidal
     breadth, 8.9; depth of braincase, 7.8.

_Discussion._--Three species of _Microtus_ were collected by James W.
Bee at the type locality. _Microtus montanus codiensis_, _Microtus
longicaudus mordax_, and _Microtus pennsylvanicus modestus_ were taken
in the same runways in the same meadow, at the same time. _Microtus
ochrogaster haydeni_, although not taken at this locality, occurs in the
Big Horn Basin. These four species differ in their geographic ranges,
being largely allopatric, except _M. montanus_ and _M. longicaudus_
which are sympatric. Although the different species have ecological
preferences and habits which differ, several species of _Microtus_ may
occur together in local areas such as the above. Certain of the
characteristics of _M. m. codiensis_ are intermediate between those of
the species _M. montanus_ on one hand and those of the other three
species on the other hand. Could interspecific hybridization between
"good species" of _Microtus_ take place in nature and possibly alter the
characteristics of a local population?

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 50, distributed as follows
     (abbreviations for collections are given in the account of _M. m.
     nanus_; localities that are not represented in Fig. 1 because
     overlapping or crowding of the symbols would result are
     Italicized):

     MONTANA: _Carbon Co._: Beartooth Mountains, 2 (USBS); _Beartooth
     Lake_, 1 (USBS).

     WYOMING: _Park Co._: Black Mountain, head of Pat O'Hara Creek, 3
     (USBS); 13 mi. N, 1 mi. E Cody, 5200 ft., 1; SW slope Whirlwind
     Peak, 9000 ft., 1; _5 mi. N Cody, 6300 ft._, 1 (USBS); 3⅕ mi. E,
     ⅗ mi. S Cody, 31; Ishawooa Creek, 6300 ft., 2 (USBS); _Valley_, 1
     (USBS); Needle Mountain, 10,500 ft., 4 (USBS). _Hot Springs Co._: 3
     mi. N, 10 mi. W Thermopolis, 4950 ft., 3.


=Microtus montanus zygomaticus=, new subspecies

     _Type._--Male, adult, skin and skull, No. 32761, Museum of Natural
     History, University of Kansas, from Medicine Wheel Ranch, 9000 ft.,
     28 mi. E Lovell, Big Horn County, Wyoming; obtained by R. Freiburg,
     original number 105.

     _Range._--The Big Horn Mountains of north-central Wyoming.

     _Diagnosis._--A large _Microtus montanus_ with a relatively short
     tail; short molar series; broad zygomatic arches well rounded in
     lateral outline when viewed from above; small and flattened bullae;
     raised basioccipito-basisphenoid suture.

     _Comparisons._--For comparison with _M. m. codiensis_ from the
     west, on the other side of the Big Horn Basin, see the account of
     that subspecies. In comparison with _nanus_ this subspecies is
     slightly paler, in this respect showing more resemblance to
     _codiensis_ although not so pale, and more grizzled or unevenly
     colored. This difference in color between _zygomaticus_ and
     _codiensis_ may not be of taxonomic significance. From both the
     topotypes of _nanus_, and the series of it from Wyoming,
     _zygomaticus_ differs on the average in having a relatively shorter
     tail, a relatively shorter upper molar tooth-row, relatively more
     rounded and relatively more wide-spread zygomatic arches, and
     smaller more flattened bullae.

     _Measurements._--Average and extreme measurements of 24 adult males
     and females from several localities here referred to _M. m.
     zygomaticus_ are as follows: total length, 159(150-175); length of
     tail, 37.6(31-46); hind foot, 18.6(17-20); condylobasilar length of
     the skull, 25.3(24.2-26.7); zygomatic breadth, 15.3(14.1-16.7);
     alveolar length of upper molar tooth-row, 6.2 (5.7-6.8);
     prelambdoidal breadth, 8.7(8.3-9.4); lambdoidal breadth,
     11.9(11.0-12.5). Average and extreme measurements of a series of 12
     adult male topotypes are as follows: total length, 159(144-174);
     length of tail, 36.4 (30-41); hind foot, 18.2(16-20);
     condylobasilar length of skull, 25.8(24.7-26.7); alveolobasilar
     length, 14.8(13.8-15.3); palatilar length, 13.8 (12.7-14.2);
     alveolar length of upper molar tooth-row, 6.4(5.9-6.6); zygomatic
     breadth, 15.9 (15.0-16.7); interorbital breadth, 3.6(3.4-3.7);
     lambdoidal breadth, 12.1 (11.5-12.5); prelambdoidal breadth,
     8.6(8.3-8.9); depth of braincase, 8.0 (7.6-8.3).

_Discussion._--This subspecies is separated from _M. m. codiensis_ to
the west by the Big Horn Basin. A series from along Buffalo Creek, 27
mi. N, 1 mi. E Powder River, 6075 ft., in Natrona County, Wyoming, is
intermediate between the topotypes of _zygomaticus_ and _nanus_ in the
characters cited above as distinguishing the two, but shows greater
resemblance to _zygomaticus_ in the shape of the zygomatic arch, in
color which is paler than in topotypes of _zygomaticus_, and in the
short hind foot. On these and on geographic grounds this population is
referred to _zygomaticus_. Unfortunately we cannot be certain in many
cases that an intermediate condition in a certain character indicates a
genetically intermediate population and therefore true intergradation
between the two subspecies to which the population is geographically
intermediate. The topotypes of this subspecies are the most distinct of
all the series which I have studied from the eastern Rocky Mountains, in
terms of the degree of morphological departure from the norm for the
species. After _zygomaticus_ the following populations are arranged
according to their degree of deviation from this norm (_codiensis_
deviates most): topotypes of _codiensis_, _fusus_ and a population from
southern Sweetwater County, Wyoming, and lastly the _nanus-caryi_
complex. Within the latter group, as I have mentioned, there are a
number of local variants most of which do not differ significantly and
do not conform to any geographic pattern.

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 55, distributed as follows
     (abbreviations for collections are given in the account of _M. m.
     nanus_; localities that are not represented in Fig. 1 because
     overlapping or crowding of the symbols would result are
     Italicized): WYOMING: _Big Horn Co._: Medicine Wheel Ranch, 9000
     ft., 28 mi. E Lovell, 30; W slope, head of Trappers Creek, 9500
     ft., 2 (USBS). _Washakie Co._: 9 mi. E, 5 mi. N Tensleep, 7400 ft.,
     1. _Johnson Co._: 7½ mi. W, 1 mi. S Buffalo, 6500 ft., 3; Big
     Horn Mountains, 3 (USBS). _Natrona Co._: Buffalo Creek, 27 mi. N, 1
     mi. E Powder River, 6075 ft., 16.


=Microtus montanus fusus= Hall

     _Microtus nanus_, Bailey, N. Amer. Fauna, 17:30, June 6, 1900
     (part); Cary, N. Amer. Fauna 33:123, August 17, 1911.

     _Microtus montanus fusus_ Hall, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington,
     51:131-134, August 23, 1938; Warren, The Mammals of Colorado, Univ.
     of Okla. Press, p. 229, 1942.

     _Type._--Male, adult, skin and skull; No. 61281, Museum of
     Vertebrate Zoology; 2½ miles east of summit of Cochetopa Pass,
     Saguache County, Colorado; Sept. 21, 1933; collected by Annie M.
     Alexander; original number 2568. Type not seen by me.

     _Range._--Southern Colorado and northern New Mexico.

     _Comparisons._--For comparison with _M. m. nanus_, the subspecies
     to the northward, see the preceding account of that subspecies. For
     comparison with _M. m. amosus_ the subspecies to the west see Hall
     (1938) and Durrant (1952). I have not examined specimens of
     _amosus_.

     _Measurements._--Average and extreme measurements for 17 adults
     including both males and females from several localities in
     southern Colorado are as follows: total length, 160 (136-179);
     length of tail, 42 (35-55); hind foot, 19.2 (17-23); condylobasilar
     length of the skull, 25.2 (24.0-26.0); zygomatic breadth, 15.0
     (14.1-15.5); alveolar length of upper molar tooth-row, 6.4
     (6.0-6.7); prelambdoidal breadth, 8.7 (8.3-9.2); lambdoidal
     breadth, 11.7 (11.1-12.6).

     Average and extreme measurements of 4 adults (2 males and 2
     females) from the type locality and 11 adults (4 males and 7
     females) from other localities in southern Colorado are as follows:
     total length, 162 (157-168), 157 (137-169); length of tail (means
     only), 44.5, 40.5; hind foot, 18.8 (18-19), 18.6 (18-23);
     condylobasilar length of skull, 24.5 (24.0-24.7), 25.2 (24.3-26.1);
     alveolobasilar length, 14.2 (13.9-14.5), 14.6 (14.1-15.1);
     palatilar length, 13.2 (13.0-13.4), 13.5 (13.1-14.2); alveolar
     length of upper molar tooth-row, 6.3 (6.0-6.6), 6.4 (6.3-6.7);
     zygomatic breadth, 15.0 (14.3-15.5), 14.9 (14.1-15.5); interorbital
     breadth, 3.5 (3.3-3.6), 3.5 (3.3-3.7); lambdoidal breadth, 11.8
     (11.1-12.6), 11.7 (11.2-12.3); prelambdoidal breadth, 8.6
     (8.3-9.2), 8.8 (8.3-9.0); depth of braincase, 7.5 (7.2-7.8), 7.6
     (7.1-7.9).

_Discussion._--There is no sharp boundary between _M. m. fusus_ of
southern Colorado and the subspecies to the north, _M. m. nanus_.
Although the line separating these two subspecies is drawn somewhat
arbitrarily, on the whole the samples from north of this line more
closely resemble _nanus_. All of the means for total length given above
are larger than the maximum given in Hall's description of _fusus_. The
caudal index (38 and 35% in two series) is slightly larger than that
cited by Hall (33.3%) and is not significantly different from that in
_nanus_ (35.2%). The color in both young and old mice is variable, but
in general is more yellowish, and less grayish, than in any other series
studied.

There is a large area in western Colorado and eastern Utah, between the
known ranges of _M. m. fusus_ and _M. m. amosus_ from which there are no
specimens. Probably the species occurs only at certain places in this
arid region which seems to be a partial barrier to the species.

Specimens of _M. montanus_ from northern New Mexico have been referred
previously to _M. m. arizonensis_. When he named _M. m. fusus_, Hall
mentioned its resemblance to _arizonensis_ in reddish coloration, but
pointed out that _fusus_ is less reddish. Of six specimens from Valle
Santa Rosa, Jemez Mountains (USBS), 8500 ft., Rio Arriba County, New
Mexico, three are immature, and the skulls of the remaining specimens
are damaged. In reddish color and relatively large size these few
specimens resemble _arizonensis_ more than _fusus_ although the locality
of occurrence is closer to the geographic range of the northern _fusus_
than to that of _arizonensis_. The identification of these specimens as
_arizonensis_ is provisional; additional specimens are needed from the
area, 200 miles wide, which separates the ranges as now known of
_arizonensis_ in Arizona from the occurrence in New Mexico. There is a
single specimen from this area, the damaged skull of which prevents
conclusive identification. The specimen is either _M. montanus_ or _M.
mexicanus_, and is from Nutria, on the southern edge of the Zuni
Mountains (USBS). Detailed comparison of _fusus_ and _arizonensis_ is
not attempted here although it may be stated that in several characters
_fusus_ is intermediate between _arizonensis_ to the south and _nanus_
to the north.

     _Specimens examined._--Total, 89, distributed as follows
     (abbreviations for collections are given in the account of _M. m.
     nanus_; localities that are not represented in Fig. 1 because
     overlapping or crowding of the symbols would result are
     Italicized):

     COLORADO: _Pitkin Co._: 5 mi. W Independence Pass, 11,000 ft., 1
     (Chi). _Lake Co._: _Independence Pass, 12,095 ft._, 2 (Chi).
     _Gunnison Co._: _Gothic_, 2 (USBS); Decker's Ranch, Crested Butte,
     2 (AMNH); Almont, 3 (USBS). _Montrose Co._: Coventry, 5 (USBS 4,
     AMNH 1). _Saguache Co._: Cochetopa Pass and environs, 44 (USBS
     22). _Hinsdale Co._: Ruby Lake, 1 (USBS). _Mineral Co._: 3 mi. E
     Creede, 1; 23 mi. S, 11 mi. E Creede, 9300 ft., 7. _La Plata Co._:
     Florida, 6800 ft., 1. _Conejos Co._: 1 mi. S, 19 mi. W Antonito,
     10,200 ft., 3; _4 mi. S, 23 mi. W Antonito_, 1; _5 mi. S, 24 mi. W
     Antonito, 9600 ft._, 9.

     NEW MEXICO: _Rio Arriba Co._: 6 mi. W Hopewell, 9900 ft., 6 (USBS);
     _Tusas River, 8700 ft._, 1 (USBS).

TABLE 1. AVERAGE MEASUREMENTS, IN MILLIMETERS, OF ADULTS OF MICROTUS
MONTANUS.

Key to column headings:

A: No. of individuals averaged
B: Total length
C: Length of tail
D: Length of hind foot
E: Condylobasilar length
F: Alveolar length of upper molar tooth-row
G: Zygomatic breadth
H: Lambdoidal breadth
I: Prelambdoidal breadth

=========================================================================
       Locality   |   A  |  B  |  C  |  D  |  E  |  F  |  G  |  H  |  I
------------------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |               _M. m. codiensis_, all
                  |
Average           | 34   |165.3|44.2 |19.6 |25.47| 6.56|15.55|12.05|8.76
2 × stand. error  |      | 3.56|1.84 |.395 | .308| .067| .198| .144|.129
Coeff. variab     |      |  6.0|11.6 | 5.6 |  3.5|  3.0| 3.65| 1.20|1.47
------------------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |            _M. m. nanus_, Eastern Idaho
                  |
Average           | 21[1]|151.1|39.4 |19.2 |25.00| 6.44|14.99|11.74|8.94
2 × stand. error  |      | 3.20|2.89 |.293 | .286| 1.15| .295| .210|.182
Coeff. variab.    |      |  6.1|21.1 |4.38 | 2.49| 3.99| 4.10| 3.79|4.31
------------------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |            _M. m. nanus_, Wyoming
                  |
Teton Co.         | 35   |160.5|40.7 |18.6 |25.16| 6.51|15.17|11.86|8.77
Fremont Co.       | 26   |157.0|41.4 |19.6 |25.23| 6.25|15.05|11.88|8.91
Lincoln Co.       | 24   |159.9|41.8 |18.9 |25.08| 6.26|15.10|11.82|8.75
Uinta Co.         | 26   |162.4|41.3 |19.0 |25.33| 6.42|15.31|12.16|8.89
Sweetwater Co.    | 12   |159.8|43.7 |20.1 |24.98| 6.31|15.00|11.84|9.02
Natrona Co.       | 40   |159.6|41.0 |19.6 |25.04| 6.40|15.00|11.84|8.93
Carbon Co.        |108   |158.7|40.0 |19.1 |24.96| 6.27|15.05|11.83|8.72
 Encampment ♂     | 27   |161  |41.7 |18.9 |25.1 | 6.16|15.2 |11.9 |8.7
 Encampment ♀     | 11   |159  |41.1 |19.4 |24.9 | 6.18|14.9 |11.6 |8.6
 Savery ♂         | 23   |159  |41.0 |19.2 |25.3 | 6.32|15.2 |12.2 |8.8
 Savery ♀         | 25   |155  |37.1 |18.8 |24.7 | 6.33|14.8 |11.6 |8.6
------------------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |                     _M. m. nanus_
                  |
Northern Colo.    |  8   |163.1|42.4 |19.6 |25.20| 6.44|14.86|11.70|8.56
------------------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----
                  |                     _M. m. fusus_
                  |
Southern Colo.    | 17[2]|159.8|42.4 |19.2 |24.97| 6.43|14.98|11.73|8.69
------------------+------+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----

[Footnote 1: For external parts, 34 individuals were used.]

[Footnote 2: For external parts, 29 individuals were used.]

Some measurements not given above are included in Table 1, together with
the number of specimens and the sex if restricted to one sex. So that
the variability can be evaluated more adequately, the coefficient of
variability and 2 times the standard error of the mean are included for
the measurements in two series. The series consist of all the adult
specimens (with a condylobasilar length of 24.0 mm. or more) of both
sexes from the areas specified. Various barriers are shown in Fig. 2 for
comparison with the distributions of the subspecies and the localities
of known occurrence shown in Fig. 1. _Microtus montanus_ has not been
taken in the Black Hills area of extreme northeastern Wyoming. Suitable
montane habitat is present and both _Microtus pennsylvanicus insperatus_
and _Microtus longicaudus longicaudus_ occur there. The arid basin of
the Powder River presumably is a barrier that has prevented _M.
montanus_ from reaching this area.


REFERENCES CITED

BAILEY, V.

     1900. Revision of American voles of the genus _Microtus_. N. Amer.
     Fauna, 17:1-88, June 6.

     1917. A new subspecies of meadow mouse from Wyoming. Proc. Biol.
     Soc. Washington, 30:29-30, February 21.

CARY, M.

     1911. A biological survey of Colorado. N. Amer. Fauna, 33:1-256,
     August 17.

     1917. Life zone investigations in Wyoming. N. Amer. Fauna, 42:1-95,
     October 3.

DAVIS, W. B.

     1939. The Recent mammals of Idaho. 400 p., front., illus., maps,
     diagrs., Caldwell, Id., The Caxton Printers Ltd., April 5.

DURRANT, S. D.

     1952. Mammals of Utah, taxonomy and distribution. Univ. Kans.
     Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 6:1-549, 91 figs, in text, 30 tables,
     August 10.

ELTON, C.

     1942. Voles, mice and lemmings; problems in population dynamics.
     496 p., illus. (maps), tables, Oxford, The Clarendon Press, London.

GOIN, O. B.

     1943. A study of individual variation in _Microtus pennsylvanicus
     pennsylvanicus_. Jour. Mamm., 24:212-224, June 7.

HALL, E. R.

     1938. Notes on the meadow mice _Microtus montanus_ and _Microtus
     nanus_ with descriptions of a new subspecies from Colorado. Proc.
     Biol. Soc. Washington, 51:131-134, August 23.

HILL, E. A.

     1935. Cranial foramina in rodents. Jour. Mamm. 16(2):121-129.

HOWELL, A. B.

     1924. Individual and age variation in _Microtus montanus yosemite_.
     Jour. Agr. Res., 28(10):977-1015, June 7.

KELLOGG, R.

     1922. A study of the California forms of the _Microtus montanus_
     group of meadow mice. Univ. California Publ. Zool., 21:245-274,
     April 18.

MERRIAM, C. H.

     1891. Results of a biological reconnaissance of south-central
     Idaho. N. Amer. Fauna, 5:1-113, July 30.

PIPER, S. E.

     1909. The Nevada mouse plague of 1907-8. U. S. Dept. Agr., Farmers'
     Bul. 352, pp. 1-23, 9 figs.

WARREN, E. R.

     1942. The mammals of Colorado, their habits and distribution.
     Second (revised) edition, Univ. Oklahoma Press, Norman, xviii-330
     p., front., 50 plates.


_Transmitted March 22, 1954._



□

25-3560


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Italic typeface in the original is indicated by by _underscores_.

Bold typeface in the original is indicated by =equals=.

One typographical error was corrected: "Castlford" was corrected to
"Castleford" in "Twin Falls Co.: Castleford Fenced Plot".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Subspeciation in the Meadow Mouse,
Microtus montanus, in Wyoming and , by Sydney Anderson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEADOW MOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 31730-0.txt or 31730-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/7/3/31730/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Simon Gardner, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
