The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Unprotected Species, by Melvin Sturgis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Unprotected Species

Author: Melvin Sturgis

Release Date: April 18, 2010 [EBook #32036]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNPROTECTED SPECIES ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           The Unprotected Species

                            By Melvin Sturgis[1]

[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from Fantastic Universe
September 1956. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the
U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

[Sidenote: It was a chill, terrifying planet inhabited by furtive
gnomes. And something was forcing the crew into homicidal insanity. But
what?]


Early on the first morning after the camp had been secured--scarcely
twenty-four hours after the first plastic shack had been erected--four
members of the surveying section brought in Bradshaw.

Gallifa, the senior biologist of the party, was loading the halftrack in
preparation for a field trip when the men placed the stretcher in the
shade of the truck. He took one look; and immediately stopped
congratulating himself on the ease of operations.

"Damn! Is he dead?" asked the stunned Gallifa.

"He isn't dead," the mapping officer said lamely. "But he's damn well
beat up."

Gallifa nodded awkwardly and looked down at the stretcher. Bradshaw was
one of his team. A good man. Gallifa hadn't known he wasn't in the
compound. Bradshaw wasn't a pleasant sight. Blood covered his face from
a deep gash above the temple, and his clothes and body were cut and
scratched in a dozen places.

"Better get him over to the hospital," Gallifa ordered brusquely. "I'll
be along as soon as I can."

The mapping officer gestured, and the men moved away with their burden.
The officer inspected the toes of his boots uncomfortably.

"How did it happen?" Gallifa asked quietly. "I would say that he had
been clawed by some kind of animal."

"That's possible," the other agreed unconvincingly. He licked his lips
nervously. "Of course, we are not sure just what did happen." He nodded
at a tall, sad-faced man standing almost at his elbow. "Hawkins spotted
him from the 'copter on his second recon flight this morning. He came
back and directed a crew to pick Bradshaw up."

The officer's manner was hesitant and confusing. Gallifa started to
speak, then glanced questioningly at Hawkins and motioned impatiently.

Hawkins cleared his throat. "I saw him almost as soon as I was in the
air. He was about half a mile on the other side of camp. I probably
wouldn't have paid any attention if he hadn't been acting so funny."

Hawkins paused and glanced apologetically at Gallifa. Gallifa frowned.

"You know how thick those brambles are all around here?" Hawkins
continued quickly. "Well, Bradshaw was running through them, just as if
something was chasing him. The thorns were cutting the clothes right off
his back. I couldn't see anything from the air, so I swung the 'copter
back and grabbed some men to see if we could find out what was wrong.

"It took almost an hour to find him again. He was in the bottom of a
little ravine, leaning against a rock. He seemed to be all right until
we were close. Then he picked up a stick and started swinging it around
like a wild man. He was clear crazy. I finally had to hit him over the
head with a rock to save myself. He was true crazy."

So that was what they had been so hesitant in telling him! Gallifa shook
his head in bewilderment. Bradshaw was one of his most competent men. It
didn't make sense that he suddenly should go berserk. Something seemed
to be missing in the report.

"That doesn't sound right," Gallifa argued stubbornly. "Are you sure
Bradshaw wasn't scared half to death by something? A man sometimes does
some funny things if he's scared."

"Maybe he _was_ scared," Hawkins admitted. "But he was sure acting
crazy. I'm sorry--" He spread his hands helplessly and walked away,
accompanied by the mapping officer.

Gallifa glanced at his wrist watch and swore softly to himself. He had
planned to get an early start, but the Bradshaw tragedy was too
important. They still knew relatively nothing about the planet. If a man
could wander around for only an hour or so and return with grievous,
unexplained injuries--Well, it obviously needed looking into.

It would be difficult enough to finish the pre-colonization survey in
the allotted time under the best of circumstances, and this was hardly
what could be called a smooth beginning. He sighed and walked over to
the hospital.

Dr. Thorndyke, a small, swarthy man with the penetrating gaze of his
profession, greeted him with a shrug and a puzzled frown.

Gallifa framed the question with his eyes.

"I don't know," the doctor said slowly. "Frankly, I've never seen
anything like this before. Your man seems to have lost his mind
completely, yet his reactions are at least pseudo-normal. He has an
intense homicidal mania, however. He regained consciousness unexpectedly
and almost brained two of my medics with a headboard before we could
give him a hypo. I don't know whether he'll improve or not. But I've
classified him unfit for further survey duty."

Gallifa shook his head in disbelief. The doctor had told him exactly
nothing. He had intelligently diagnosed Bradshaw's condition, but he
apparently hadn't the slightest idea what had caused it. It was damned
strange. Bradshaw's psych check certainly hadn't hinted at any
instability. The initial spot check notwithstanding, maybe there _was_
something disturbingly wrong with this planet. If such were the case,
his team would have to uncover it. The problem would belong to Gallifa.




II


The planet--as yet unnamed--had been surveyed by the spotting cruiser
and pronounced suitable for colonization to nine-point-oh on a scale of
ten. Of course, the nine-point figure was really only a pro tem rating.
The cruiser hadn't been able to conduct a personal survey. That more
difficult undertaking would fall to the lot of the pre-col crew.

By the time the balance of the colonists arrived, in forty-five days,
the survey party would have to have the initial focal point ready for
occupancy, and be in a position to supply all the data the colony would
need for survival.

It was the biological team's specific job not only to classify the flora
and fauna of the planet, but to determine the adaptability of the
colonists to all existing conditions. Bradshaw might have encountered
something which would have helped tremendously with the latter category.
But it was obvious he wouldn't be able to tell anyone about it.

However, an isolated tragic incident which held no bearing on the
success or failure of the colony could not be allowed to interrupt the
survey. Gallifa impatiently dismissed the gentle nagging at the back of
his mind and returned to the compound. By 1300, Solar Time, the camp was
considered to be on a standard operating basis.

Gallifa pressed young Samuels into service and finished loading the
halftrack. While they were waiting for MacFarland, senior geologist and
acting executive of the camp, the natives of the planet appeared.

Gallifa saw them first, and more from surprise than fear hopped to the
platform beside the truck seat and swiveled the automatic pellet rifle
until the muzzle covered the visitors.

"Samuels," he called softly. "Hey, Samuels, we have a welcoming
committee."

Samuels stopped his work and peered over the back of the truck. He was
well trained. He didn't move an inch.

"Are they intelligent?" he asked. His view was curtailed slightly by a
tool box.

"I can't tell," Gallifa said quietly. "They're clannish, though. There
must be fifteen, maybe twenty, in the group. Climb over the back of the
truck and take a look," he suggested.

Samuels vaulted lightly into the truck.

Gallifa looked quizzically at his aide. "Well, what do you make of
them?" he asked. "Do you think they could have anything to do with
Bradshaw's sudden crackup?"

Samuels removed his hat and ran stubby fingers through his blond,
short-cropped hair. "It's hard to tell," he answered. "But they sure
look harmless to me. In fact, they look somewhat like a bunch of Celtic
little people."

Gallifa frowned. He didn't understand.

"You know," Samuels grinned. "Gnomes or elves with big ears. Large dwarf
model."

Gallifa turned his attention back to the visitors and laughed. "I see
what you mean," he agreed. "Ears and all. They do seem harmless. But
it's strange they aren't upset by us. They could be semi-intelligent."

Gallifa stepped gingerly from the truck. He really didn't expect to find
a modicum of intelligence. The spotting cruiser had orbited around the
planet for more than seventy-two hours before the crew had been
deposited, and had almost definitely established the contrary.

On every Earth-type planet that had ever been discovered, if there were
intelligent life it had developed according to water-oxygen evolution;
and the culture invariably parallelled _homo sapiens_. It was as if a
busy and preoccupied nature had hit upon a pattern which worked and
never bothered to change the mold. There were minor deviations, of
course, biologically and structurally, but never culture-wise.

The swift, but amazingly discerning survey, had revealed absolutely no
evidence of any intelligence on the planet. There were no artifacts,
dwellings, roads, dams, bridges--primitive or otherwise. Any stage of
culture would have been observed by the cruiser immediately. The planet
seemed ideally suited to colonization.

Gallifa, the trained biologist, carefully studied the creatures. The
dwarf-like gnomes, as Samuels had dubbed them, might be considered
caricatures of humanity.

They were about four feet high--bipeds, and covered with a soft, pinkish
fur. They walked erect; normally so, Gallifa could tell, because their
upper limbs were too short for knuckling and were not jointed correctly
for moving on all fours. They had five digited limbs, both upper and
lower, just as did all higher life forms ever discovered on any planet.
Their features were without hair and of a fairy story-humanoid type.
With their large, floppy ears, and round-solemn eyes they were very
unusual gnomes indeed.

Gallifa spoke to them quietly, trying a few standard low-order
communication and classification tricks. The visitors--somehow he
couldn't think of them as base animals--made no response. They didn't
quite seem to fit any classification niche. The creatures faintly
puzzled Gallifa. The best he could do was: Low order intelligence and
probably harmless. Cultural development, nil.

As if to prove his rationalizations, the creatures suddenly seemed to
ignore the humans. They walked unconcernedly past the truck and attacked
the vegetation on the edge of the clearing. Every so often one would
overturn a small rock and grub for the exposed insects.

Gallifa observed their broad, dull teeth. They weren't, he decided,
omnivorous.

Samuels interrupted his train of thought. "Do you think they will give
us any trouble?" he asked.

"No," Gallifa affirmed slowly. "Not materially, anyway. But it's going
to be interesting, and a little difficult, to study this species. They
don't seem to be ecologically feasible. Look at them. They are small and
weak. They don't have claws, not even sheathed--and they are definitely
too low in the evolutionary scale to know anything of weapons. Their
feet obviously aren't constructed for climbing, and their limbs are too
short and aren't planned right for running."

He removed his hat and scratched his head. "In short," he finished,
"they are an unprotected species, obviously _unable_ to protect
themselves."

"That's odd enough," Samuels agreed. "But maybe they don't need
protection. Maybe they don't have any natural enemies."

"On a raw planet?" Gallifa retorted. "That's not very likely."

"Perhaps I can catch a few for the lab," Samuels suggested. "I'll work
up a behavior pattern analysis."

"That shouldn't be too hard," Gallifa said. "They certainly aren't
afraid of us. You do that," he added suddenly. "I'm going to pick up Mac
and be on my way. Otherwise, we'll never get out of here."

"Good hunting," Samuels said. "I'll have a couple of these fat little
specimens neatly catalogued for you when you get back."

Gallifa laughed and headed the truck across the compound.




III


Gallifa found MacFarland by the main-gate shack. He helped him secure a
manual excavating kit to the side of the truck, and then headed for a
hogback MacFarland had spotted from the early air photos.

Gallifa jolted the truck up a rutted mound and braked close to a grove
of trees. They had covered roughly ten miles. Gallifa was still uneasy
about Bradshaw, but he had maintained an exceptionally sharp lookout and
had seen nothing which might be termed dangerous to a wary colonist. If
anything had harmed Bradshaw, the ground must have swallowed it.

MacFarland shouldered his pack and stalked toward an outcropping rock
formation. Gallifa planned to work close to the truck in order to keep
in touch with the other crews who were on less personalized missions of
mass survey with highly sensitive instruments. That was the way, of
course, that most of the work would have to be done.

A short time later MacFarland reappeared, red-faced and panting, and
with a bulging pack. Gallifa had activated the scanning scope and was
casually inspecting the terrain.

"Finding anything of interest?" MacFarland grunted, after he had caught
his breath.

"Nothing except a couple of those little creatures like the ones we saw
back in camp," Gallifa answered. At MacFarland's frown he remembered,
and filled in the details.

"Want to take a look?" he asked.

MacFarland shrugged out of the pack and clambered into the truck. He
expertly advanced the power of the scope and swung it in slow arcs.

"I'll help with the pack," Gallifa volunteered.

"Wait a minute!" MacFarland called excitedly. "Take a look at this."

Gallifa frowned and glanced into the view screen. His jaw fell. He
leaned forward and swallowed hard. "That's an ugly looking beast," he
affirmed, with a grimace.

"I thought the spotting cruiser said there weren't any dangerous animals
in the zone where we were supposed to land," MacFarland said
caustically. "I think we had better revise the theory--unless you want
me to believe the teeth on that thing are used for shredding lettuce."

"No," Gallifa said. "It's a meat eater, all right. Either the cruiser
made a mistake, or--and this is more likely--the beast has wandered in
from a more natural habitat. You know, I believe it's after one of the
gnomes."

MacFarland left the screen and swung the automatic rifle to bear on the
beast. He carefully adjusted the telescopic sights, centering the hair
lines on the target. There was a quiet whir and a slight shifting of the
rifle as the computer device allowed for correct elevation and windage.

"I have the critter dead center," MacFarland said eagerly.

"Don't shoot," Gallifa suddenly warned. "There is something awfully
peculiar about this. I'm positive our friend sees that fellow, but he
doesn't seem the least bit worried. Keep the rifle trained, but let's
watch a little longer. I'm interested in this."

The gnome did seem aware that he was being stalked. Every so often he
stopped to peer over his shoulder where his adversary was in plain view.
Then he calmly went on feeding. He made no effort to flee or find
concealment.

Gallifa watched in puzzlement. Was the creature really so stupid? It
wasn't logical. It just didn't make sense. How had the race survived?

The pursuer tentatively crawled a few feet and stopped, its eyes
gleaming. It crawled a few more. It seemed to be appraising the distance
to be traversed. All at once it gathered its powerful legs snugly under
it. A quick rush and a spring ...

The gnome suddenly stopped feeding and curled into a tight ball. The
charging beast seemed to be trying to change its course in mid-leap. It
landed almost on top of its prey, but it didn't strike. Instead, it
whirled, biting its shoulder and clawing spasmodically. Then it charged
headlong across the slope and disappeared in a cloud of dust.

Back at the truck, Gallifa turned to MacFarland. "Did you shoot it?" he
asked with wide eyes.

MacFarland shook his head.

"The gnome just curled up like a porcupine," Gallifa said, frowning.
"And that's certainly no protection ... I wouldn't think. It doesn't
have spines or anything."

"You're right," MacFarland answered. "I think the meat eater had a fit,
and it's a damn good thing for your friend Mr. Gnome, too!"

"You may be right," Gallifa speculated slowly. "Only--You know, it's a
far-fetched thought, but maybe the gnomes throw out some scent that
stops their enemies cold."

"It would have to be considerably potent," MacFarland snorted. "To cause
a fuss like that!"

"Well," Gallifa affirmed with finality, "Samuels will have several
specimens for us back at the base. We will find out after we get back."

"I just thought of something," MacFarland exclaimed suddenly. "Do you
think maybe that--that cat--or one like it, attacked Bradshaw? It may
have been the reason he ran through the brambles, figuring the beast
couldn't follow."

"Hmm, I see what you mean," Gallifa replied thoughtfully. "The beast
_was_ sort of catlike, and it _could_ have roughed Bradshaw up some.
Only it doesn't seem logical that the experience could have driven him
to the type of mental breakdown he suffered. Still, it's as good a guess
as any, I suppose. Maybe Bradshaw will snap out of it and be able to
tell us himself."

MacFarland glanced at the sky. "We'd better be getting back," he
suggested. "The other crews will be in, and we have a lot of data to
correlate tonight."

Gallifa agreed and secured the rifle and scope. Before he could turn the
truck around, they heard the sound of a helijet approaching at maximum
speed. Gallifa shaded his eyes and looked at the now hovering craft.

"I think it is Hawkins," he reported. "And I'd say offhand that he wants
to talk to us."

The 'copter landed expertly a few feet away, and the blades slowed to
idling speed. It was Hawkins. He waved excitedly as he ran toward the
truck.

"Mac! Gallifa!" he called. "There's a space ship down a few miles from
here!"

Gallifa gasped. A wrecked ship? It seemed inconceivable. A space craft
wasn't dainty. Damage from a wreck should have been plainly visible even
from the spotting cruiser--ignoring completely their own air maps.

He faced Hawkins. "Are you sure?" he asked incredulously. "How did we
ever miss the wreckage?"

"The ship isn't wrecked," Hawkins said levelly. "It's in the same
condition that it was in when it landed."

"It's not wrecked?" MacFarland repeated blankly. "Now who in hell--" He
turned to Gallifa. "I thought we were the first crew on the planet," he
said, almost accusingly. "It's very strange no one told us of any other
expedition."

Gallifa frowned in annoyance. "We _are_ the first. I'm sure of that. The
other ship must be a free-lance." He turned to Hawkins. "How about the
crew? Are they still with the ship?"

"They're still with the ship," Hawkins said quietly. "But they're all
dead. It's quite a mess," he added simply.

"A mess?" Gallifa echoed. "Could you tell how they died? Was it a
disease? Were they killed by some animals? Speak up, man!"

"You aren't going to believe this," Hawkins said grimly. "But it sure
looks like they killed each other."

"Why would they want to do that?" MacFarland protested. "Are you sure,
Hawkins? How could you tell, anyway?"

"I could tell," Hawkins insisted. "You better come and have a look for
yourselves. I'll take you in the 'copter, then bring you back for the
truck."

Gallifa shrugged, and the men joined Hawkins in the helijet. The mapping
man handled the controls, and the ship soared into the air.

"There is something else kind of funny, too," Hawkins volunteered. "The
ship landed almost on top of a colony of the screwiest bunch of things
you ever saw. They look something like little gnomes, only with a
pinkish fur. They are all around the ship, but they haven't bothered
anything."

"More gnomes," Gallifa told MacFarland. "I wonder if they're
ecologically basic?" He addressed Hawkins. "Gnomes are exactly what I
called them, but I'm quite sure there were never such gnomes on Earth.
What do you mean by colony? Like a village?"

"No," Hawkins said slowly. "Not that. Maybe I don't mean colony. They
just sort of hang around and eat together. They don't have any
dwellings, or anything like that. At least, none that I could see," he
amended.

Gallifa wasn't sure why he sighed with relief. At least his hypothesis
wasn't spoiled. They were clannish. But hell, rabbits were clannish.
Herd development wasn't anything more than instinct.




IV


The helijet suddenly swooped around and settled for a landing. It was
easy to see how the grounded ship had avoided detection. It was
camouflaged almost perfectly--although whether purposely or not wasn't
readily discernible.

The space craft wasn't large. Gallifa estimated an eight-man crew, and
Hawkins proved him correct. He had found all of them at once. They had
been dead a long while; decomposition had been thorough. But Hawkins was
right. It did look as if they had killed themselves.

They were scattered haphazardly around an irregular perimeter of the
ship, and no two of the bodies were close together. The positions of the
skeletons showed that they hadn't been molested by any wild animals--nor
had they been killed by any.

But the strange thing--and this to Gallifa was also a senseless
thing--was the startling fact that each skeleton had a pellet pistol
still firmly clasped in its fleshless hand.

The magazines of all the weapons were either completely discharged or
nearly so. Hence it was obvious that they had been firing at each other.
But why? If it had been a battle between two rival factions--in itself
incredible--Gallifa could have understood to some degree. But these men
were all alone. Each of them had obviously been against all the rest. No
matter how you looked at it, there wasn't any answer.

MacFarland was hard to convince. "Maybe they didn't kill each other," he
insisted. "How do you know those creatures--gnomes, as you call
them--didn't attack the ship?"

"If you had ever been close to a gnome," Gallifa answered wearily,
"you'd have your answer. I can't guess why, but these men killed
themselves, beyond any possible doubt."

"Then they must have gone completely crazy," MacFarland said stubbornly.
"Every last one of them."

Gallifa frowned as he remembered Bradshaw. Crazy? Could it be possible
that the crew of this ship had stumbled on something which had driven
them into insanity? Psychologically, Gallifa couldn't discount an idea
simply because it seemed impossible. A newly established colony was a
fragile thing.

"While we are here," Gallifa said, "let's take a closer look at that
colony of gnomes. I think I noticed something from the air which doesn't
jibe with our first impression of them."

The three men climbed a little hillock, and Gallifa carefully studied
the area in front of him. He finally shook his head in bafflement.

"This is an unbelievably screwy planet. These creatures apparently
haven't reached any stage of development higher than the herd instinct,
and yet they are farming. It doesn't make any kind of sense. The species
is completely out of character."

MacFarland looked at the virgin growth below him, and shook his head.
"That's a farm?" he asked sarcastically.

Gallifa grinned. "You would have to be a biologist to catch on," he
explained. "See that yellowish bush? The one with the purple blossoms?
Now look at the area directly in front of us. Not a single bush. If you
will look carefully you will find several types of plant life which are
growing freely everywhere except in the area I showed you. The gnomes
are allowing only the plants they want to grow in the area.

"Perhaps they aren't exactly _farming_," he elaborated. "That is, they
may not be planting anything in an orderly fashion. But they _are_
cultivating. And it all adds up to the same thing. They are increasing
an edible crop by eliminating--well, weeds. And if they can do that,
they should have a corresponding cultural development.

"Another thing bothers me," Gallifa complained. "If these stupids are a
natural prey for animals, as unprotected as they are, I should think
they would live in some kind of thick brambles. That at least would give
them some measure of safety. I think the bio team is going to have more
than their share of headaches."

"Let's work on it tomorrow," MacFarland suggested tiredly. "I want to
get back to camp."

Hawkins returned them to the truck, and Gallifa and MacFarland jolted
off into the gathering dusk. It was fully dark by the time they reached
the camp.

Gallifa checked his team, then gathered their various findings together
and sent them over to the Administration Building for further
evaluation. Samuels didn't check in with the rest. Gallifa assumed that
he was busy with the gnomes. He wanted to discuss the queer creatures
with him, and wandered over to the specimen shack. Samuels wasn't there.
Neither were any of the natives.

Gallifa returned to the team shack and left a note on Samuel's bunk
telling him where he could be found. Then he went over to the
Administration Building to work with MacFarland. The next few hours he
and MacFarland were so busy sorting material and feeding it to the
analyzers that he forgot his aide.

Finally Gallifa finished verifying the last of a huge stack of
photographs, and stuffed the important ones into a plastic envelope. He
added the date seal, initialed it, and handed it to one of the men to
take to the laboratory for micro-filming. Then he produced a battered
pipe and filled it with tobacco, slowly tamping the bowl with his
fingers.

He had just about finished his smoke when the messenger returned to the
Administration Building. "--Gallifa," he began.

Gallifa knew that something was wrong by the way the man hesitated. He
sprang up. "What's the matter?" he asked.

"Some of the boys ran into Samuels over on the edge of camp," the
messenger said miserably. "He was clear out of his head. He fought like
a tiger, and they had to tie him hand and foot to get him over to the
sick bay. The doctor wants you to come right over."

Gallifa turned a white face to MacFarland. "What the devil," he said
woodenly. "Is my whole team going crazy?"

MacFarland slipped into his field boots. "I'll go with you," he said.

Outside a cold drizzle was falling, and from the way the leaden skies
were piling up, Gallifa was convinced that it would stay around for
several days. Evidently the weather boys had been right in predicting
that the planet was about to be plagued by a rainy season.

As they drew near to the edge of camp, Cummings, the little, bald-headed
meteorologist of the weather group, burst out of the weather shack,
cursing soundly and waving a boot in one hand.

"Damn those piebald dwarfs," he shouted. "They've got more brass than a
fire pole. They stole one of my boots."

He threw the boot and disappeared around the corner. "Get out of here,
you little devils!"

"The gnomes seem to have invaded the camp," MacFarland remarked. "We'll
have to take steps to chase them out. They might get into our stores."

"Yeah," Gallifa nodded glumly. He was too upset with the problem of
Bradshaw and Samuels to worry about gnomes.

From all indications Samuels had developed the same malady as Bradshaw.
The doctor pursed his lips and shrugged his shoulders. Thirty-three
hours on the planet and two men suddenly, violently insane! Did that
herald an epidemic, Gallifa wanted to know. Or could it simply be put
down to an unlucky coincidence? Could it be a disease or a virus?

There were tests that might shed some light on the mystery, the doctor
admitted. But it would take time to apply them and reach any kind of
conclusion. Meanwhile, the work had to continue. The survey could not
wait.

Samuels had been given a hypo and been moved to the ward with Bradshaw.
Gallifa walked past the ward corpsman and looked in the door. Bradshaw
was tossing fretfully in his sleep. Both he and Samuels were in
restraint jackets.

Gallifa shuddered and swabbed a perspiring brow. The rain was making
everything muggy.

He left MacFarland still talking to Dr. Thorndyke, and started
back--heading directly for the team shack. Gallifa was obviously
worried. He found himself wishing that he could somehow avoid telling
the rest of the crew about Samuels.

Damn! Was the Bio team jinxed?




V


Gallifa kept close to the shacks in a futile effort to protect himself
from the rain, which was really driving now. A single light burned in
the Administration Building, but the rest of the compound was dark and
quiet.

He skirted the deserted equipment building and paused for an instant in
the lee of a truck to light his pipe. There was a loud tinkle of glass,
and the windshield on the vehicle magically spouted a hole.

Gallifa ducked instinctively and only just in time. The windshield
spouted a second hole--and then a third. A faint, bluish flash located
his attacker. It was uncomfortably close.

Gallifa lashed out, and fell over a crouching figure. In a moment the
two men were thrashing in the mud. The unseen attacker was strong and he
fought like a maniac. But Gallifa was even stronger and his determined
anger quickly gave him the advantage. He wrested the pellet gun from the
other's grasp, and brought the butt down hard--brought it down twice.
The man slumped, and was still.

Gallifa snapped on his wrist torch and played the tiny, luminous glow
over the sprawled figure. The man who had tried to kill him was
Cummings. Gallifa numbly wiped the mud from his pipe and lit it with a
flickering lighter. The flame made a weird, cameo-like oval of his gaunt
face, with the olive-toned skin of his ancestry stretched tightly across
the high cheekbones.

Why? Bradshaw ... Samuels ... Cummings ...

A pattern was forming. And it was forming with a viciousness and a
regularity which left little doubt as to the probable outcome.

Did that pattern embrace the space ship with its ring of rain-washed
skeletons? Had they disintegrated under a pressure as relentless as the
swiftly-tightening jaws of a vise. _Something_ was forcing normal men
into homicidal insanity. But what?

Gallifa didn't know. But he did know that someone had better come up
with some answers--intelligent ones, and very much to the point. Or was
it already too late? Was the compound already infected--with each man
only waiting to be struck down?

Gallifa draped the limp body of Cummings over his shoulder, and sloshed
his way back to the hospital. The doctor grimly made room in the ward
room for the new patient. While he was treating the gash in Gallifa's
cheek, MacFarland, Hawkins, and some of the early-rising camp cooks
brought in two more men from the weather group.

Gallifa watched in tight-lipped silence as the corpsmen administered
hypos and set the new cots end to end in the already overcrowded
sickbay.

"There were only two restraint jackets," Dr. Thorndyke said jerkily.
"We'll have to secure the rest of them to the bunks."

MacFarland nodded. When he spoke, his voice was low and strained. "This
is getting out of hand. I think we'd better get everybody over to the
Administration Building as soon as possible."

"All right," Gallifa said quietly. "Only--"

"Only what?" MacFarland asked sharply.

"What if everybody in camp isn't available," Gallifa said flatly. He
opened the door and stepped into the rain.

The Administration Building was hot. The windows were steamed over, and
the men nearest to them had wiped clear spots with their hands, as if
they could not bear the thought of not being able to peer out into the
night.

The room buzzed with a kind of orderly confusion. The men were scared
and they made no effort to conceal it. Gallifa studied a slip of paper
covered with tally marks, and then quickly stuffed it into his pocket.

Ten men were now missing, not counting the ones already in the hospital.
They couldn't be accounted for, so it had to be assumed they were either
sick--or dead.

It had been decided that Gallifa and Dr. Thorndyke were the best
qualified to take charge of the camp, until normality returned. Gallifa
studied the men carefully.

"We haven't much to go on," he said with grim candor. "We're still in
the dark as to what is happening. We only know that when it takes place,
it happens damn fast--and without discrimination. Men have been affected
both in and out of camp.

"So far, here are the facts. To the best of our knowledge none of the
men have been bitten by animals and we haven't found any poisonous
plants. Dr. Thorndyke is considering the possibility that some unknown
virus which affects the brain may be responsible. He's over in the
laboratory running tests now. If it is a virus, grouping together like
this might be a mistake. We'll load everybody up with antibiotics and
hope for the best. We've got to lick this!"

"Until now," Gallifa continued grimly, "no one has been hurt except the
stricken men. We want to keep it that way. One fact stands out bluntly.
All of the men have been damned anti-social. They want to be left alone,
and will attempt to kill anyone who gets close to them. That should make
them easy to spot. If we are to have a chance to cure them, we have to
catch them first."

"We are going to have to consider the likelihood that more of us will be
affected. We must do everything within our power to isolate those
suspiciously-acting persons. Probably the ship Mac and I discovered
didn't have the warning I am giving to you now. We can lick this thing
if we're determined enough. The main thing is not to lose your head.
Watch your neighbor, but don't jump to conclusions. Be sure before you
act."

There was a stir and Gallifa paused. The doctor pushed his way through
the men to the front of the room. His face was white and haggard.

"What about the tests?" Gallifa asked.

"There aren't going to be any tests," Dr. Thorndyke replied grimly. "At
least not on the men in the hospital. They are all dead."

"What happened?" Gallifa urged, his eyes wide with shock.

Everyone was very quiet.

The doctor wiped his hand across his forehead. "Nolan was on duty in the
wardroom. He went out for a smoke. I heard him go out. I didn't hear him
come back. I was setting up some new equipment. When I finally went back
to the ward Nolan must have caught--whatever it is. He was gone, and
he'd slit every man's throat with a scalpel."

Gallifa faced the assemblage. "We're going to inoculate everyone here.
As soon as we're through, I want each team to go to their own shacks and
stay there. If you _have_ to go somewhere, go in pairs. If you see
anyone wandering around by himself, no matter _who_ he is, bang him over
the head with something and bring him over to the hospital. Otherwise,
stay put."

The men received their shots in an uncomfortable silence and disappeared
into the night. Gallifa, MacFarland, and Dr. Thorndyke remained in the
Administration room.

"Any idea what it is, doc?" MacFarland asked huskily.

"I hardly had time to take care of the patients," Dr. Thorndyke replied
bitterly. "Did you honestly expect me to find out what was wrong with
them in a few short hours?"

"But--" Gallifa began.

MacFarland suddenly started, and leapt to his feet. The doctor moved
away, his face paling.

"What's the matter?" Gallifa asked, alarmed.

"Don't be so old womanish," MacFarland snapped. "I'm not catching it. I
just thought of something. Cummings had a gun. Where did he get it?"

"The storeroom!" Gallifa exclaimed. "I'd forgotten we had weapons and
ammo in the storeroom! If things got bad enough, we _could_ wipe
ourselves out. We'd better check."

"I'm going back to the hospital," Dr. Thorndyke said bluntly. "I'm going
to lock the door. If anyone comes banging around he damn well had better
know who he is and talk intelligently--or I'll slice him from his
wishbone to his crotch." He stalked out.

Gallifa stared blankly after Dr. Thorndyke. It was funny hearing him
talk this way. He had always thought of the doc as being rather
mild-mannered. Damned flexible, humans!




VI


They found the door was torn off the storeroom. It hadn't even been
secured. Someone had just been in a terrific hurry. There wasn't a
single weapon left. MacFarland studied the disarray, then thoughtfully
hefted a broad-bladed pick axe.

"I'm of the opinion," he said quietly, "that in a short time things are
going to get a little rough around here."

"Now wait a minute, Mac," Gallifa protested.

"Sorry, boy," MacFarland said grimly. "If I knew everyone else was
barehanded, I would go along with you. I may not be the next victim--or
the tenth. I'll more than likely have to protect myself against someone
who has come down with it, however, and I've got an overwhelming desire
to stay alive."

Gallifa let his hands drop helplessly to his sides. MacFarland was
right, of course. They hadn't acted soon enough. Was this how panic was
born?

"Mac," Gallifa tried huskily. "We've got to keep our heads. If we don't,
we'll destroy ourselves."

"I'm open to any suggestions," MacFarland said steadily. "But until I'm
satisfied that the danger is past, I'll just hang on to this axe."

"Let's go back over to the hospital," Gallifa said wearily. "We'll use
Thorndyke's projector and go over every inch of micro-film we have. We
may be too close to the problem. There must be something we've
overlooked."

Outside the rain had slackened into a fine mist. Overhead the clouds
still held, but they were somewhat lighter. In a short while, it would
be dawn. Every light in the compound was burning fiercely. Gallifa
suddenly remembered the generator in the shack behind the Administration
Building. If anyone smashed or damaged the generator beyond repair, the
camp would be without power of any kind. And they might be forced to
warn the colonists to stay away from the planet.

He stopped MacFarland. "I think we better secure the door to the
generator shack," he said thoughtfully. "We can put a robot control on
the radio, but we have to insure power."

MacFarland understood the reason immediately. But before he could answer
angry voices rang out somewhere across the compound.

Gallifa hesitated. "You better see what that is," he told MacFarland.
"And I'll check the generator."

MacFarland nodded and slipped away. Gallifa detoured around the hospital
and carefully approached the Administration Building. Once he saw
something moving in the half-light and halted abruptly. It was only a
few of the little gnomes moving through the camp.

Gallifa quickly rummaged through the spare parts cache in the shack and
drove stout pegs into the door jamb and the door. Then he expertly wove
a short length of wire around the pegs and drew them tight with a pair
of wire nippers. He leaned a shoulder against the door until he was
satisfied it would hold. Then he returned to the hospital.

MacFarland met him at the back entrance. The five corpses still lay
shackled to the bunks in a mute and grisly reminder of how quickly
deterioration had spread through the embryonic colony. Gallifa felt his
jaw muscles tighten.

"The bio team stole all the weapons," MacFarland said without preamble.
"They've barricaded themselves in the mess hall and threaten to shoot
anyone who comes within ten feet of the door."

Gallifa waited, his expression somber.

"The other teams are mad clear through," MacFarland continued. "I
convinced them to go back to their own shacks, but I don't know how long
they will stay there."

Gallifa nodded. "If the other teams decide to rush the mess hall--" He
let the sentence trail off and grimly began to sort the micro-film.

A few hours later he had uncovered a series of very surprising--and
confusing--facts. He was amazed by the extent and completeness of the
data the teams and machines had assembled during their brief stay on the
planet. Gallifa closed his eyes and began to sift through the data with
the queer, persistent sixth sense of all true research men.

The field of biology isn't limited. It begins just under the crust of a
planet, encompasses the surface, and extends ... as far as needs be.
Gallifa was a good biologist. And now he had a series of incredible
facts at his command. He thought he had the answer to the epidemic. Only
if he was on the right track--and he was almost sure of it--the cure
might be so simple that it would be no cure at all.

How did you cure fear?

MacFarland was dozing across the room. Gallifa suddenly realized how
tired he really was. Perhaps the doctor could give him a stimulant. In
any case, he wanted to discuss an idea with Dr. Thorndyke. He stood up
and gathered together the papers lying scattered on the desk.

MacFarland was immediately awake. He held the axe loosely in one big
hand, but a slight tensing of the muscles in his forearm denoted his
readiness to use the weapon.

Gallifa noticed only that MacFarland was awake. He gestured vaguely and
walked through the room to the doctor's office.

"Dr. Thorndyke!" Gallifa called.

"Eh!" The doctor was startled. He walked quickly over to a wall cabinet
and busied himself with an electronic sterilizer. When he turned he was
holding a short-barreled, hair-thin hypodermic jet.

"I've been hoping you'd come by," he said. "That cut in your cheek. You
should have had a tetanus shot."

Gallifa automatically bared an arm and leaned on the table. The doctor
held the needle up to the light and exerted a minute pressure on the
plunger. He reached for Gallifa's arm.

MacFarland was across the room in five quick strides. He hit the doctor
across the side of the head with the broad blade of the axe. Dr.
Thorndyke sighed and collapsed loosely on the floor. The point of the
dropped hypodermic shattered and a milky fluid oozed from the splintered
end.

Gallifa's reflexes were slow. For a long moment he stood as though
stunned. Then shock caught at him. But the slow-motion time which
gripped him wouldn't allow him to take more than two steps before the
axe in MacFarland's big hand would come crashing down. He wished he
could have activated the transmitter before it happened. Dazed, he
wondered who would warn the colonists?

Gallifa suddenly realized he had placed the portable operating table
between himself and the other man. He drew his first breath, and it
caught in his throat. Then he was through the door and running across
the compound. He stumbled towards the equipment shack and threw himself
in the back of a truck.

MacFarland didn't follow.




VII


Gallifa rubbed his aching eyes and rested. How many hours had passed
since he had slept or eaten? It was fully light now, although the dawn
sky was gray because of the clouds. A strong wind pulled at his hair,
and the first heavy drops of another rainstorm pelted against his face.
Gallifa moved under the half-top canvas and wished for a slicker. The
rain was cold.

The crackle of small arms brought Gallifa to the edge of the truck. He
hadn't realized how still the camp really was. The tension was a live
thing, coiled in the wet air. There was no doubt the firing came from
the mess hall. The bio team had all of the weapons.

Gallifa was sure he could stop the panic if he could contact the men. If
only they weren't so scattered. He had to try. He gave another quick
look at the hospital door, then sped around the Administration Building.

Something hit him from the side and hurled him joltingly to the sharp
gravel. Gallifa rolled to a fighting crouch, dimly realizing that his
right arm was almost paralyzed. He shook his head hard against the pain.
The man was Nolan--and he was the most frightened man Gallifa had ever
seen.

His face was convulsed with such abject terror that Gallifa was stunned.
He was like an animal at bay, with all moving life his enemy. Gallifa
remained perfectly still, his eyes on the surgeon's scalpel in Nolan's
hand. Then from the mess hall came another rattle of fire.

Gallifa couldn't help jumping. Nolan drew his tight lips away from his
teeth and gestured menacingly with the scalpel. Then a beefy arm
appeared from nowhere and struck the corpsman a chopping blow at the
base of the skull. He dropped the scalpel and fell silently to the
ground.

MacFarland stepped around the corner of the building.

Gallifa tried to rise, then gave way to the weakness of his limbs. The
ground spun crazily past his face and he passed out.

"Gallifa! Snap out of it! Wake up, boy!"

Rough hands were shaking him. He opened his eyes.

"I didn't kill Doc," MacFarland said quietly. "There wasn't time to
explain. I had to act fast. He had enough knockout juice in that needle
to put you away permanently."

Gallifa searched the other man's face. Then, slowly the tension went out
of his features. "I heard shots?"

"Your boys took a few shots at me," MacFarland admitted. "I guess they
thought I was rushing them."

Gallifa stared at Nolan. "We've got to contact the men before it's too
late," he said. "I know what caused the epidemic--and how to stop it.
Anyway, temporarily. If I can only find some way to get them to
listen."

MacFarland said: "We'll find a way. Tell me about it."

"There's nothing wrong with this camp now but fear," Gallifa continued
wearily. "Or the _fear_ of fear. There wasn't any epidemic. It was the
gnomes. It's all here in the micro-film."

MacFarland stared blankly.

"You know how we survey?" Gallifa said quickly. "We send out low-flying
'copters and track the neural waves from all animal life. Later on,
after we pick up some specimens, all the neural patterns on the tapes
are matched. Otherwise, we wouldn't know one from the other. This
information, along with other data, is fed to the analyzers and we get
an excellent idea of the type and distribution of all life in a given
area. The boys did a good job with the 'copters. They covered enough
territory to provide all the data we need at present."

"So?" MacFarland asked.

"Somehow," Gallifa went on, "Samuels managed to get a neural trace from
the natives before he went insane. It's right here in his report. And
the trace matches perfectly with some of the patterns taken from the
'copters. When I fed the patterns to the analyzers, I got some damned
strange results. The analyzers classified the gnomes as an oversized
form of rodent, somewhat similar to rabbits and rats. This I suspected.
What I hadn't suspected was that their neural wave was so strong it
could be projected as a physical impulse."

"I still don't see--" interjected MacFarland.

"It's simple," Gallifa said. "The natives are _mental skunks_. I don't
know how they do it. Maybe we can't even find out. But I can guess how
it works. The creatures transmit a neural charge as real as an electric
current. We don't yet know the range, but we've already seen it in
action."

"The cat!" MacFarland said.

Gallifa nodded. "The 'copter survey showed that where the instruments
located gnomes, there was very little other animal life in a wide area.
Their charge may be deadly to a non-reasoning animal if it is exposed
more than a few moments. To a human it isn't deadly, but it's
devastating. The charge must hurt the mind so badly that it defends
itself with the only bit of reasoning left. Kill or be killed. That's
why our men turned homicidal."

"If this is true," MacFarland said soberly, "can we do anything about
it? Can we destroy these creatures?"

"We can probably destroy them," Gallifa said slowly. "But remember the
rabbits in Australia? The gnomes are ecologically basic. They are by far
the most numerous animal in this area."

"Meaning," said MacFarland, "that if we killed them off here, they would
swarm in from somewhere else? That will mean a running battle."

Gallifa smiled grimly at MacFarland's use of the future tense. "We may
have to live with them for awhile. But our immediate problem is how to
convince the men that we can solve the present crisis--while we still
have time."

"You'd never dare approach the mess hall," MacFarland warned.

The camp waited, wound up to the breaking point. Along about the middle
of the afternoon, maybe before, all hell was going to bust loose. Unless
he could stop it.

He suddenly grabbed MacFarland's arm. "Mac!" he asked eagerly. "The
generator. Do you know if it's still working?"

A look of understanding crossed MacFarland's face. "The bull horn. Of
course! Everyone in camp can hear the bull horn."

They made it past the mess hall without drawing any fire. A few moments
later the resonant voice of the loudspeaker was booming across the camp.
Gallifa spoke slowly, methodically, trying to convince and reassure. He
paused, then once more repeated the plea.

He almost gave up. Then slowly the mapping gang edged into the open and
filed toward the Administration room. Finally the bio team left the mess
hall, and Gallifa let the heavy horn drop. What now? The present
nightmare was almost over, but what of the future?

"We will be able to control the gnomes locally," MacFarland said,
seeming almost to guess his thoughts. "As we expand, they will have to
give."

"Maybe," Gallifa said. "But just because they are rodents. Don't
underestimate their possibilities.

"The creatures of this planet have never been pressed. Nothing has been
able to push them up the evolutionary ladder. We'll be the toughest
environment they've ever faced, for we know the power of their defensive
mechanism. How well will we be able to compete if they learn to use it
as an offensive weapon?"

"We can't," MacFarland said.

"We know it's selective," Gallifa corrected. "They didn't bother either
Samuels or myself when we first contacted them. We also know all of the
stricken men weren't actively molesting gnomes. Therefore, some were hit
due to the actions of others. The only question is--how selective is
their power?"

"Then how _can_ we handle them?" MacFarland questioned soberly.

Gallifa shrugged. "I don't know," he said simply. "We're committed here,
and we'll stay. This isn't the first time the human race has been
challenged--it won't be the last."

Gallifa turned and walked toward the Administration Building. Humans had
solved a hundred problems on a hundred planets. Problems existed to be
solved. This one, too, would be solved. But no matter how hard or how
easy, it would be an experiment.

As all humanity was an experiment.

[Footnote: _Melvin Sturgis is a mechanical engineer employed by_
ROCKETDYNE, _Propulsion field laboratory--a division of North American
Aviation, Inc. Like many another brilliant young technician with an
extra-curricular, electronic string to his bow he has also been a
free-lance magazine writer for the past five years. We think you'll
agree he has scored heavily here, on the planet of a far-off star!_]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Unprotected Species, by Melvin Sturgis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UNPROTECTED SPECIES ***

***** This file should be named 32036.txt or 32036.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/0/3/32036/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
