The Project Gutenberg EBook of New West Indian Spiders, by Nathan Banks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: New West Indian Spiders
       Bulletin of the AMNH, Vol. XXXIII, Art. XLI, pp. 639-642

Author: Nathan Banks

Release Date: September 5, 2010 [EBook #33650]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW WEST INDIAN SPIDERS ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.







_New West Indian Spiders._

BY NATHAN BANKS.

BULLETIN OF THE
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY,
VOL. XXXIII, ART. XLI, pp. 639-642.

_New York, November 21, 1914._


[Transcriber's Note: Words surrounded by tildes, like ~this~ signifies
words in bold. Words surrounded by underscores, like _this_, signifies
words in italics.]




Article XLI.--NEW WEST INDIAN SPIDERS.

BY NATHAN BANKS.


The following new species were found in the course of an examination of
material in the American Museum of Natural History collected by Dr. F.
E. Lutz and Mr. Charles W. Leng in Cuba and by Dr. Lutz in Porto Rico.
The types are in that institution.


~Mecoloesthus signatus~ n. sp.

Cephalothorax pale, with black median mark, wider at head; sternum
reddish or yellowish. Abdomen pale, with a black median stripe, narrowed
near middle, not reaching anterior end where there is an oblique stripe,
and a basal spot each side, also an apical spot each side, and the basal
pleura show an oblique dark stripe. These marks are made up of small
spots, more or less connected. The venter shows a narrow, median black
stripe followed by a round spot, some distance before the spinnerets.
Femora reddish, blackish near tip, and a white band at extreme tip;
tibiæ dark, with a broad, white band near tip; rest of legs paler. Eyes
in two groups, three each side (subequal in size) on a distinct
elevation; A. M. E. minute, close together, and as high as upper edge of
A. S. E. Abdomen elongate, cylindrical, spinnerets apical; legs very
long; vulval area corneous, yellow, concave behind, but little swollen.
Length; ceph. 1 mm.; abdomen 2.5 mm.; femur I, 12 mm.; femur IV, 10 mm.

From Naguabo, Porto Rico, March. No. 21669, Dept. Inv. Zoölogy.


~Callilepsis grisea~ n. sp.

Cephalothorax reddish brown, clothed with white hair; black in
eye-region; mandibles reddish brown; legs yellowish, darker on anterior
tarsi and metatarsi, a dark band on middle of tibiæ III and IV and these
metatarsi rather dark; sternum yellowish brown, darker on sides; abdomen
grayish white above and below, above with a median basal blackish
streak, a dark streak on each anterior pleuron and a dark streak each
side toward apex, and two blackish spots above spinnerets, latter
brownish. Cephalothorax narrow; eye-rows short and far apart; P. M. E.
slightly oval, about three diameters apart and much closer to the larger
P. S. E.; legs moderately long, very hairy or bristly, and with stout
spines especially on femora III and IV; tibiæ I and II with three spines
beneath, one at base, one at middle, one at tip, metatarsi with basal
spine only; metatarsi and tarsi scopulate beneath; hind legs more
numerously spined; sternum once and a half longer than broad, pointed
behind, narrowed in front; abdomen fully twice as long as broad, sides
subparallel. Length 6.8 mm.

From 12-1/2 kilometers south of Pinar del Rio, Cuba, September. No.
21670, Dept. Inv. Zoölogy.


~Wulfila pretiosa~ n. sp.

Pale yellowish. Cephalothorax with a greenish stripe each side, a
greenish mark over groove, and two faint lines back from P. M. E.;
mandibles with a greenish vertical line in middle. Abdomen with dark
greenish or nearly blackish stripe each side reaching to middle, a spot
behind it, and a large median spot above spinnerets, four small dark
dots in mid-dorsum; legs with faint dark spots at bases of many spines
on femora and tibiæ. Cephalothorax narrow in front, A. M. E. hardly more
than diameter apart; about as close to the very much larger A. S. E.
Posterior eye-row nearly straight, the eyes equal and as large as A. S.
E., P. M. E. about two diameters apart, and about as far from P. S. E.
Legs long and slender, first and fourth pair about equal, all with stout
spines on femora; tibiæ and metatarsi I and II each with two pairs of
very long spines, none at tips. The black hair on tips of maxillæ, lip
and mandibles is very prominent. Abdomen twice as long as broad. Length
4.5 mm.; leg I, 8 mm.

From San Carlos Est., Guantanamo, Cuba. October. No. 21671, Dept. Inv.
Zoölogy.


~Wulfila immaculata~ n. sp.

White or pale yellowish throughout, unmarked; the eyes on black rings,
the claws black, and the anterior edge of the vulva reddish. The A. M.
E. small, but little more than their diameter apart, about twice as far
from the plainly large A. S. E., P. M. E. nearly three diameters apart,
and only about two diameters from the P. S. E. Mandibles with only fine
hairs; legs long, and very slender, the first pair more than twice as
long as the body, all with very long, slender spines, and fine hairs.
Abdomen nearly twice as long as broad; vulva shows two reddish marks in
front, and behind is a large indistinct cavity. Length 3 mm.; leg I, 7.5
mm.

Type from 7 kilometers north of Viñales, Cuba, September, No. 21687,
Dept. Inv. Zoölogy. Paratypes from Cabanas, Cuba, September; Naguabo,
Porto Rico, March; and Mona Island, Feb. Nos. 21672 and 21682 to 21686,
Dept. Inv. Zoölogy.


~Bathyphantes semicincta~ n. sp.

Cephalothorax dull yellowish, a marginal dark seam, eyes on black spots;
mandibles dull yellowish. Legs pale yellowish, femora and coxæ more
whitish, tibiæ and patellæ I and IV tipped with black. Sternum
yellowish, margined with dark. Abdomen above gray, with scattered white
spots and larger black patches; a basal black spot each side, and two
others each side toward tip, the last larger and extending down on sides
to near the spinnerets; a large, oblique, dark spot on pleura, and one
near base; venter with a large, median blackish spot, concave in front,
dark on sides of genital groove. Legs I and II very long, much longer
than others, all with many long, fine but stiff, hairs and some erect
bristles on tibiæ, a long one at top of each patella above and one near
middle of tibia above. Length 1.8 mm.

From 7 kilometers north of Viñales, Cuba, September. No. 21673, Dept.
Inv. Zoölogy.


~Epeira gundlachi~ n. sp.

Cephalothorax, legs, sternum, mandibles, and palpi whitish; tarsi, and
sometimes metatarsi, slightly infuscated; sternum sometimes more
yellowish, no markings. Abdomen white above and below. Eyes small;
posterior row recurved, subequal in size, the P. M. E. one half nearer
to each other than to the S. E. and about three diameters apart; the
four M. E. make a square; A. S. E. smaller than other eyes, close to P.
S. E., fully as far from A. M. E. as these from each other. Legs with
many fine white bristles, and a few black spines, two on inner side of
femur I near tip, no spines in front nor below on femora, nor below on
tibiæ I and II, a few above on tibiæ and patellæ, the tarsus plus
metatarsus I about as long as tibia plus patella I. Sternum
sub-triangular, a little longer than broad, pointed behind. Abdomen
fully one and a half times longer than broad, roundedly projecting
behind the spinnerets, no higher at base than at spinnerets, and
broadest at about middle of length. Length 3 mm.

From 12-1/2 kilometers south of Pinar del Rio, Cuba. September. No.
21674, Dept. Inv. Zoölogy. Related to group of _E. mormon_ and _E.
peckhami_ by shape of abdomen and vulva.


~Misumessus echinatus~ n. sp.

Male: Cephalothorax yellowish, with about fifty small reddish-brown
spots scattered over surface, from each of which arises a short, but
very stout spine; the marginal seam is reddish. The legs are pale with
spots similar to those on the cephalothorax, many of which have a
bristle or spine; no marks on the tarsi, but tibiæ and metatarsis are
twice banded with reddish. The coxæ and sternum are pale. The abdomen is
rather whitish above, with two rows of five reddish spots near middle,
and elsewhere with many reddish dots, from many of which arise short,
stout spines like those on the cephalothorax, pleura with red spots;
venter with two reddish marks near base, beyond genital furrow with
transverse white and black spots; some red around the pale spinnerets.
The A. S. E. rather larger than usual; P. M. E. about three diameters
apart, about as close to the P. S. E. Legs long and slender, tibia I
with four pairs of spines beneath, the longest but little longer than
the width of the joint. The male palpal organs show a very long stylet
curved over two times around the bulb. Length 2.5 mm.

From Cerro Cabras, near Pinar del Rio, Cuba. September. No. 21675, Dept.
Inv. Zoölogy.


~Olios bicolor~ n. sp.

Male: Cephalothorax, palpi, sternum, and most of legs yellowish; abdomen
dark brown; metatarsi dark, tibiæ infuscated; mandibles reddish brown;
tips of male palpi dark. Cephalothorax with several dark lines; a median
one reaching to groove, a short one from each P. M. E., one from S. E.
curved and then extending toward groove, four or six lateral dark lines;
two dark lines on mandibles. A. M. E. rather more than diameter apart,
about as far from the somewhat smaller A. S. E.; P. S. E. equal to A. S.
E., P. M. E. much smaller than A. M. E., fully two and one half
diameters apart and as far from the slightly larger P. S. E. Male palpi
figured. Length 10 mm.; ceph., 4.6 mm.; femur I, 5 mm.; tibia I, 3.7
mm.


Type from Desecheo Is., Feb., No. 21688, Dept. Inv. Zoölogy. Paratypes
from San Juan, Porto Rico, February; Desecheo Isl., Feb., and Mona Isl.,
Feb. Nos. 21676 to 21681, Dept. Inv. Zoölogy.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE.

     Fig. 1. Mecoloesthus signatus, abdomen and vulva.
      "   2. Callilepsis grisea, vulva.
      "   3. Bathyphantes semicincta, side of abdomen.
      "   4. Wulfila pretiosa, vulva.
      "   5. Olios bicolor, palpus beneath.
      "   6. Misumessus echinatus, palpus.
      "   7. Wulfila immaculata, vulvæ of two specimens.
      "   8. Epeira gundlachi, top and side outline of abdomen, and vulva.
      "   9. Olios bicolor, palpus above.

[Illustration: NEW WEST INDIAN SPIDERS.]




PUBLICATIONS OF THE American Museum of Natural History.

     The publications of the American Museum of Natural History
     consist of the 'Bulletin,' in octavo, of which one volume,
     consisting of 400 to 800 pages and 25 to 60 plates, with
     numerous text figures, is published annually; the 'Memoirs,'
     in quarto, published in parts at irregular intervals; and
     'Anthropological Papers,' uniform in size and style with the
     'Bulletin.' Also an 'Ethnographical Album,' and the
     'American Museum Journal.'


MEMOIRS.

Each Part of the 'Memoirs' forms a separate and complete monograph,
usually with numerous plates.


Vol. I. Zoölogy and Palæontology.

PART I.--Republication of Descriptions of Lower Carboniferous Crinoidea
from the Hall Collection now in the American Museum of Natural History,
with Illustrations of the Original Type Specimens not heretofore
Figured. By R. Z. Whitfield. Pp. 1-37, pll. i-iii, and 14 text figures.
September 15, 1893. Price, $2.00.

PART II.--Republication of Descriptions of Fossils from the Hall
Collection in the American Museum of Natural History, from the report of
Progress for 1861 of the Geological Survey of Wisconsin, by James Hall,
with Illustrations from the Original Type Specimens not heretofore
Figured. By R. P. Whitfield. Pp. 39-74, pll. iv-xii. August 10, 1895.
Price, $2.00.

PART III.--The Extinct Rhinoceroses. By Henry Fairfield Osborn. Part I.
Pp. 75-164, pll. xii_a_-xx, and 49 text figures. April 22, 1898. Price,
$4.20.

PART IV.--A Complete Mosasaur Skeleton. By Henry Fairfield Osborn. Pp.
165-188, pll. xxi-xxiii, and 15 text figures. October 25, 1899.

PART V.--A Skeleton of Diplodocus. By Henry Fairfield Osborn. Pp.
189-214, pll. xxiv-xxviii, and 15 text figures. October 25, 1899. Price
of Parts IV and V, issued under one cover, $2.00.

PART VI.--Monograph of the Sesiidæ of America, North of Mexico. By
William Beutenmüller. Pp. 215-352, pll. xxix-xxxvi, and 24 text figures.
March, 1901. Price, $5.00.

PART VII.--Fossil Mammals of the Tertiary of Northeastern Colorado. By
W. D. Matthew. Pp. 353-448, pll. xxxvii-xxxix, and 34 text figures.
November, 1901. Price, $2.00.

PART VIII.--The Reptilian Subclasses Diapsida and Synapsida and the
Early History of the Diaptosauria. By Henry Fairfield Osborn. Pp.
449-507, pl. xl, and 28 text figures. November, 1903. Price, $2.00.


Vol. II. Anthropology.

_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. I._

PART I.--Facial Paintings of the Indians of Northern British Columbia.
By Franz Boas. Pp. 1-24, pll. i-iv. June 16, 1898. Price, $2.00.

PART II.--The Mythology of the Bella Coola Indians. By Franz Boas. Pp.
25-127, pll. vii-xii. November, 1898. Price, $2.00.

PART III.--The Archæology of Lytton. British Columbia. By Harlan I.
Smith. Pp. 129-161, pi. xiii, and 117 text figures. May, 1899. Price,
$2.00.

PART IV.--The Thompson Indians of British Columbia. By James Teit.
Edited by Franz Boas. Pp. 163-392, pll. xiv-xx, and 198 text figures.
April, 1900. Price, $5.00.

PART V.--Basketry Designs of the Salish Indians. By Livingston Farrand.
Pp. 393-399, pll. xxi-xxiii, and 15 text figures. April, 1900. Price, 75
cts.

PART VI.--Archæology of the Thompson River Region. By Harlan I. Smith.
Pp. 401-442, pll. xxiv-xxvi, and 51 text figures. June, 1900. Price,
$2.00.


Vol. III. Anthropology.

PART I.--Symbolism of the Huichol Indians. By Carl Lumholtz. Pp. 1-228,
pll. i-iv, and 291 text figures. May, 1900. Price, $5.00.

PART II.--The Basketry of the Tlingit. By George T. Emmons Pp. 229-277,
pll. v-xviii, and 73 text figures. July, 1903. Price, $2.00. (Out of
print.)

PART III.--Decorative Art of the Huichol Indians. By Carl Lumholtz. Pp.
279-327, pll. xix-xxiii, and 117 text figures. November, 1904. Price,
$1.50.

PART IV.--The Chilkat Blanket. By George T. Emmons. With Notes on the
Blanket Designs, by Franz Boas. November, 1907. Price, $2.00.


Vol. IV. Anthropology.

_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. II._

PART I.--Traditions of the Chilcotin Indians. By Livingston Farrand. Pp.
1-54, June, 1900. Price, $1.50.

PART II.--Cairns of British Columbia and Washington. By Harlan I. Smith
and Gerard Fowke. Pp. 55-75, pll. i-v. January, 1901. Price, $1.00.

PART III.--Traditions of the Quinault Indians. By Livingston Farrand,
assisted by W. S. Kahnweiler. Pp. 77-132. January, 1902. Price, $1.00.

PART IV.--Shell-Heaps of the Lower Fraser River. By Harlan I. Smith. Pp.
133-192, pll. vi-vii, and 60 text figures. March, 1903. Price, $1.00.

*PART V.--The Lillooet Indians. By James Teit. Pp. 193-300, pll. viii
and ix, 40 text figures. 1906. Price, $1.80.

*PART VI.--Archæology of the Gulf of Georgia and Puget Sound. By Harlan
I. Smith. Pp. 301-442, pll. x-xii, and 98 text figures. 1907. Price,
$3.00.

*PART VII.--The Shuswap. By James Teit. Pp. 443-789, pll. xiii-xiv, and
82 text figures. 1909. Price, $6.00.


Vol. V. Anthropology.

_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. III._

PART I.--Kwakiutl Texts. By Franz Boas and George Hunt. Pp. 1-270.
January, 1902. Price, $3.00.

PART II.--Kwakiutl Texts. By Franz Boas and George Hunt. Pp. 271-402.
December, 1902. Price, $1.50.

*PART III.--Kwakiutl Texts. By Franz Boas and George Hunt. Pp. 403-532.
1905. Price, $1.40.


Vol. VI. Anthropology.

_Hyde Expedition._

The Night Chant, a Navaho Ceremony. By Washington Matthews. Pp. i-xvi,
1-332, pll. i-viii (5 colored), and 19 text figures. May, 1902. Price,
$5.00.



Vol. VII. Anthropology (not yet completed).

_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. IV._


PART I.--The Decorative Art of the Amur Tribes. By Berthold Laufer. Pp.
1-79, pll. i-xxxiii, and 24 text figures. December, 1901. Price, $3.00.


Vol. VIII. Anthropology.

*_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. V._

PART I.--Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida. By John R.
Swanton. Pp. 1-300, pll. i-xxvi, 4 maps, and 31 text figures. 1905.
Price, $8.00.

PART II.--The Kwakiutl of Vancouver Island. By Franz Boas. Pp. 301-522,
pll. xxvii--lii, and 142 text figures. 1909. Price, $10.00.


Vol. IX. Zoölogy and Palæontology.

PART I.--The Osteology of _Camposaurus_ Cope. By Barnum Brown. Pp. 1-26,
pll. i-v. December, 1905. Price, $2.00.

PART II.--The Phytosauria with Especial Reference to _Mystriosuchus_ and
_Rhytiodon_. By J. H. McGregor. Pp. 27-101, pll. vi-xi, and 26 text
figures. February, 1906. Price, $2.00.

PART III.--Studies on the Arthrodira. By Louis Hussakof. May, 1906. Pp.
103-154, pll. xii and xiii, and 25 text cuts. May, 1906. Price, $3.00.

PART IV.--The Conard Fissure, A Pleistocene Bone Deposit in Northern
Arkansas, with Descriptions of two New Genera and twenty New Species of
Mammals. By Barnum Brown. Pp. 155-208, pll. xiv-xxv, and 3 text-figures.
1907. Price, $2.50.

PART V.--Studies on Fossil Fishes (Sharks, Chimæroids, and Arthrodires).
By Bashford Dean. Pp. 209-287, pll. xxvi-xli, and 65 text figures.
February, 1909. Price, $3.50.

PART VI.--The Carnivora and Insectivora of the Bridger Basin, Middle
Eocene. By W. D. Matthew. Pp. 289-567, pll. xlii-lii, and 118 text
figures. August, 1909. Price, $5.00.


Vol. X. Anthropology.

*_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. VI._

PART I.--Religion and Myths of the Koryak. By W. Jochelson. Pp. 1-382,
pll. i-xiii, 1 map, and 58 text figures. 1905. Price, $10.00.

PART II.--Material Culture and Social Organization of the Koryak. By W.
Jochelson. Pp. 383-811, pll. xiv-xl, and 194 text figures. 1908. Price,
$12.00.


Vol. XI. Anthropology.

*_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. VII._

PART I.--The Chuckchee: Material Culture. By W. Bogoras. Pp. 1-276, pll.
i-xxxi, 1 map, and 199 text figures. 1904. Price, $8.00.

PART II.--The Chuckchee: Religion. By W. Bogoras Pp. 277-536, pll.
xxxii-xxxiv, and 101 text figures. 1907. Price, $4.00.

PART III.--The Chuckchee: Social Organization. By W. Bogoras. Pp.
537-733, pl. xxxv, and 1 text figure. 1909. Price, $3.00.


Vol. XII. Anthropology.

*_Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. VIII._

Part I.--Chuckchee Mythology. By Waldemar Bogoras. Pp. 1-197. 1910.
Price, $1.25.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of New West Indian Spiders, by Nathan Banks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW WEST INDIAN SPIDERS ***

***** This file should be named 33650-8.txt or 33650-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/6/5/33650/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Josephine Paolucci and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
