The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Miner, by Horatio Alger, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Young Miner
       or Tom Nelson in California

Author: Horatio Alger, Jr.

Release Date: September 18, 2007 [EBook #22669]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG MINER ***




Produced by David Edwards, Marcia Brooks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)







[Illustration: THE PACIFIC SERIES.]

THE

YOUNG MINER;

OR,

TOM NELSON IN CALIFORNIA.

BY

HORATIO ALGER, JR.,

AUTHOR OF "RAGGED DICK," "TATTERED TOM," "LUCK AND PLUCK," "BRAVE AND
BOLD" SERIES, ETC., ETC.

PHILADELPHIA:

HENRY T. COATES & CO.




FAMOUS ALGER BOOKS.

       *       *       *       *       *

=RAGGED DICK SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 6 vols. 12mo. Cloth.

RAGGED DICK.
FAME AND FORTUNE.
MARK THE MATCH BOY.
ROUGH AND READY.
BEN THE LUGGAGE BOY.
RUFUS AND ROSE.

=TATTERED TOM SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 4 vols. 12mo. Cloth. FIRST
SERIES.

TATTERED TOM.
PAUL THE PEDDLER.
PHIL THE FIDDLER.
SLOW AND SURE.

=TATTERED TOM SERIES=. 4 vols. 12mo. Cloth. SECOND SERIES.

JULIUS.
THE YOUNG OUTLAW.
SAM'S CHANCE.
THE TELEGRAPH BOY.

=CAMPAIGN SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 3 vols.

FRANK'S CAMPAIGN.
PAUL PRESCOTT'S CHARGE.
CHARLIE CODMAN'S CRUISE.

=LUCK AND PLUCK SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 4 vols. 12mos. Cloth.
FIRST SERIES.

LUCK AND PLUCK.
SINK OR SWIM.
STRONG AND STEADY.
STRIVE AND SUCCEED.

=LUCK AND PLUCK SERIES=. 4 vols. 12mo. Cloth. SECOND SERIES.

TRY AND TRUST.
BOUND TO RISE.
RISEN FROM THE RANKS.
HERBERT CARTER'S LEGACY.

=BRAVE AND BOLD SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 4 vols. 12mo. Cloth.

BRAVE AND BOLD.
JACK'S WARD.
SHIFTING FOR HIMSELF.
WAIT AND HOPE.

=PACIFIC SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 4 vols. 12mo.

THE YOUNG ADVENTURER.
THE YOUNG MINER.
THE YOUNG EXPLORERS.
BEN'S NUGGET.

=ATLANTIC SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 4 vols.

THE YOUNG CIRCUS RIDER.
DO AND DARE.
HECTOR'S INHERITANCE.
HELPING HIMSELF.

=WAY TO SUCCESS SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 4 vols. 12mo. Cloth.

BOB BURTON.
THE STORE BOY.
LUKE WALTON.
STRUGGLING UPWARD.

=NEW WORLD SERIES=. By HORATIO ALGER, JR. 3 vols. 12mo. Cloth.

DIGGING FOR GOLD.
FACING THE WORLD.
IN A NEW WORLD.

=_Other Volumes in Preparation._=

       *       *       *       *       *

COPYRIGHT BY A. K. LORING, 1879.

To
GENEVIEVE AND ANITA ALGER,
This Volume
IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED.




PREFACE.


When "The Young Adventurer" was published, a year since, as the initial
volume of The Pacific Series, it was announced that the second volume
would be "The Young Pioneer." This has been changed to "The Young
Miner," in order to avoid confusion with a book bearing a title somewhat
similar to the one first proposed.

Those who were interested in Tom Nelson's trip across the Plains will
find in the present story a record of his adventures in the Land of
Gold. Though his prosperity was chiefly due to his own energy and
industry, it is also true that he was exceptionally lucky. Yet his good
fortune has been far exceeded by that of numerous adventurous spirits in
Colorado, within the last twelve months. Some measure of prosperity
generally awaits the patient and energetic worker, and seldom comes to
those who idly wait for something to turn up.

NEW YORK, Oct. 1, 1879.




THE YOUNG MINER;

OR,

TOM NELSON IN CALIFORNIA.




CHAPTER I.

THE GOLD-SEEKERS.


A dozen men, provided with rockers, were busily engaged in gathering and
washing dirt, mingled with gold-dust, on the banks of a small stream in
California. It was in the early days, and this party was but one of
hundreds who were scattered over the new Eldorado, seeking for the
shining metal which throughout the civilized world exercises a sway
potent and irresistible.

I have said there were a dozen men, but this is a mistake. One of the
party was a well-grown boy of sixteen, with a good-humored and even
handsome face. He was something more than good-humored, however. There
was an expression on his face which spoke of strength and resolution
and patient endurance. The readers of "The Young Adventurer" will at
once recognize in our young hero Tom Nelson, the oldest son of a poor
New England farmer, who, finding no prospects at home, had joined the
tide of emigrants pouring from all parts of the country to the land of
which so many marvelous stories were told. Tom had come to work; and
though he doubtless shared to some extent the extravagant anticipations
of the great body of Eastern visitors who hoped to make a fortune in a
year, he did not expect to succeed without hard toil.

His companions belonged to the same party with whom he had crossed the
plains, under the leadership of Phineas Fletcher, a broad-shouldered
Illinois farmer, who had his family with him. Next to Tom was Donald
Ferguson, a grave Scotchman, and Tom's special friend; a man of
excellent principles, thoroughly reliable, and held in high respect by
all though not possessed of popular manners. On the other side was
Lawrence Peabody, a young Boston clerk, who had spent several years
behind a dry-goods counter. He was soft and effeminate, with no talent
for "roughing it," and wholly unfitted for the hard work which he had
undertaken. He was deeply disappointed in his first work at
gold-hunting, having come out with the vague idea that he should pick up
a big nugget within a short time that would make his fortune and enable
him to go home a rich man. The practical side of gold-seeking--this
washing particles of dust from the dirt of the river-bed--was in the
highest degree unsatisfactory and discouraging. He was not a bad fellow;
and his companions, though they laughed at him, were well disposed
towards him.

Among the rest, mention may be made of John Miles, Henry Scott, and
Chapman, owner of a refractory donkey named after King Solomon.

Not far away from the river were the tents occupied by the miners. There
was but one house, roughly built of logs. This was occupied by Captain
Fletcher and his family. He had not had the trouble of building it, but
had found it ready for occupation, having been constructed by a
previous party who had wandered farther down the river in search of
richer washings. In fact, it was this building which had decided our
party to remain.

"There isn't much difference in places," said Fletcher. "We may as well
stay here."

"Then why was it deserted?" suggested John Miles, dubiously. "That's
rather against it, isn't it, captain?"

"Not necessarily, Miles. You've been on berrying parties, haven't you,
when at home?"

"Many a time."

"You've noticed that many of the pickers leave good places, just from
love of novelty, and wander about the field, often faring worse than if
they remained where they were?"

"That's so, captain."

"Then let us give this place a try. We'll make more working steady in a
medium place than wandering here, there, and everywhere."

So the whole party agreed to "give the place a try."

There had been no brilliant success as yet, but fair luck. In six days
Tom had washed out twenty-five dollars' worth of gold-dust, in spite of
awkwardness and inexperience. Others had done better, but poor Lawrence
Peabody had barely five dollars' worth to show. It must be said,
however, that he had not averaged more than two or three hours of real
labor in every twenty-four. He spent the rest of the time in wandering
about aimlessly, or sitting down and watching the labors of his
companions, while he enlivened them by pathetic lamentations over his
unfortunate position, so far away from Boston and the refining
influences of civilization.

A little transcript of a conversation between Tom and himself will throw
light upon the characters of both.

"This is beastly work," sighed Peabody, resting from his by no means
arduous labors, and looking over to Tom. "I tell you, it isn't fit for a
gentleman."

"It is rather hard to keep one's hands clean, Mr. Peabody," said Tom;
"but you mustn't think of the present. Think of the time when you will
go home, your pockets full of gold."

"I don't see any prospect of it, Tom," sighed Peabody. "Here I've been
hard at work for a week, and I haven't got over five dollars' worth of
dust."

"I have five times as much," said Tom.

"Some people are lucky," said Peabody.

"You haven't worked like Tom," said the Scotchman, plainly. "You haven't
averaged over two hours a day, while Tom has worked eight or ten."

"I have worked till my back was like to break," said the young man from
Boston. "I am not accustomed to manual labor, Mr. Ferguson. My friend
Tom has worked on a farm, while I have been engaged in mercantile
pursuits. Oh, why did I leave Boston!"

"I am sure I can't guess," said Ferguson, dryly.

"I never expected anything like _this_."

"What did you expect, if I may be so bold as to inquire?"

"I thought I should find the gold in big nuggets worth thousands of
dollars apiece. I was always reading in the papers about finding them. I
think it's a great shame to deceive people by such stories. I don't
believe there are any nuggets."

"Oh, yes, there are; but they are few and far between," said Fletcher.
"A neighbor of mine found one worth three thousand dollars. Altogether
he brought home five thousand dollars, and invested it in a farm and
saw-mill. He is doing a good business. When he came to California he had
nothing."

"That is what I should like, Captain Fletcher," said Tom. "If I could
only manage to carry home five thousand dollars, I could make my father
comfortable for life."

"I shouldn't be satisfied with five thousand dollars," said Peabody,
whose ideas were lofty.

"How much would satisfy you?"

"About fifty thousand," said the young Bostonian, his face lighting up
at the thought of so large a sum.

"And what would you do with it, if I may make so bold?" asked Ferguson.

"I would buy a nice house at the South End, furnish it handsomely, and
live in style."

"I suppose you would marry?" suggested Tom, smiling.

"I probably should," answered Peabody, gravely.

"Perhaps you have the lady already selected."

"I have."

"Who is she?" asked John Mills. "Come, now, Peabody, don't be bashful."

"It is the daughter of a Boston merchant."

"Does the lady love you?"

"We understand each other," answered Peabody, loftily. "She would marry
me, poor as I am, but for her purse-proud, mercenary sire. It will be a
happy day when, with my pockets full of gold, I enter his presence and
claim his daughter's hand."

"I wish you success, Mr. Peabody," said Tom. "I hope you have no
rivals."

"Yes, there is one."

"Are you not afraid of him?"

"Oh, no; he is a fellow of no style," said Peabody, drawing up his
slender form, and looking as stylish as a very dirty shirt, muddy boots,
and a soiled suit would allow.

"I think I shall wait awhile before getting married," said Tom. "I am
afraid I wouldn't stand any chance with an heiress, Mr. Peabody. Do you
think I can ever be stylish?"

The Bostonian understood Tom to be in earnest, and told him he thought
in time, under proper training, he might become fairly stylish.

The conversation was interrupted by the ringing of a bell from the
log-house. Mrs. Fletcher, by an arrangement with the party, prepared
their meals, and thus they fared better than most of the early pioneers.
Their labor gave them a good appetite, and they were more solicitous
about quantity than quality. Slow as he was at his work, there was no
one who exhibited greater alacrity at meal-times, than Lawrence Peabody.
At such times he was even cheerful.




CHAPTER II.

MISSOURI JACK.


At the end of a month the settlement had considerably increased. A large
party from Missouri went to work farther up stream, and a few stray
emigrants also added themselves to the miners at River Bend, for this
was the name selected by Captain Fletcher for the location. The new
arrivals were a rougher and more disorderly class than Fletcher and his
companions. Already there was a saloon, devoted to the double purpose of
gambling and drinking; and the proprietor, Missouri Jack (no one knew
his last name), was doing a thriving business. Indeed his income
considerably exceeded that of any one in the settlement.

Neither Tom nor any of his party contributed much to Missouri Jack's
profits. In consequence, they had to bear the ill-will and sometimes
open abuse of Jack and his friends.

"Come in and take a drink, stranger," called out Jack, the day after the
opening of the saloon, to Captain Fletcher.

"No, thank you."

"It shan't cost you a cent."

"It would cost me my health," returned Fletcher.

"Do you mean to say I sell bad whiskey?" demanded Jack, angrily,
emphasizing the inquiry by an oath.

"I don't know anything about it."

"Then what _do_ you mean?"

"I mean that all whiskey is bad for the health," replied Fletcher.

"Oh, you're a temperance sneak!" exclaimed Missouri Jack,
contemptuously.

"I am a temperance man; you may leave out the other word," calmly
answered Fletcher.

"You're not a man!" exploded Jack. "A man that's afraid of whiskey is
a--a--isn't half a man. He isn't fit to be a woman."

"Have it as you like," said Fletcher, unruffled. "I shall not drink to
please any man. I had a younger brother--a bright, promising young man
poor Ben was--who drank himself to death. He'd have been alive now but
for whiskey."

"Oh, dry up your pious talk! You make me sick!" exclaimed Missouri Jack
in deep disgust.

Next he accosted John Miles, who curtly declined and received in return
a volley of abuse. Now Miles was a powerful man, and not possessed of
Fletcher's self-control. He paused, and surveyed Jack with a menacing
look.

"Look here, stranger," he said, sharply, "just have a care how you use
that tongue of yours. This is a free country, and if I choose to decline
your whiskey, there's no law against it that I know of."

"You're a white-livered sneak!"

Missouri Jack did not proceed with his remarks, for John Miles, seizing
him by the shoulder, tripped him up, and strode away, leaving him
prostrate, and pouring out a volley of curses. Being a bully, and
cowardly as most bullies are, he did not pursue his broad-shouldered
enemy, but vowed vengeance whenever a good opportunity came.

In fact, the only one of the original miners who accepted Jack's
invitation was Lawrence Peabody.

"Step in, stranger, and have a drink!" said Jack, a little dubiously,
having met with such poor luck heretofore.

The young Bostonian paused. He was not a drinker at home, but in his
discontent and disappointment he was tempted.

"My dear sir, you are very polite," he said.

"I hope you ain't one of them temperance sneaks," said Jack, his brow
clouding in anticipation of a refusal.

"I assure you I am not," Peabody hastened to say. "I have participated
in convivial scenes more than once in Boston."

"I don't understand college talk," said Jack; "but if you want a glass
of prime whiskey, just say the word."

"I don't care if I do," said Peabody, following his new friend into the
saloon.

The draught of prime whiskey scorched his throat as he swallowed it
down, but it was followed by a sense of exhilaration, and Peabody's
tongue was loosened.

"You're a gentleman!" said Missouri Jack. "You ain't like them fellows
you're with. They're sneaks."

"Really, you compliment me, Mr.--, what may I call your name?"

"Missouri Jack--that's the peg I hang on to."

"My dear Mr. Jack, I am glad to know you. You are really quite an
accession to our settlement."

"Well, if I ain't, my saloon is. How you've managed to live so long
without liquor beats me. Why, it ain't civilized."

"It _was_ pretty dull," admitted Peabody.

"No life, no amusement; for all the world like a parcel of Methodists.
What luck have you met with, stranger?"

"Beastly luck!" answered Peabody. "I tell you, Mr. Jack, California's a
fraud. Many a time I've regretted leaving Boston, where I lived in
style, and moved in the first circles, for such a place as this.
Positively, Mr. Jack, I feel like a tramp, and I'm afraid I look like
one. If my fashionable friends could see me now, they wouldn't know me."

"I ain't got no fashionable friends, and I don't want any," growled
Missouri Jack, spitting on the floor. "What I want is, to meet
gentlemen that ain't afraid to drink like gentlemen. I say, stranger,
you'd better leave them Methodist fellers, and join our gang."

"Thank you, Mr. Jack, you're very kind, and I'll think of it," said
Peabody, diplomatically. Though a little exhilarated, he was not quite
blind to the character of the man with whom he was fraternizing, and had
too much real refinement to enjoy his coarseness.

"Have another drink!"

"Thank you."

Peabody drank again, this time with a friend of Jack's, a man of his own
stripe, who straggled into the saloon.

"Do you play euchre?" asked Jack, producing a dirty pack of cards.

"I know little of it," said Peabody; "but I'll try a game."

"Then you and me and Bill here will have a game."

"All right," said Peabody, glad to while away the time.

"What'll you put up on your game, stranger?" asked Bill.

"You don't mean to play for money, do you?" asked Peabody, a little
startled.

"Sartain I do. What's the good of playin' for nothing?"

So the young Bostonian, out of his modest pile was tempted to stake an
ounce of gold-dust. Though his head was hardly in a condition to follow
the game intelligently, he won, or at least Bill and Jack told him he
had, and for the first time Lawrence felt the rapture of the successful
gambler, as he gathered in his winnings.

"He plays a steep game, Bill," said Jack.

"Tip-top--A No. 1."

"I believe I do play a pretty good game," said the flattered Peabody.
"My friends in Boston used to say so."

"You're hard to beat, and no mistake," said Bill. "Try another game."

"I'm ready, gentlemen," said Peabody, with alacrity.

"It's a great deal easier earning money this way," he reflected,
regarding complacently the two ounces of dust which represented his
winnings, "than washing dirt out of the river." And the poor dupe
congratulated himself that a new way of securing the favors of fortune
had been opened to him.

The reader will easily guess that Lawrence Peabody did not win the next
game, nor will he be surprised to hear that when he left the saloon his
pockets were empty.

"Better luck next time, stranger," said Jack, carelessly. "Take a drink
before you go?"

Peabody accepted the invitation, and soon after staggered into the tent
occupied by Tom and his friend Ferguson.

"What's the matter, Mr. Peabody?" asked Tom. "Are you sick?"

"Yes," answered Peabody, sinking to the floor. "Something's the matter
with my head. I don't feel well."

"Have you been to the saloon, Mr. Peabody?" asked Ferguson.

"Yes," answered the Bostonian.

"And while there you drank some of their vile whiskey, didn't you?"

"I'm a free man, Mr. Ferguson. If I choose to drink, what--what business
is it--yours?"

"None, except as a friend I advise you not to go there again."

Further inquiries elicited the facts about the gambling, and Ferguson
and Tom seriously remonstrated with Peabody, who, however, insisted that
Mr. Jack, as he called him, was a hospitable gentleman.

The dust which Peabody had lost should have been paid to Capt. Fletcher,
as his share of the expenses that same evening. Of course this was now
impossible. Fletcher warned him that any subsequent failure from the
same cause would be followed by an exclusion from his table.




CHAPTER III.

HOW TOM GOT ON.


About this time Tom took account of stock. He had come out to California
with the noble and praiseworthy purpose of earning money to help his
father pay off the mortgage on his little farm. He was the more anxious
to succeed, because two hundred dollars of the amount had been raised to
defray his expenses across the continent. The mortgage, amounting now to
twenty-two hundred dollars, was held by Squire Hudson, a wealthy
resident of the same town, who hoped eventually to find an excuse for
fore-closing the mortgage, and ejecting Mr. Nelson's family. He was
actuated not alone by mercenary motives, but also to gratify an ancient
grudge. In early life Mrs. Nelson, Tom's mother, had rejected the suit
of the wealthy squire, and this insult, as he chose to characterize it,
he had never forgotten or forgiven.

Had Tom been aware of the Squire's feelings, towards his family, he
never would have been willing to have the mortgage increased for his
sake, much as he wished to go to California. But neither Tom nor his
father dreamed of Squire Hudson's secret animosity, and regarded his
willingness to advance the extra two hundred dollars as an evidence of
friendship.

But I have said that Tom took account of stock--in other words,
ascertained how much he was worth. First, then, of the money borrowed
for his trip--the original two hundred dollars--he had twenty-five
dollars left over. Besides this sum, after paying all expenses, he had
accumulated, by hard work and strict economy, fifty dollars' worth of
gold-dust.

"I wish father had this money," said Tom to his tent-mate, Ferguson. "I
am afraid he stands in need of it."

"There may be a way to send it to him, Tom."

"I wish there were."

"There's one of our party going to San Francisco next week. He can buy
a draft there, and send it to your father."

"Who is going?" asked Tom, eagerly.

"John Miles. You can trust him with the money, Tom."

"Of course I can. I'd trust John Miles with any sum."

"Who's that taking liberties with my name?" asked a manly voice, and
John Miles himself stepped into the tent, bending his head as he
entered.

"I hear you are going to San Francisco, John?"

"Yes, I start next week."

"Will you come back again?"

"I intend to. I am going to prospect a little, and buy some things for
myself and Captain Fletcher."

"Will you do me a favor?"

"Of course I will, if it isn't too large a one," answered Miles.

Tom explained what he wished, and John Miles cordially assented.

"You're a good boy, Tom," he said, "to think of your father so soon."

"I feel anxious about him," said Tom. "He raised money to send me out
here, and I don't want him to suffer for it."

"That's the right way to feel, Tom. I wish I had a father and mother to
look out for," said Miles, soberly, "but you're in better luck than I.
Both died when I was a mere lad. How much do you want to send?"

"Seventy-five dollars."

"Have you saved up so much already?" asked Miles, in surprise.

"Part of it I had left over when I got here."

"Will you have any left?"

"No."

"Isn't it well to reserve a little, then?"

"Oh, I shall have some more soon," answered Tom, sanguine, as most boys
are.

"Suppose you are sick?"

"If he is sick he shall suffer for nothing," said the Scotchman. "While
I have money, Tom shall not feel the want of it."

"Thank you, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom, gratefully.

"That old fellow has a heart, after all," thought Miles, who had been
disposed to look upon Ferguson ever since their first acquaintance, as
rather miserly.

The Scotchman was certainly frugal, and counted his pennies carefully,
but he was not mean, and had conceived a strong affection for his young
companion, whom he regarded much as a son or a nephew.

"Suppose you take the money now, John," said Tom.

"Shall I scribble a receipt, Tom? I am afraid my writing materials have
given out."

"I don't want any receipt," said Tom; "I'll trust you without one."

"Nevertheless, lad," said the cautious Scotchman, "it may be well--"

"Yes, Tom, Mr. Ferguson is right. Of course I know that you trust me;
but if anything should happen to me,--any accident, I mean,--the paper
may be useful to you."

"Just as you like, Mr. Miles, but I don't ask it, remember that."

"Yes, I will remember it, and I don't mean to meet with any accident if
I can help it. Mr. Ferguson, can you oblige me with a pipeful of
tobacco? I'll join you in smoking."

Smoking was the Scotchman's solitary extravagance, not a costly one,
however, as he never smoked cigars, but indulged only in a democratic
clay pipe.

John Miles threw himself on the ground between Tom and his Scotch
friend, and watched complacently the wreaths of smoke as they curled
upwards.

"Tom, you ought to smoke," he said. "You don't know how much enjoyment
you lose."

"Don't tempt the lad," said Ferguson. "It's a bad habit."

"You smoke yourself."

"That is true, but it isn't well for a growing boy. It can do him no
good."

"I smoked before I was as old as Tom."

"So did I, but I wish I had not."

"Well, perhaps you're right, but it's a comfort when a man's tired or
out of spirits."

"I am not troubled in that way," said Tom. "I mean with being out of
spirits."

"Youth is a hopeful age," said the Scotchman. "When we are young we are
always hoping for something good to befall us."

"And when one is older, how is it, Mr. Ferguson?"

"We fear ill more than we hope for good," he replied.

"Then I want to remain young as long as I can."

"A good wish, Tom. Some men are always young in spirit; but those that
have seen the evil there is in the world find it harder to be hopeful."

"You speak as if you had had experience of the evil, Mr. Ferguson."

"So I have," answered the Scotchman slowly. Then, after a pause, "I will
tell you about it: it's no secret."

"Not if it is going to pain you."

"Oh, the pain is past. It's only a matter of money, and those wounds
heal."

"Only a matter of money!" said John Miles to himself. "I must have
misjudged Ferguson. I thought money was all in all with him. I did not
think he would speak so lightly of it."

"When I was a young man," Ferguson began, "my father died, leaving me a
thousand pounds, and a small annuity to my mother. With this money I
felt rich, but I knew it would not support me, nor was I minded to be
idle. So I began to look about me, to consider what business I had best
go into, when a young man, about my own age, a clerk in a mercantile
house, came to me and proposed a partnership. He was to put in five
hundred pounds, and contribute his knowledge of business, which was
greater than mine. He was a young man of good parts, and had a brisk,
pleasant way with him, that made him a favorite in business circles. I
thought it was a good chance, and, after taking a little time for
thought, agreed to his proposal. So the firm of McIntire and Ferguson
was formed. We went into business, and for a time all seemed to go
well. As my partner chose to keep the books, I was not so clear as I
wished to be about matters, but we seemed to be prospering. One morning,
however, on coming to business, I found that my partner had disappeared,
after possessing himself of all the money he could collect on the credit
of the firm. Of course we were bankrupts, or rather I was, for he left
me to bear the brunt of failure."

"Have you ever seen him since, Mr. Ferguson?"

"From that day to this--twenty years--I have never set eyes on Sandy
McIntire."

"It was a mean trick to serve you, Ferguson," said Miles.

"Yes," said the Scotchman, soberly. "I minded the loss of money, but the
loss of confidence was a sore thought too, after all the trust I had put
in that man."

Presently Miles rose to go.

"I'll take care of your money, Tom," he said, "and do my best to get it
safely to your father."

"Thank you, John."

As Miles left the tent, he did not observe a crouching figure on the
other side of it. It was the figure of Bill Crane, a crony of Missouri
Jack, in fact, the man who helped him to fleece poor Peabody of his
scanty hoard.

Bill looked after Miles enviously.

"I wonder how much money he's got?" thought Bill. "I'd like some of it,
for I'm bust. I must tell Jack. I don't dare to tackle him alone."




CHAPTER IV.

A FOILED ROBBER.


In the grand rush to the newly discovered gold-fields all classes were
represented. There were men of education, representatives of all the
learned professions, men versed in business, and along with them
adventurers and men of doubtful antecedents, graduates of prisons and
penitentiaries. Bill Crane, introduced in the last chapter, belonged to
the latter undesirable class. He had served a term at Sing-Sing as a
housebreaker, and later another term in a Western penitentiary. He had
come to California with a prejudice against honest labor, and a
determination to make a living by the use of the peculiar talents on
which he had hitherto relied. He had spent a week at River Bend, chiefly
at the saloon of Missouri Jack, whom he found a congenial spirit, and
had picked up a little money from flats like the young Bostonian; but,
on the whole, he had found it an unprofitable field for the exercise of
his special talents.

"I must make a raise somehow," he bethought himself, "and then I'll make
tracks for some other settlement."

Precisely how to raise the fund of which he stood in need was difficult
to decide. Moneyed men were not plenty at River Bend. Captain Fletcher
and his party had been at work but a short time, and were not likely to
have collected much.

As we know, Bill Crane overheard a part of the closing conversation
between Tom and John Miles. From this he learned that Miles, besides his
own money, would be in charge of seventy-five dollars belonging to our
young hero. It was not much, but it was something.

"If the whole doesn't come to over two hundred dollars, I can make it
do," thought Crane. "It will get me out of this beastly hole, and carry
me to San Francisco."

John Miles slept by himself under a small tent at the northern end of
the small encampment. He looked like a man who ate well and slept well,
and this would be favorable to Bill Crane, who proposed to effect the
robbery in the night. He had half a mind to secure the aid of Missouri
Jack, but then Jack would expect to go shares in the "plunder," and
there was likely to be little enough for one. So Bill decided to make
the attempt alone.

In a small camp like that at River Bend, the movements and plans of each
individual were generally known. So it was generally understood that
John Miles intended to start on Thursday for the city.

The previous evening he spent with Tom and Ferguson, with whom he was
more intimate than any others of the party. He would not have been drawn
to the Scotchman, but for his being Tom's room-mate. Through him he came
to appreciate and respect the Scot's sterling virtues, and to overlook
his dry, phlegmatic manner.

"I hope you'll have good luck, Mr. Miles," said Tom.

"Thank you, my boy."

"I would join with my young friend Tom," said Ferguson, "if I were quite
clear in my mind whether good luck is the right term to use."

"Don't you think some men are luckier than others, Mr. Ferguson?" asked
Tom.

"Some men are more successful, doubtless; but what we call good luck,
generally comes from greater industry, good judgment, and, above all,
the prompt use of opportunities."

"There is something in that," said Miles; "but when two men work side by
side with equal industry, and one finds a nugget worth thousands of
dollars, while the other plods along at a few dollars a day, isn't there
some luck there?"

"It may be so," said the Scotchman, cautiously, "but such cases are
exceptional."

"So one boy is born to an inheritance of wealth and another to an
inheritance of hard work. Isn't there any luck there?"

"The luck may be on the side of the poor boy," was the reply. "He is
further removed from temptation."

John Miles laughed.

"Well, at any rate, it seems you believe in luck after all. I am sure
you both wish me to be prosperous, whether you call it luck or by some
other name. Tom, if I meet with any good opening that I think will suit
you, I shall write you. You don't want to stay here, particularly?"

"No; the place is not so pleasant since these new people have come here.
Missouri Jack isn't a neighbor that I like."

"He is exerting a bad influence," said Ferguson. "I am afraid Peabody
visits him too often for his own good."

"He ought to have stayed in Boston," said Miles. "He is not the man for
such a life as ours. He is too delicate to work, or thinks he is, and I
see no other reliable road to success."

"I saw Peabody reeling out of the saloon this afternoon," said Tom. "I
asked him if he considered it was 'high-toned' to drink in a saloon, as
that is the word he is always using, but he said it didn't make much
difference out here, where he wasn't known."

"Peabody isn't overstocked with brains, though he does come from
Boston," said Miles.

Ten o'clock came, and Miles rose to go.

"I must have a good night's rest," he said, "for to-morrow night must
see me many miles on my road. Tom, I will attend to that commission of
yours just as soon as I have the opportunity."

"Thank you, Mr. Miles."

John Miles walked slowly toward his tent. Arrived there, he threw
himself down on his rude couch, and in less than fifteen minutes, he was
sound asleep. He had done his usual day's work, and made some
preparations for his journey besides, and these made slumber sweet and
refreshing.

Before settling himself for the night, however, Miles carefully
deposited a bag of gold-dust under his head, wrapped up in an extra pair
of pantaloons. Had he known that Bill Crane had formed a plan to rob him
that very night, he would have taken extra precautions, but he was not
inclined to be suspicious, or to anticipate danger.

Perhaps an hour later, Tom, who found himself unusually restless, got up
from his hard couch, leaving Ferguson fast asleep, and went out into
the air, thinking that a walk would do him good and dispose him to
sleep. The night was dark, but not wholly so. There was no moon, but a
few stars were shining; and as his eyes became accustomed to the faint
light, he could easily distinguish objects at the distance of a few
rods.

Tom's thoughts reverted to his humble home, more than three thousand
miles away. Probably the fact that he had committed to John Miles a sum
of money to send to his father, had turned his thoughts in that
direction.

"Father will be glad to get the seventy-five dollars," thought Tom, "and
I am sure he will need it. I wish it could get there more quickly, but
it is a long way off."

Tom was not homesick, and was far from wishing himself back, with his
object in coming yet unaccomplished, but it did occur to him, that he
would like to see his father and mother, and brothers and sisters, if
only for a few minutes.

When he came out he had no particular direction in mind in which he
wished to walk, but chance directed his steps toward the tent of his
friend, John Miles.

When he came near it, his attention was arrested by the sight of a
crouching figure which appeared to be entering the tent. His first
thought was, that Miles, like himself, had got up from his couch and was
just returning. He was on the point of calling out "John," when a sudden
doubt and suspicion silenced him.--"Might not it be a robber?"

Tom was determined to find out. He crept nearer, so that he could have a
clearer view of the figure.

"It's Bill Crane!" he said to himself, with sudden recognition. "What's
he up to?"

Tom could guess. He didn't know the man's antecedents, but he had read
his character aright. He was instantly on the alert. Crane evidently was
on a thief's errand, and was likely to steal not only Miles's money but
Tom's. Our hero was alive to the emergency, and resolved to foil him. He
had his revolver with him; for in the unsettled state of society, with
no one to enforce the laws, and indeed no laws to enforce, it was the
custom for all men to go armed.

Tom was not long left in doubt as to Crane's intentions. He saw him
cautiously pulling at something in the tent, and felt sure that it was
the bag of treasure. He decided that the time had come to act.

"Put that back," he exclaimed in boyish, but clear, commanding tone.

Bill Crane turned suddenly, panic-stricken.

He saw Tom standing a few feet from him, with a revolver in his hand.

All was not lost. He might, he thought, intimidate the boy.

"Mind your business, you young cub," he growled.

"What are you about?" demanded Tom.

"I am going to sleep with Miles. He invited me. Does that satisfy you?"

"No, it doesn't, for I know that it's a lie. You are here to rob him."

"You'd better not insult me, boy, or I'll have your life."

"Get up this instant and leave the tent, or I'll fire," said Tom,
resolutely.

"A young cub like you can't frighten me. That shooting-iron of yours
isn't loaded," said Bill Crane, rather uneasily.

"It'll be rather a bad thing for you to take the risk," said Tom, with a
coolness that surprised himself, for the situation was a strange one for
a boy brought up in a quiet New England farming town.

"What do you want of me?" growled the desperado, uncomfortably, for he
was satisfied that the weapon was loaded, and Tom looked as if he would
shoot.

"I want you to leave that tent at once," said Tom.

"Suppose I don't."

"Then I shall fire at you."

"And be hung for attempted murder."

"I think I could explain it," said our hero. "You know very well what
will happen to you if you are caught."

Bill Crane did know. Hanging was the penalty for theft in the early
days of California, and he had no desire to swing from the branch of a
tree.

"You're a young fool!" he said roughly, as he rose from his stooping
posture. "I wanted to ask Miles to do a little commission for me in
Frisco. I had no thought of robbing him."

"You can see him in the morning about it," said Tom, resolutely.

"I'll be even with you for this," said the foiled thief, as he sullenly
obeyed the boy, half-ashamed to do so.

Tom went back to his tent, aroused Ferguson, and the two took turns in
guarding the tent of Miles during the night. Tom did not wish to awaken
him, for he needed rest on the eve of a long and fatiguing journey.




CHAPTER V.

MILES SETS OUT ON HIS JOURNEY.


"When Miles woke up in the morning he found Tom beside him.

"Hallo, Tom!" he said, in some surprise. "This is an early call."

"I have been here half the night," said Tom, quietly.

"How is that?"

"I was afraid you would be robbed."

"Did you have any particular reason for fearing it?" asked Miles,
quickly.

Thereupon Tom described his chance visit of the evening before, and what
he saw. As might have been expected, John Miles was indignant.

"The miserable sneak! I'd like to wring his neck," he exclaimed. "Did
you say he had his hand upon the bag of gold-dust, Tom?"

"Yes; I distinctly saw him attempting to draw it out from under your
head."

"If the boys knew of this, Crane's fate would be sealed. A thief in a
mining camp has a short shrift."

"You mean he would be hung?" asked Tom, in surprise.

"Yes, he would grace a limb of yonder tree, and I am not sure but it
would be the best way to dispose of him."

Tom shuddered.

"It would be a terrible fate," he said. "I should like to see him
punished, but I don't want him hanged."

"Then you will have to keep your mouth shut. Once let the boys get hold
of what happened, and nothing will save him."

"Then I shall keep it to myself."

"I will see Crane, and let him understand that I am aware of the attempt
he made," said Miles.

After breakfast he came upon Crane within a few rods of Missouri Jack's
saloon.

"Look here, Bill Crane," said Miles, "I've got something to say to you."

"What is it?" returned Crane, sullenly, looking ill at ease.

"I understand you favored me with a visit, last night."

"Who told you so?"

"Tom Nelson."

"The young cub had better mind his own business," growled Crane, in a
menacing tone.

"He did me a service in preventing your intended theft."

"If he says I meant to rob you, he lies!"

"Nevertheless, if he should make public what he saw, the boys would be
likely to believe him rather than you," said Miles, significantly.

"Is he going to tell?" asked Crane, nervously.

"He has told me, but is not likely to speak of it to others, being
unwilling that you should suffer the punishment you deserve."

"He is very kind," sneered Bill Crane, but he felt very much relieved.

"You probably owe your life to his kindness," said Miles, quietly. "He
tells me you wish me to do something for you in Frisco."

"I've changed my mind," said Crane, abruptly; "I may go there myself,
soon."

Miles smiled.

"I thought it might be something urgent," he said, "since it led you to
come to my tent at midnight."

"I thought you would be starting away early this morning."

"Well thought of, Bill Crane; but it is only fair to tell you that I
don't believe a word you say. I have one thing to say to you before I
go, and you had better bear it in mind. If you harm a hair of Tom
Nelson's head, and I believe you quite capable of it, I will never rest
till I have found you out and punished you for it."

"I am not afraid of you, John Miles," retorted Crane, but he looked
uncomfortable.

"You will have cause to be, if you injure Tom."

Miles walked off, leaving behind him a bitter enemy.

"I _hate_ him--him and the boy too!" muttered Bill Crane. "If I dared, I
would put my mark on him before he leaves the camp."

But Crane did not dare. He knew that he was in a very critical position.
His safety depended on the silence of two persons--one of whom would
soon be gone. He was not aware that Ferguson also knew of his attempted
crime, or the danger would have seemed greater. However much he thirsted
for vengeance, it would not do to gratify it now. He must bide his time.

Bill Crane was cunning as well as malignant. He decided to quiet Tom's
suspicions if he could, and ensure his continued silence, by an
affectation of friendliness. He waited till he saw our hero washing dust
beyond earshot of any listeners, and strolled up to him.

"How are you getting on, Tom?" he asked, with an appearance of
friendliness.

Tom looked up quickly. Considering all that had happened, he was
somewhat struck by Crane's effrontery.

"Fairly well," he answered coldly.

"Shan't I relieve you a few minutes?" proposed Crane.

"No, thank you."

"It's pretty hard work, and don't pay as well as it might. I think
California's a humbug, for my part."

"Have you tried washing for gold?" asked Tom. "I haven't seen you at
work."

"Not here. I've tried it elsewhere, but it's slow."

"Then, why do you stay here?" asked Tom, naturally.

Crane shrugged his shoulders.

"Because I haven't money to get away," he said. "I'm waiting for
something to turn up. If I could only get to Frisco, I would go into
some business. I would like to have gone with Miles."

"Was that what you were going to propose to him, last night?" asked Tom,
dryly.

"Yes, I wanted to speak to him on that subject. I had a great mind to
ask him to lend me a little money, and take me along with him. I would
have arranged to pay him soon after we reached Frisco."

Tom knew that the fellow was lying, and remained silent.

"You made a little mistake about my intentions," continued Bill Crane,
smoothly, "but perhaps it was natural under the circumstances."

Tom thought it was, but still preserved silence, much to Crane's
discomfiture.

Bill Crane eyed him sharply, and saw his incredulity, but for that he
cared little, if only he could secure his silence.

"I think you will see that it isn't fair to me to speak of this matter,"
he continued.

"I had made up my mind not to speak of it," said Tom. "I don't want to
get you into trouble."

"Good-morning, Mr. Crane," said Lawrence Peabody, who had just come up.

"Good-morning, Peabody. I was watching our friend Tom. How are you
getting on?"

"I haven't done anything yet to-day. It's dirty work. I don't think
it's fit for a gentleman; Tom, there, is used to work, and he don't
mind."

"Shall we go round to Jack's?"

"All right!"

And the two walked away together.

"I am sorry Peabody doesn't keep better company," Tom said to himself.
"Bill Crane won't do him any good."




CHAPTER VI.

ROBBED IN HIS SLEEP.


Tom was right in concluding that Bill Crane's influence over Peabody was
anything but good. The young Bostonian, however, was not long subjected
to it. During the night following John Miles's departure, the little
settlement at River Bend was called upon to deplore the loss of an
eminent member.

In brief, somewhere between midnight and dawn Mr. William Crane took his
departure, without the ceremony of leave-taking. Had he gone alone no
one perhaps would have felt any violent sorrow, but he took with him a
horse belonging to Adam Dietrich, an industrious young German, who had
only recently arrived. No one had seen the two go together, but it was
only natural to suppose that Crane had spirited away the horse.

Dietrich borrowed a horse, and, accompanied by a friend, set out in
search of the thief, but returned at night unsuccessful. Had it been wet
weather, it might have been possible to track the fugitive; but it was
very dry, and the trail was soon lost. It was almost impossible to tell
what direction Crane would choose, and continued pursuit would not pay,
so Adam sadly returned to his work.

Little doubt was entertained among the miners that Crane was responsible
for the loss of the horse. Had he been caught, there would have been
small chance for him, so generally was he pronounced guilty. A few of
his companions, especially Missouri Jack, defended him.

"Bill Crane wouldn't steal a horse any more than I would," said Jack;
and there were those who agreed with him without acquitting Bill. "Bill
ain't no saint, but he ain't a thief."

Whether Jack believed what he said, admits of a doubt. Crane needed a
different advocate to clear him from suspicion.

It may as well be stated that Crane did steal the horse. He had a
decided objection to walking as long as he could ride, and, having no
animal of his own, annexed the property of his neighbor.

He had two motives which influenced him to leave the settlement. First,
he was in Tom's power, and he was by no means certain that our hero
would keep silence touching his night-attempt at robbery. In the second
place, he still coveted the bag of gold-dust which John Miles carried
away with him. He had been prevented from taking it; but, as Miles was
travelling alone, he foresaw a better chance of success if he should
follow on his track.

How or under what circumstances he should make the new attempt he left
to be decided later. The first thing, obviously, was to overtake him.

Crane experienced the same difficulty in tracking Miles that had led to
the failure of his own pursuers. It was only on the fifth day, that, as
he halted his steed on the hillside, and cast long glances about him, he
caught sight, a mile away, of the object of his pursuit. He could not
mistake the sturdy, broad-shouldered figure, and large, massive head.

"That's Miles, sure enough!" he exclaimed, joyfully. "I thought I had
missed him, but I'm in luck. That bag must be mine."

The most direct course was to ride up in the fashion of a highwayman,
and demand the bag. But Crane did not mean to proceed in this fashion.
Physically, though not a weak man, he was not a match for Miles, and he
knew it. Cunning must supply the place of strength. He knew that Miles
was a sound sleeper, and could think of no better plan than repeating
the visit he had made in camp. It was already late in the afternoon when
he caught sight of the sturdy miner. It was his policy now to keep him
in sight, but not to approach near enough for recognition. Once seen,
Miles would be on his guard, and the game would be spoiled. Crane
halted, therefore, and drew back within the shadow of the trees,
henceforth advancing cautiously.

John Miles did not once turn back. Had he done so, it is quite possible
that he might have caught a glimpse of his pursuer. He had travelled
since morning, and his faithful horse was beginning to show signs of
fatigue.

"You are tired, my poor Dick," he said kindly, stroking the horse. "You
deserve supper and rest, and you shall have it."

Dick appeared to understand what his rider said, for he gave a short
neigh of satisfaction.

John Miles looked around him. Just ahead was a large tree, under whose
broad branches it would be pleasant to recline. Not far away was a
slender mountain-stream trickling over the rocks. Nothing could have
been better.

Miles slid from his horse and made preparations to encamp for the night,
first leading his faithful steed to the stream, where he quenched his
thirst. Then he brought out his slender stock of provisions and partook
of supper.

"It's pleasant to rest after a long day's ride," soliloquized Miles. "I
must have made forty miles to-day. I could easily have gone farther, had
it been on the prairies at home, but these mountain-roads are hard upon
man and beast."

After supper Miles threw himself upon the ground, and his mind became
busy with his plans and prospects.

"I shall reach Frisco in three days, according to my calculations," he
reflected; "and then, first of all, I must attend to Tom's commission.
That's a good boy, Tom. I wish he were here with me to-night. Why didn't
I urge him to come with me? He is not doing very well where he is, and
there are plenty of chances for a smart boy in the city. If I find any
opening for him, I will send for him. I don't know what gives me such an
interest in that boy, but I'd sooner do him a good turn than any man I
know. I hope that thief Crane won't play any trick upon him. If he does,
I swear I'll get even with him."

John Miles little suspected that he himself stood in more peril from the
man he denounced than our hero. Had he known that Bill Crane was lurking
in the vicinity, he would scarcely have courted slumber so fearlessly.

Physical fatigue and the stillness of outward nature speedily brought
on a feeling of drowsiness that was not long in bringing sleep. Twilight
had hardly given place to night when our traveller had become "to dumb
forgetfulness a prey."

This was what Bill Crane had been waiting for. He rightly calculated
that Miles would soon be asleep. He inferred this from his own feelings.
He, too, had travelled many miles, and felt drowsy; but, with the object
he had in view near accomplishment, he was able to resist the promptings
of nature.

Crane rode till he was but a few rods from Miles, then dismounted and
tethered his horse. With stealthy step he approached the sleeper. With
satisfaction he regarded the upturned face of the man whom, if waking,
he would have feared, and noted his deep, regular breathing.

"You wouldn't sleep so sound, John Miles," he said to himself, "if you
knew I was standing over you. How easily I could put a bullet into you!
But then I wouldn't have the satisfaction of anticipating your
disappointment when you wake up and find your treasure gone! No, you
may live. I have no use for your life, that is, if you don't wake up. In
that case, I may have to kill you."

The bag of gold-dust lay under the head of Miles. He knew of no better
place for it, calculating that any attempt at removal would arouse him.
So it might under ordinary circumstances, but unusual fatigue made him
sleep like a log. Bill Crane kneeled down, and by delicate manipulation
succeeded in drawing the bag from beneath the sleeper's head. Lest the
removal of the pillow might awaken Miles, he replaced it by a coat,
which he folded up so as to produce about the same elevation above the
ground.

The transfer was made, without in the least interfering with the
slumbers of the tired traveller.

Bill Crane rose to his feet, triumphant. Not only was he possessed of a
sum of which he stood sorely in need, but he had the satisfaction of
outwitting his adversary. Moreover, he had obtained Tom's money in
addition, and thus revenged himself upon the boy who had once thwarted
him.

"Good-by, John Miles!" he said, lifting his hat mockingly. "Sorry to
inconvenience you, but can't help it. A long sleep, and pleasant
dreams!"

Thus speaking, he turned away, unconscious that he had been observed by
a third party.




CHAPTER VII.

THE HEATHEN CHINEE.


This third party belonged to that peculiar race immortalized by Bret
Harte. He was a heathen Chinee! His face was smooth and bland, and wore
an expression of childlike innocence which was well calculated to
deceive. Ah Sin possessed the usual craft of his countrymen, and
understood very well how to advance his worldly fortunes. He belonged to
the advance guard of immigrants from the Central Flowery Kingdom, and
with a companion, Ah Jim, was engaged in mining in the immediate
neighborhood. His gains had not been great thus far, but then his
expenses had amounted to little or nothing. He and his friend had
brought two bags of rice from San Francisco, and they were well
satisfied with this solitary article of diet.

Ah Sin, from a distance, had seen John Miles encamp for the night, and,
impelled by curiosity or a more questionable motive, had approached to
take a view of the stranger. Before reaching him he caught sight of Bill
Crane, and his almond eyes straightway watched the movements of that
gentleman, while he himself kept sufficiently in the background to
escape observation.

When he saw Crane stealthily remove the bag from under the sleeper's
head, he became very much interested, and a bland smile overspread his
face, while his cue vibrated gently with approval.

"'Melican man very smart," he murmured to himself. "He steal his
friend's money while he sleep."

My readers are probably aware that our Mongolian visitors find a
difficulty in pronouncing the letter _r_, and invariably replace it by
_l_.

"Suppose other 'Melican man wake up, he make a low," continued Ah Sin,
softly.

But the other 'Melican man did not wake up, and Bill Crane got away with
his booty, as we already know. Cautiously the Chinaman followed him,
and ascertained where he intended to pass the night. It was at a
moderate distance from the cabin which the two Chinamen had selected for
their mining camp.

Bill Crane jumped from his horse, stretched his limbs, and gaped.

"I'm powerful sleepy," he soliloquized. "I can't go any farther
to-night. I don't like to rest so near Miles, but I can be on the road
before he wakes up. I guess it will be safe enough."

Crane, having made up his mind to rest, rolled himself up in his
blanket, and stretched himself out, first tying his horse to a sapling.
The place was retired, and he felt moderately confident that, even if he
overslept himself, he would not be discovered.

"I'd like to see Miles when he discovers his loss," he said to himself,
smiling at the thought. "He'll be ready to tear his hair, and won't have
the least idea how the gold-dust was spirited away. You excel me in
brute strength, John Miles, but one thing I am pretty sure of, you
haven't got my brains," and he complacently tapped his forehead.

"There must be at least two hundred dollars' worth in that bag," he
reflected. "It isn't a great haul, but it will do. It will last me some
time, and perhaps start me in something in Frisco. Bill Crane, you've
done a good stroke of business to-day. You are entitled to a good
night's rest, and you shall have it."

First, however, he concealed the bag. He did not think it safe to place
it under his head as Miles had done. He scooped a hole in the earth near
by, deposited the bag, replaced the dirt, and spread a few leaves over
the top.

"No one will think of searching there," thought Crane. "Even if Miles
himself surprises me here, he won't suspect anything."

Bill Crane felt that he was unusually sharp and crafty, and felt great
contempt for the stupidity of the man whom he had overreached. The time
was not far off when he had occasion to doubt whether he had not
overrated his own artfulness.

A pair of almond eyes, lighted up with mild wonder, followed closely
all the movements of William Crane. When the bag was concealed, and
Crane lay down to sleep, the Chinaman nodded blandly, and remarked
softly, "All light! Me go find Ah Jim."

Ah Sin had to walk but half a mile to find the partner of his toils. Ah
Sin and Ah Jim, though not related to each other, were as like as two
peas. The same smooth face, the same air of childlike confidence, the
same almond eyes, a pigtail of the same length, a blouse and loose pants
of the same coarse cloth, were characteristic of both.

When the two met, they straightway plunged into a conversation in which
Ah Sin had most to say.

Ah Jim listened attentively, and was evidently well pleased with what
his companion said. I am afraid my young friends are not well up in the
Chinese tongue, and would not understand the conversation, however
faithfully reported. They must infer what it was from what followed.

The two Chinamen bent their steps towards the resting-place of Bill
Crane. Ah Sin carried a bag of about the same size as the one Crane had
stolen, which he carefully filled with sandy earth. With stealthy steps
these two innocent heathen drew near the spot, and looked searchingly at
the recumbent form of the eminent representative of American
civilization.

Ah Sin turned to Ah Jim with a pleased smile.

"All light!" he said. "'Melican man asleep."

A similar smile lighted up the face of Ah Jim. "'Melican man sleep
sound," he said; "no wake up."

Quite unaware of the honor done him by the special Chinese embassy which
had taken this early opportunity to call upon him, Bill Crane slept on.
There was a smile upon his upturned face as if he were dreaming of
something pleasant. He should have been a prey to remorse, if his
conscience had done its duty, but Bill's conscience had grown callous,
and gave him very little trouble. It was only when he was found out that
he became sensible of a kind of mental discomfort which came as near to
remorse as he was capable of feeling.

Reassured by the deep, regular breathing of the sleeper, Ah Sin and his
friend proceeded to their work. The former drew a slender stiletto-like
knife from a fan which protruded above the collar of his blouse, and,
stooping down, began skilfully to remove the dirt which covered the bag
of gold-dust. From time to time he stole a glance at the sleeper to mark
the first indications of returning consciousness. It was well for Crane
that his sleep continued. A Chinaman does not set a high value upon
human life, and the long stiletto would have been plunged into the
'Melican man before he was well aware of what was going on. Bill Crane's
good genius saved him from this sudden exit by continuing the profound
slumber in which he was repairing the ravages of fatigue.

The Chinamen therefore met with no interruption in their work. They drew
out from its place of concealment the buried bag, and emptying the
contents of their own poured into it the combined treasures of Miles and
poor Tom. Then they filled the first bag with the worthless dust which
they had brought with them, and carefully reburied it in the ground.

They did their work so carefully and well that no one was likely to
suspect that the bag had been tampered with.

Having done their work, Ah Sin and his friend smiled upon each other in
bland satisfaction, which was further expressed by a low guttural
chuckle.

"All light," said Ah Sin, with a nod.

"All light," chimed in Ah Jim, nodding in return.

A consciousness of lofty virtue could not have produced a happier
expression upon any face than appeared on the mild countenance of the
Chinamen.

"'Melican man much supplised when he wake up," remarked Ah Jim.

"Chinamen make much money," returned his friend.

The two enterprising visitors returned to their quarters, and concealed
their booty in a safe place. Then they too lay down and slept the sleep
of confiding innocence.

Bret Harte has not told us whether the heathen Chinee has a conscience;
but if he has, neither Ah Sin nor Ah Jim experienced any inconvenience
from its possession. Neither they nor Bill perhaps can fairly be taken
as fair representatives of the different religious systems under which
they were trained. Bill Crane could hardly claim any superiority over
the heathen Chinee in point of honesty.




CHAPTER VIII.

BILL CRANE'S DISAGREEABLE DISCOVERY.


It was five o'clock in the morning when Bill Crane opened his eyes. He
felt refreshed by his night's sleep, yet under ordinary circumstances
would have deferred getting up for at least an hour. But the
consciousness that he had a treasure to guard, and the knowledge that he
was at any moment liable to be called to account by the real owner,
whose camp was scarcely more than a mile distant, aroused him to
exertion.

"I must get away while John Miles is still asleep," he bethought
himself. "Let me get to Frisco first, and I can at once dispose of it,
and he will never find me out."

Crane did not wait to prepare breakfast. That he could take on the road
an hour or two later, when he felt safe from interruption. He rose and
shook himself. This was his scanty toilet. Next he must take the bag
from its place of concealment, and then he could commence his journey.

While uncovering the bag, Crane did not discover that it had been
tampered with, partly because it was still there. It was natural to
suppose that, if discovered by a third party, it would be carried away.
He did not even open the bag, not thinking it necessary.

"John Miles hasn't waked up yet," he said to himself with a smile. "When
he does, there'll be some swearing, I'll be bound. You're a good boy,
John Miles, but you ain't so smart as you think you are. I think I have
got the start of you this time."

Bill Crane rode off smiling.

His course led him by the camp of the Chinamen. Early as it was they
were astir. Ah Sin saw the rider, and at once recognized him as the man
he had robbed. How could Crane know that those pleasant-faced barbarians
had served him such a trick?

"Hallo, Chinamen!" he said aloud. "Have they got out here already? I'll
speak to them. Hallo, John!" he said, halting his horse, for even then
every Chinaman was John.

"How do, John?" replied Ah Sin, smiling blandly.

"My name isn't John, but no matter. What are you two doing?"

"Looking for gold," was the reply.

"Do you find any?"

"Velly little. Bad place."

"Have you been in San Francisco?"

"Yes, John."

"Why didn't you stay there?"

"Too many Chinamen--too little washee,--washee."

"What have you got in the way of provisions? Mine are stale. I'd like to
buy some of you."

"We have got a little lice, John."

"Got a little what? Oh, I know: you mean rice. Why don't you pronounce
your English better?"

"Because Chinamen not 'Melican men."

"Then I suppose I may as well be moving on, as I can't get anything out
of you. Oh, have you got any tea, John?"

"Yes, John."

"Got any made?"

Ah Sin produced a cup, for he and his friend had just prepared their
breakfast, and being warm, Bill Crane gulped it down with a relish.

"After all, a man needs some warm drink in the morning," he said to
himself. "How much to pay, John?"

"Nothing, John. 'Melican man welcome."

"John, you're a gentleman, or rather both of you are gentlemen, even if
you are heathens. I'll remember you in my prayers."

The eminent Christian, Bill Crane, rode off from the Chinese camp,
calmly confident of his moral superiority to the two benighted heathen
whom he left behind him. Whether he remembered his promise to intercede
for them in prayer is a little doubtful, or would have been, if he had
had occasion to pray himself. It is to be feared that prayer and William
Crane had long been strangers.

As Crane rode away, the two Chinamen exchanged glances. A gentle smile
lighted up their yellow faces, and they were doubtless thinking of
something pleasant. They exchanged a few guttural remarks which I should
like to be able to translate, for they doubtless referred to Bill Crane,
whom they had kindly supplied with a cup of tea gratis. Yet, perhaps,
considering all things, it was the dearest cup of tea Crane had ever
drank, since it was the only return he got for a bag of gold-dust worth
over two hundred dollars. But there is an old saying, "Where ignorance
is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise." Crane was just as happy as if the bag
really contained gold-dust. But this happy ignorance was not to last
long.

After riding five or six miles our traveller thought he might venture to
dismount for rest and refreshment. He selected as his breakfast-table
the green sward beside a sparkling mountain streamlet. He dismounted,
permitting his horse to graze while he took out the stale provisions
which must constitute his morning meal. They were not very palatable,
and Crane sighed for the breakfasts of old, the memory of which at this
moment was very tantalizing. But he comforted himself with the thought
that he had the means of making up for his enforced self-denial when he
reached San Francisco.

This naturally led him to open the bag, and feast his eyes over his
easily obtained wealth. He untied the string, and with a smile of
pleased anticipation peered at the contents.

His face changed suddenly.

Was he dreaming? In place of the shining dust, his eyes rested on--sand.

He hastily thrust in his finger, and stirred the grains. But nothing
else was to be discovered. The bag contained nothing but worthless sand.

Crane stared at the deceptive bag in the most lugubrious astonishment.
Surely the bag contained gold-dust when he concealed it. There could be
no doubt on that point, for he had opened it and seen the contents for
himself. But in that case, how could such a change have been effected in
one night? It had not been touched; so, at any rate, he believed. He had
found it in the morning in the exact spot where he had placed it
overnight, and yet--

Bill Crane took another look at the contents of the bag, hoping that he
had been deceived by some ocular delusion, but the second examination
brought him no comfort. He sank back, feeling in a state of mental and
bodily collapse.

Never was poor thief so utterly bewildered as Bill Crane. He could
almost believe that some magical transformation had been practiced at
his expense. Was it possible, he thought, that John Miles, discovering
his loss, had visited him, and played this trick upon him? He could not
believe this. It was not in accordance with John's direct,
straightforward nature. Instead of acting in this secret manner, he
would have sternly charged Crane with the robbery, and punished him on
the spot. Leaving him out of the account, then, the mystery deepened. It
never occurred to Crane to suspect the Chinamen who had so hospitably
furnished him with a cup of tea. Even if they had come into his mind, he
would have been puzzled to account for their knowledge of his having the
bag in his possession.

Bill Crane was decidedly unhappy. His glowing anticipations of
prosperity, based upon the capital contained in the bag, were rudely
broken in upon, and the airy fabric of his hopes dashed to the ground.
He felt that fortune had been unkind--that he was a deeply injured man.
Had his claim to the stolen property been the best possible, he could
not have felt the injustice of fate more keenly.

"It's always the way!" he exclaimed in deep dejection. "I always was
unlucky. Just as I thought I was on my feet again, this cursed gold-dust
turns to sand. Here am I out in the wilderness without an ounce to my
name. I don't know what to do. I'd give a good deal, if I had it, to
find out what became of the gold-dust."

As he spoke, Crane, in a fit of ill-temper, kicked the unlucky bag to a
distance, and slowly and disconsolately mounting his horse, plodded on
his way. All his cheerfulness was gone. It was some comfort, but still
scant, to think that John Miles was as unlucky as himself. Both had
become penniless tramps, and were alike the sport of Fortune. There was
a difference in respect to their desert, however. John Miles may
rightly claim the reader's sympathy, while Bill Crane must be considered
to have met with a disaster which he richly deserved.




CHAPTER IX.

CLEANED OUT.


John Miles slept long, and awoke feeling refreshed and cheerful. He had
a healthy organization, and never failed to eat and sleep well. Like
Crane, he had no toilet to make, but sprang to his feet already dressed.

His first thought was naturally of his treasure. His heart gave a quick
bound when he failed to discover it in the place where he remembered to
have put it. In dismay he instituted a search, which, of course, proved
unavailing.

"Who could have taken it?" thought Miles, large drops of perspiration
gathering upon his forehead.

All about him was loneliness. He could see no signs of life. Yet the bag
could not have gone away of itself. There was certainly human agency in
the matter.

Miles confessed to himself with sadness that he had been imprudent to
leave the bag where it would naturally excite the cupidity of any
passing adventurer. That it must have been taken by such a one seemed
evident. In that case, the chance of recovering it seemed slender
enough. Nevertheless, John Miles decided to make an effort, hopeless as
it was, to discover the whereabouts of his lost property.

"If it had been mine, I wouldn't have cared so much," he said to
himself, with a sigh; "but poor Tom's money is gone too. I will make it
up to him if I live, but I am afraid his father will be inconvenienced
by the delay."

Miles made preparations for his departure, and strode away, looking
searchingly to the right and left in search of something that might
throw light upon his loss. Presently he espied the two Chinamen. Could
they have taken it? He would at any rate speak to them.

"Good-morning, John," he said, when he came within hearing distance.

Ah Sin bobbed his head, and repeated "Good-morning, John."

"Do you live here?"

"Yes, we washee-washee for gold."

"Does anyone else live near by?"

The two inclined their heads, and answered in the negative.

"Have you seen anyone pass last night or this morning?"

"Yes," answered Ah Sin. "'Melican man stay all nightee--over there.
Chinaman give him a cup of tea this morning."

"How long ago?" asked Miles, eagerly.

"Two hours," answered Ah Jim.

"In what direction did he go?"

The two Chinamen readily told him.

Miles decided to tell them of the loss of his bag of gold-dust. Possibly
they could throw some light upon his loss.

"Some one stole a small bag of dust from me last night," he said. "I
suspect it was the man you describe. Did he appear to have any such
article with him?"

"Yes," answered Ah Sin, who, with natural cunning, saw that this
information would divert suspicion from them. "It was so large,"
indicating the size with his hands.

Of course his description was accurate, for he had very good reason to
know the size of the bag.

"He must have been the thief," said Miles, eagerly. "In what direction
did you say he went?"

Ah Sin pointed to the west.

"I will follow him. It is on my way. If I catch the villain, it will be
the worse for him."

"He velly bad man," said Ah Sin, sympathizingly.

"That's where you are right, my heathen friend. Well, good-morning,
John. I am much obliged to you for your information."

"Velly welcome, John."

As John Miles rode away, Ah Sin turned to his friend Ah Jim, and
remarked,--

"S'pose he catch him, he kill him."

"All lightee!" returned Ah Jim. "He velly bad man, he thief."

The two Chinamen exchanged glances. If they had been white men, there
would have been a smile or a wink, but these children of Confucius
looked so serenely virtuous, so innocent of guile, that the most
experienced detective would have seen nothing in their faces indicating
any guilty knowledge of the lost treasure. But, guileless as they
seemed, they had proved more than a match for Bill Crane and his victim.

       *       *       *       *       *

John Miles rode away with a faint hope that he might overtake the man,
whoever he might be, who had stolen his precious bag. In due time he
reached the spot where Crane had examined the bag, and on discovering
its worthless contents, had thrown it away. The thief had not taken the
trouble to empty it.

When Miles saw it he hurried to it, hoping he might find some of the
treasure inside. Of course he was disappointed, and at the same time
bewildered.

"This is certainly my bag," he said to himself. "Here are my initials,
J. M. Then there are other marks well known to me. I could swear to it
anywhere. But how does it happen that it is full of sand, and why has
the thief thrown it away? That beats me!"

Miles decided that for some reason unknown the thief had transferred its
contents to some other bag--perhaps his own--and then had discarded the
original one, in wanton humor filling it instead with sand.

"He may have been afraid it would be found on him," thought Miles. "The
marks on the bag would have been evidence enough to condemn him. By
throwing away my bag he thinks himself safe."

His solution of the puzzle was ingenious, but as we know he erred in two
respects. Bill Crane had not filled the bag with sand and thrown it away
from prudential considerations, nor had he profited by the theft he had
committed. He had been as badly outwitted as his victim, and the profit
had gone to the bland and obliging Chinamen, who had thus far escaped
suspicion.

John Miles slackened his rein, and thought seriously and sadly of the
position to which he was reduced. What was he to do? He was, in the
expressive language of the country, "cleaned out," and brought to a pass
where he must begin life over again, with the disadvantage of being
seventy-five dollars in debt, for he was resolved that Tom's loss should
be paid back to the uttermost penny.

Presently philosophy came to his aid.

"It might have been worse," he reflected. "Two hundred dollars is too
large a sum to lose, but it wont take long to make up if I have any sort
of luck. I wish I were in San Francisco. It may trouble me to get there
without means."

When misfortune comes it is always best to look it manfully in the face,
and not to shrink from or over estimate it. John Miles had a strong,
healthy nature, with a good deal of confidence in his own resources, and
in an hour or two he was again looking hopefully forward to the future.
Not that he cherished a hope of recovering his lost money. There seemed
to be no way of identifying it, even if he should track the thief. One
ounce of gold-dust looks like another, and there is no way of
distinguishing individual property in that form.

John Miles pushed on slowly. About noon he found himself threading a
narrow cañon, shaded by gigantic redwood tress, with steep, almost
perpendicular sides, with here and there a narrow streamlet descending
in a cascade, and lighting up the darkened scene with its silvery
reflections.

"This is a pretty spot, but it would be lonely to live here," thought
Miles. "Yet," shading his eyes, "there seems to be a cabin of some sort.
Is it possible that anybody lives in this cañon?"

Ten minutes' ride brought him to a rude cabin, with a gigantic tree
spreading at a great height protecting branches over it. That it was
inhabited was clear, for in front of it stood a strongly built, robust
woman, who seemed to be nearing forty.

She bent a searching look upon the intruder, who bent his head
courteously.

"Good-morning, ma'am," said Miles.

"Good-morning, stranger," was the reply. "Where might you be going?"

"I am on my way to the city. Am I on the right track?"

"I reckon so."

"Do you live here--alone?" asked John Miles, in some curiosity.

"It looks like it, doesn't it?" returned the woman. "I've been alone
since my man pegged out."

"Is that long?"

"A matter of three weeks."

"I sympathize with you," said Miles. "You must be very lonely."

"Yes," said the widow. "Jim was good company, and I feel kind of
lonesome without him, you better believe."

"There isn't much sentiment there," thought Miles. "She doesn't appear
to be heart-broken. Do you mean to stay here alone?" he inquired. "Are
you not afraid?"

"What's there to be afraid of?"

"Some tramp or adventurer might attack and injure, or at least rob you."

"Look here, stranger! do you see that?" and the woman produced a
revolver. "Do you see that shooting-iron?"

"It looks as if it might be a good one," said Miles, who began to think
the woman better able to take care of herself than he had at first
supposed.

"You bet it is! I know how to use it, too. If one of them tramps gets in
front of it, and sasses me, he'd better say his prayers mighty quick,
for he'll need 'em. He needn't reckon much on my being a woman. I can
shoot jest as true as my man could when he was alive."




CHAPTER X.

A CALIFORNIA WIDOW.


John Miles eyed the woman curiously. There did not seem much that was
feminine left in her. Life in the wilderness had made her as bold and
self-reliant as a man. She was not compelled to plead for woman's
rights. She resolutely took a man's rights, and was prepared to
maintain them against all comers.

"I rather think you can take care of yourself, ma'am," he said.

"You can bet your bottom dollar on that, stranger," said the woman,
cheerfully. "Brown--that's my husband--knew what I was. We was ekal
partners--Brown and me--and he knew too much to tread on me."

"I'm glad I wasn't Brown," thought John Miles. "When I marry, it'll be a
woman, and not a man in petticoats."

"If you're hungry, stranger," said the woman, "just jump off that horse
of yours, and come in. I can give you a square meal, and I reckon you
haven't had one lately."

"You are right, Mrs. Brown," said Miles, dismounting with alacrity. "My
provisions are dry and stale, and I shall enjoy a square meal amazingly.
But I ought to tell you that last night I was robbed of a bag of
gold-dust, and I have nothing to pay you."

"Who asks for pay?" returned the woman. "I don't keep a hotel, but I'm
tired of eating alone. I want to see how it seems to have a man setting
opposite me agin. So come in, and I won't keep you waiting long."

"Thank you, Mrs. Brown. If you don't mind, I'll light my pipe, and sit
out here till I've had a smoke."

"You can smoke inside if you want to. I always let Brown. It makes me
feel better, now that he's pegged out, that I didn't deny him any of his
little comforts."

"Clearly Mrs. Brown was a considerate wife," thought Miles; "but she
doesn't look like a woman to fall in love with."

Tying his horse, he threw himself down on the grass, and enjoyed the
luxury of a smoke while Mrs. Brown was heard bustling about inside,
preparing the square meal which she had promised to her unexpected
guest.

Presently she reappeared.

"The victuals is ready, if you are, stranger," she said.

"I am ready, Mrs. Brown," said Miles, rising at once, and entering the
cabin.

The cabin was rough, and ill-adapted to a fastidious tenant, but it
looked comfortable. What attracted Miles most, however, was a table set
in the middle of the floor, covered with a substantial and appetizing
meal. Mrs. Brown was a fair cook--perhaps her only feminine
accomplishment. She placed Miles at the head of the table, and seated
herself opposite him. She watched his attacks upon the fare she had
provided with evident satisfaction.

"I hope you like it," she said.

"Mrs. Brown, I haven't tasted anything so good for a long time."

She nodded, with a pleased look.

"Brown allus liked my cookin," she said. "He had a good appetite most
generally, and it was a pleasure to see him eat. It's kinder lonesome
cookin' for yourself. Then, too, it takes away my appetite sittin' down
alone to eat."

"You must be very lonely, Mrs. Brown."

"Yes, its lonesome like bein' a widder. I'm kinder used to seein' a man
about the house."

"So I suppose."

"Be you a married man?" asked the lady, pointedly.

"No, ma'am."

"How old be you?"

"Twenty-eight," answered Miles, rather amused.

"Then you're old enough to get married?"

"Oh yes, I am old enough."

"Be you in love with any girl?"

"The old woman's getting curious," thought Miles. "However, I don't mind
gratifying her curiosity."

"No, I'm not in love," he replied.

Mrs. Brown eyed him thoughtfully. She seemed to be revolving some plan
in her mind.

"Take a good look at me, stranger," she said, bracing herself up, as if
on exhibition.

"Certainly," said John Miles, considerably astonished.

"I want to ask you a few questions."

"Go ahead, Mrs. Brown."

"Am I hump-backed?"

"Certainly not. Who said you were?"

"Just attend to my questions, if you please, stranger. Am I
squint-eyed?"

"Mrs. Brown must be crazy," thought Miles. However, he answered in the
negative.

"Am I as homely as a hedge-fence?" pursued the widow.

"Has anybody been calling you so? If so, tell me who it is."

"Never you mind, stranger. Am I old and wrinkled?"

"Certainly she's out of her mind," thought Miles. "I must humor her."

"I think you are a very good-looking woman," he said, soothingly.

"No, I'm not," said the strong-minded lady, "but at the same time I
ain't a scarecrow."

"Certainly not."

"Don't talk too much, stranger. I expect you're surprised at my
questions, but I'll come to the p'int at once. I'm tired of livin' here
alone. I didn't think I'd miss Brown so much. He wasn't any great shakes
of a man, but he was better than nothing. He was company for me, Brown
was, in the long evenin's, and I miss him. I've made up my mind to take
on somebody in his place, and I reckon I'd like to engage you, stranger.
Will you marry me?"

Mrs. Brown did not blush when she asked this extraordinary question. She
was entirely self-possessed, and could not have been cooler, if she had
been transacting an ordinary piece of business.

John Miles had never before received a proposal of marriage. He felt as
awkward and confused as a young girl, and began to hesitate and
stammer.

"Really, Mrs. Brown," he began, "you have taken me by surprise."

"I expect I have," said the widow, "but I'll give you time to think it
over. Brown left me I pretty comfortable, though I did more to get the
property together than he. You wouldn't think it, perhaps, but I've got
five thousand dollars in gold hid away somewheres near, and there's a
claim not far away, that belongs to me, and will pay for workin'."

"I am glad you are so well off, Mrs. Brown," said Miles.

"If you marry me," continued the widow, "you can work that claim. You're
a strong, able-bodied man, and a year from now, if you want to, we'll go
to the city, and settle down. I'm older than you; but a matter of a few
years don't make much difference. You were robbed, you told me?"

"Yes, of all that I had."

"How much was it?"

"About two hundred dollars."

"That ain't much."

"It's a good deal when it's all you have," answered Miles.

"If you marry me you won't miss it," said Mrs. Brown. "I won't give you
my money right off, for you might run off with it, but at the end of the
first year you shall have half of it. There's a parson a few miles up
the cañon, at Dirt Hole, that will marry us any time we ride over. What
do you say, stranger?"

It was an embarrassing moment for John Miles. He had no desire to
succeed the deceased Brown, notwithstanding the little property he had
left behind him. Mrs. Brown did not in the least resemble the wife of
whom he had sometimes dreamed. But how could he decline without exciting
the resentment of that singular female? He bore in mind that Mrs. Brown
carried a revolver, and she might take a notion to shoot him down. He
must temporize.

"Your proposal is a very kind and flattering one, Mrs. Brown, but I
don't care to marry just at present. I want to go to the city and try
my fortune. I've only lately arrived in California, and I am not ready
to settle down yet."

To his relief Mrs. Brown accepted his objection in good part.

"No offence, stranger," she said. "I didn't know how you might feel
about it. I've made you a fair offer."

"Indeed you have. The time may come when I shall return, and--"

"I won't promise to wait for you, stranger. Somebody else may happen
along that'll take the situation."

"It would be too much to expect you to wait for me, I admit."

"All right, stranger. You've answered fair, and now we'll let the matter
drop."

When Miles left the cabin he carried with him an addition to his stock
of provisions, for which he was indebted to Mrs. Brown's liberality. It
was evident that she bore no malice, notwithstanding her suit had been
rejected.




CHAPTER XI.

BILL CRANE'S GOOD LUCK.


About an hour after John Miles rode away from the widow's door Mr.
William Crane came in sight of the cabin. He had strayed from the direct
course, and that had delayed him. Otherwise he would not have fallen
behind Miles.

Bill Crane was in rather a melancholy mood. He had not got over his
disappointment of the morning. He was fagged out and hungry, and felt
that luck was against him. When he saw the cabin, and the widow Brown
sitting in the door-way, it instantly occurred to him that here was a
chance to get a dinner. He had nothing to pay, to be sure, but he need
say nothing about it till after the dinner was eaten.

As he rode up, he removed his hat, and said, "Good-day, ma'am."

Mrs. Brown scrutinized the new-comer with critical eyes. She decided
that he was not as good-looking as John Miles. Indeed Bill Crane never
could have been accounted handsome; but on this point the widow was not
exacting. She was looking for somebody to fill the place of her lamented
Brown, and relieve her loneliness, and it was Crane's eligibility in
this respect that she was considering. Beauty was but skin deep, as Mrs.
Brown was practical enough to admit, and she was not overstocked with
that attractive quality herself. Though Crane did not know it, the
resolute, middle-aged female, from whom he hoped to obtain a gratuitous
dinner, was making up her mind to offer him the position of husband.

"Good-day, stranger," she answered composedly. "Are you travelin' fur?"

"I'm thinkin' of goin' to Frisco," he said, "but it's a long journey and
I'm fagged out. If you have no objection, I'll stop at your place and
see if I can rest a few minutes."

"You can stop if you want to," she said. "I don't see much company, and
I like to see a new face now and then."

"So do I," said Crane, thinking a little flattery might help him;
"especially when it's the face of a good-looking woman."

"I ain't good-lookin' enough to hurt me," returned Mrs. Brown, with a
frankness which rather disconcerted and puzzled Crane, "but I don't mind
you callin' me so. If you are anyways hungry, I haven't cleared away the
dinner, and--"

"You are very kind," broke in Crane, eagerly; "I don't mind saying I am
a little bit hungry."

"All right, stranger. If you'll wait long enough for me to make some hot
tea, and warm the victuals, you shall have a chance to judge of my
cookin'."

Bill Crane was quite elated. He decided that the widow would not ask him
for payment, thus saving him from embarrassing excuses. In due time he
was called in and seated in the chair not long since occupied by John
Miles.

"You're the second man that's dined with me to-day," said the widow.

"And who was the first lucky man?" inquired Crane, suspecting at once
that it might have been Miles.

"I don't know his name, but he was a good-looking young man, who said he
had had a bag of gold-dust stolen from him."

"That's Miles," thought Crane; and he at once decided not to betray any
knowledge of him.

"He was in bad luck," said Bill. "Did he know who stole it?"

"He didn't tell me. I don't think he knew."

"That's well," thought Crane.

"Did he say where he was going?"

"To the city."

"Do you live here all the year round, Mrs.----?"

"My name's Brown, stranger."

"All I can say is, that Brown is a lucky man. Another cup of tea if you
please, Mrs. Brown."

"You might not like to exchange places with him, for all his luck,
stranger," remarked the widow.

"Indeed I would," said Bill, with a languishing look.

"He's six feet under ground!" explained Mrs. Brown, dryly.

"Dead?" ejaculated Crane.

"Yes; he's been dead these three weeks."

"And you are a widow?"

"That's so, stranger."

"But you don't mean to stay a widow?" interrogated Crane.

"Well, it is kinder lonesome. It seems natural like to have a man
round."

"I wonder if she's got any money," thought Crane. "I'll find out if I
can."

"Yes, Mrs. Brown, I feel for you," he said. "A woman can't struggle with
the world as a man can."

"I don't know about that, stranger. I can take care of myself, if that's
what you mean."

"But a woman needs a man to protect and work for her," insinuated
Crane.

"I don't need any one to protect me," said the widow; "and, as for
support, I've got a matter of five thousand dollars laid by, and a good
claim that'll pay for the workin'. I don't think I shall need to go to
the poor-house yet awhile."

Bill Crane's eyes sparkled. The widow Brown seemed wonderfully
attractive in his eyes. He was willing to barter his young affections
for five thousand dollars and a claim, even if the widow had been thrice
as homely as she was. If he had known that Mrs. Brown was bent on
marriage his way would have been clearer. His mind was made up. He would
woo and win his fair hostess if he could.

"When did Brown die?" he inquired.

"Three weeks ago, stranger."

"You must miss him."

"Yes, he was a quiet man, Brown was. He never gave me any trouble, and
it was natural to see him round."

"You must not mourn for him too much, Mrs. Brown."

"I shan't make a fool of myself," said the widow. "He's gone, and he
won't come back. There's no use cryin'."

"She's rather a queer specimen," thought Crane. "She hasn't broken her
heart, it seems."

"You ought to marry again," he said.

"I mean to," said Mrs. Brown.

"Well, that's frank," thought Crane. "There ain't any nonsense about
her."

"Your second husband will be a lucky man, Mrs. Brown."

"Well, he'll have a good livin', and, if he treats me right, he'll get
treated right too."

"This is a cold world, Mrs. Brown. I've been drifting about till I'm
tired. I'd like to settle down with a good wife."

"If you want to take Brown's place, say so," remarked the widow, in a
business-like tone.

Bill Crane was staggered by the promptness with which his hint was
taken, but did not hesitate to follow it up.

"That's what I mean," he said.

"What's your name, stranger?"

"William Crane."

"You haven't got another wife anywhere, have you?"

"Of course not."

"I've got to take your word for it, I s'pose. I guess I'll take the
risk. I'll marry you if you say so."

"How soon?" asked Crane, eagerly.

"Well, there's a parson a few miles from here. We can ride right over
and be back by sundown, if that will suit you."

"A capital idea, Mrs. Brown. You won't be Brown long," he added,
sportively. "How will you like to be called Mrs. Crane?"

"One name will do as well as another," said the widow, philosophically.

Crane wanted to make inquiries about the five thousand dollars and the
claim; but he reflected that it might be inferred that his views were
mercenary. It would be more politic to wait till after marriage. He did
not understand the character of the woman he was going to marry. She
understood very well that Crane was marrying her for her money; but she
felt lonesome, and it suited her to have a husband, and she was willing
to overlook such a trifle.

The widow had a horse of her own. Directly after dinner it was
harnessed, and the two rode over to Dirt Hole, a small mining
settlement, where the Rev. Pelatiah Pond, a Methodist minister, united
them in the bonds of matrimony.

When Mr. and Mrs. Crane reached home, Bill ventured to inquire, "Have
you got the money in the house, Mrs. Crane,--the five thousand dollars,
I mean?"

"It's put away in a safe place."

"You'd better let me take care of it for you, my dear."

"Not at present, Mr. Crane. A year from now I will let you have half of
it, if you behave yourself."

"As your husband, madam, I insist."

"Stop right there, stranger--Mr. Crane, I mean," said the bride,
decidedly. "Do you see that? and she whipped out a revolver.

"Good gracious, Mrs. Crane! Do you want to murder me?"

"No, I didn't marry you for that; but I want you to understand that the
money is in my hands, and I don't allow any man to insist. I may let you
have some of it when I get ready. Do you understand?"

"I believe I do," murmured Crane. "I'm regularly taken in and done for,"
he reflected sadly.

But directly after their return Mrs. Crane prepared a nice supper, and
Crane, as he ate it, and smoked a pipe later, began to be reconciled to
his new situation.




CHAPTER XII.

TOM RECEIVES NEWS FROM HOME.


Meanwhile Tom, happily unconscious that the money entrusted to John
Miles had been lost, continued to work diligently at his claim. His
success varied from day to day; but, on the whole, he was gaining. He
spent nothing except for absolute necessities, and in spite of all
temptations he gave a wide berth to Missouri Jack's saloon. In this way
he gained the ill-will of the saloon-keeper, who felt a certain portion
of every miner's gains ought to find its way into his till.

One evening Tom met the saloon-keeper when out walking. The latter had
not at that time given up securing Tom's patronage.

"Good-evening, young feller," said Jack.

Tom answered the greeting politely.

"Why don't you come round to the saloon evenings? We always have a jolly
crowd there. After a hard day's work it'll do you good to take a social
glass."

"I would rather not drink, thank you," said Tom.

"You ain't afraid of a little drink, I hope, are you?"

"Yes, I would rather let it alone."

"Oh, you're too good to live," said Jack, in deep disgust.

"I hope not," answered Tom, smiling; "for I hope to live a good many
years."

That was the last attempt Missouri Jack made to secure Tom as a patron.
Our hero spoke in so decided a tone that he understood the uselessness
of the attempt.

Two months passed, and Tom heard nothing from John Miles. He was not
surprised or disquieted, for he knew that mails to the interior were
very irregular, and, besides, Miles might not be fond of letter-writing.
He took it for granted that the seventy-five dollars had been forwarded
home, and were now in his father's hands. He had saved as much more, and
would like to have sent that too, for its possession gave him anxiety;
but there seemed to be no opportunity.

About this time he received two letters. The first was from John Miles,
written from San Francisco. After acquainting Tom with his loss of the
bag of gold-dust, he proceeded:--

"I should not have cared so much, Tom, had the loss been mine only; but
it was hard to think that I had lost your money too, and was unable to
pay it back. I know, from what you said, that your father needed the
money, and that the delay would put him to a good deal of inconvenience.
You shall have it all back, Tom, every cent; but you will have to wait
awhile. On reaching Frisco I got work, and soon saved up enough to pay
the debt, when, as bad luck would have it, I fell sick, and before I got
well all my money had been used up. Now I am well again, and at work,
and if I have good luck will be able soon to send on the money to your
father. I know you will understand the circumstances, and will excuse
the delay.

"The very day I discovered my loss I had a chance to marry a fortune.
You will stare at that, and wonder how it happened. At a lonely cabin I
made the acquaintance of a widow, who was looking out for a second
husband. She was left with a comfortable property, which, with her hand,
she was willing to bestow upon your friend; but she didn't tempt me
much. I believe her fortune amounted to five thousand dollars and a
claim. It would be a good chance for you, if you were old enough, Tom.

"I don't know when this letter will reach you, for the country mails--at
least to such out-of-the-way places as River Bend--go quite irregularly.
However, I hope you will get it after a while, and won't be too much
troubled about the money; if I live it shall be repaid."

Tom showed this letter to Ferguson.

"It's a pity, my lad, that the money was stolen," said the Scotchman;
"but you'll get it again. John Miles is an honest man."

"I am sure of that, Mr. Ferguson. I don't know that I ought to make him
pay it back, though. It isn't his fault that it was lost."

"That's true, my lad, and you might offer to share the loss with him,
but I doubt if he would accept your offer. He will feel better to pay it
all back."

"At any rate I will write him, and make him the offer."

"That's fair, Tom; but you'll see what he'll say."

It may be stated here that Miles utterly declined to accept any
abatement of the debt.

"I ought to have taken better care of the money," he said. "It's my
fault, and I shall pay it in full."

The next letter was from home. Tom opened and read it eagerly. It was
mainly from his father, but there was a note from each member of the
family.

His father wrote:--

     MY DEAR TOM,--We are glad to hear that you have reached
     California after a wearisome journey, and are now at work. We
     have travelled so little that we can hardly realize that you are
     more than three thousand miles away from us, with so many
     mountains, plains, and valleys between. Of course you cannot tell
     us much in your letters of your various experiences. I wish we
     could have you with us this evening, and hear some of them from
     your own lips.

     I am anxious to hear that you are succeeding in the object of
     your journey, and that you will not find the stories of the rich
     gold fields greatly exaggerated. I do not myself believe all I
     hear, yet I think there must be gold enough to pay those who
     search for it diligently. You must remember, my dear boy, that
     hard work is better than luck, and more to be relied upon. Don't
     expect to make your fortune all at once by finding a big nugget,
     but work steadily, and you will meet with more or less success.

     If you succeed moderately, I shall be glad you went away, for
     here prospects are not very good. Our little farm seems to be
     less productive every year. The soil is not very good, as you
     know, and I cannot afford fertilizers. This year the crops were
     not as good as usual, and we have felt the decrease sensibly. If
     there were not a mortgage on the farm, I could get along very
     well, but the interest now amounts to one hundred and thirty-two
     dollars annually, and it is hard to get that amount together.
     Next month sixty-six dollars come due, and I don't know how I am
     to find the money. Squire Hudson could afford to wait; but I am
     afraid he won't. The older and richer he gets, the more grasping
     he becomes, I sometimes think. However, I don't want to borrow
     trouble. If it is absolutely necessary I can sell off one of the
     cows to raise the money, and before the year comes round I think
     you will be able to help me.

     Walter, though only twelve years old,--his thirteenth birthday
     comes next month,--helps me about the farm, and is very useful in
     doing chores. He likes farm-work, and will be ready to succeed me
     in time. As for Sarah, she is a good, sensible girl, and helps
     her mother in a good many ways. Though I am a poor man, and
     always expect to remain so, I feel that I am blessed in having
     good, industrious children, who promise to grow up and do me
     credit. I should not be willing to exchange one of my boys for
     Squire Hudson's son Sinclair. He is, to my mind, a very
     disagreeable boy, who makes himself ridiculous by the airs he
     puts on. I have seen him once or twice lately when he appeared to
     have been drinking; but I hope I am mistaken in this. He is an
     only son, and it would be a pity that he should go astray.

Tom looked thoughtful after reading this letter.

"Is it bad news, Tom, lad?" asked Ferguson.

"Times are hard at home, Mr. Ferguson," answered Tom. "Father is very
much in need of money. It would have been a great help to him if he had
received that seventy-five dollars."

"You have as much as that on hand now, Tom. If it isn't enough, I will
lend you some."

"Thank you, Mr. Ferguson. You are a good friend, and I wouldn't mind
accepting your offer, if I needed it. But father won't need any more
than I can send him. Only I don't know how to get it to him."

"If you were in San Francisco, you would have no difficulty in sending
the money."

"No."

"I've been thinking, Tom," said Ferguson, after a while, "that it might
be a good plan for us to take a little vacation, and visit the city. We
have been working steadily here over three months, and the change would
do us good. Besides, we might on the way come across some better place.
This isn't as good now as when we began to work it."

"That is true," said Tom.

"Suppose, then, we stay a week longer, sell out our claim if we can,
and start in the direction of the city."

"You and I?"

"Yes; we shall be better off without company."

"We had better not let Peabody know we are going, or he will want to
accompany us."

"I could almost be willing to take him, poor creature, to get him away
from that Missouri Jack; but, as you say, he would not be a help to us."

So it was decided that, in a few days, as soon as they were ready, Tom
and Ferguson should leave River Bend.




CHAPTER XIII.

A SPECULATIVE INVESTMENT.


It leaked out after a while that Tom and Ferguson were intending to
leave River Bend, and considerable regret was expressed by the other
members of the party. Tom was a general favorite. His youth and his
obliging disposition made him liked by all except Missouri Jack and his
set. It cannot be said that his Scotch friend was popular, but he was,
at all events, highly respected as a man of high principle and rigid
honesty. This was not the way the miners expressed it. They called him a
"square" man, and that word expressed high moral praise. They all felt
that Tom was going off in good company.

Before they went, the two had a chance for a speculation. Two weeks
before, a man came to River Bend, across the country, with a horse and
wagon, the latter an old express wagon, which he had brought round the
Horn from some one of the Eastern States. What had induced him to take
so much trouble to convey such bulky articles was not quite clear. Now
that he was a miner he had no use for them, and at River Bend they were
not saleable. This man, Abner Kent, came to Ferguson's tent, where he
and Tom were resting after the labors of the day. He was a tall man,
with a shambling gait and an angular face.

"Good-evening," he said. "If you ain't busy I'll sit down a few
minutes."

"We are glad to see you Mr. Kent," said Ferguson. "Tom and I were
discussing our plans, but we've plenty of time for that. Come in. Here's
a place for you."

"I hear that you are going to leave us, you two?"

"Yes, Tom has some business in San Francisco, and I want to see a little
more of the country."

"How are you going?"

"We'll take the cars if we can find any," answered Tom. "If we can't
we'll foot it."

"That's what I came to see you about. You know I've got a horse and
wagon."

"Yes."

"Why don't you buy it? You'll go easier and quicker."

"We can't afford it," said Ferguson. "Poor men must walk."

"You don't see the point. When you get through with the team, you can
easily sell them for more than you gave. It will be a good speculation."

"That will depend on how much we give," said the Scotchman, shrewdly.

"To be sure, Mr. Ferguson. Now about that, I'll be easy. They ain't any
good to me here. I'll take--let me see--four hundred dollars cash.
You'll maybe double your money inside of a month."

The team did seem cheap at this price, as prices of all articles in a
new country are very much enhanced.

"Tom and I will talk it over and let you know to-morrow morning," said
Ferguson.

"That's all right. It's a good chance for you."

When Kent was gone Tom asked, "What do you think of his offer, Mr.
Ferguson?"

"I think it will be a good investment, Tom, and that we shall be less
likely to be robbed than if we carried gold-dust with us. You know how
John Miles got robbed."

"I have only a hundred dollars," said Tom, doubtfully.

"I have enough to add to it, but I think we can get the team cheaper. I
don't want to beat the man down, but a bargain is a bargain, and we must
look out for our own interest."

"You know more about such things than I do, Mr. Ferguson; I will agree
to anything you say."

"Very well, my lad, I shall be sure to consult your interest as well as
my own. It will be very comfortable for us to have a team of our own."

"It will seem strange to me," said Tom, laughing. "What will they think
at home when they hear that I have set up a carriage?"

"They might think it imprudent to invest all you had in that way; but
we'll make money out of it yet, or I am sorely mistaken."

The next morning, while Tom and Ferguson were at work, Kent came up to
them.

"What have you decided about the team?" he asked.

"We are not willing to pay four hundred dollars," said Ferguson.

"That's a fair price."

"It may be, but it will take all the money Tom and I can raise. You know
it wouldn't be quite prudent for us to part with all our funds."

"I will take a note for part of the money," said Kent.

"That's very considerate of you, but scarcely prudent."

"Then don't you want it at all?" asked Kent, disappointed.

"Yes; we are prepared with an offer. We'll give you three hundred
dollars."

Kent shook his head.

"That's too little," he said.

Ferguson remained silent. He wished to give Kent time to reflect upon
his offer.

"Have you sold these claims of yours?" asked Kent, after a pause.

"No."

"Then add them to your offer, and I accept it."

This proposal struck Ferguson favorably. They could not carry away their
claims, and very possibly no other purchaser might offer, as, except as
regards location, other places along the river-bank could be had without
cost.

"What do you say, Tom?" asked Ferguson.

"I agree if you do, Mr. Ferguson."

"Then it's a bargain, Mr. Kent. I hope it'll prove satisfactory to both
of us."

"I don't think you'll regret it. It's a good speculation."

When the two friends had settled for their purchase, Tom paying one
hundred and Ferguson two hundred dollars, our hero found himself left
with twenty dollars, or its equivalent in gold-dust, while his companion
had about one hundred and fifty left over.

"We shall go off in style," said Tom; "riding in our own carriage. But
there's one thing I have been thinking of. I want to send a hundred
dollars home as soon as I get the chance. Suppose we can't sell the
team?"

"Have no fears about that, Tom. I'll lend you the money if that is the
case; but, mark my word, we shan't have it left on our hands, of that
you may be sure."

The night before they were to start Lawrence Peabody dropped in. He was
looking down in the mouth.

"How does the world use you, Mr. Peabody?" inquired Tom.

"Fortune is against me," said Peabody. "I'm tired of River Bend."

Tom glanced at his companion. He could guess what was coming.

"Won't you take me with you, Tom?" entreated the young Bostonian.

"You must ask Mr. Ferguson. He is the head of our party."

Peabody looked appealingly towards Ferguson, but the Scotchman shook his
head.

"You mustn't be offended, Mr. Peabody," he said, "when I tell you that
you are responsible for your own bad luck. You have had just as good a
chance as Tom or I."

"Your claim was better."

"There was no difference that I can see, except that we worked, and you
didn't. You don't expect gold to come to you?"

"You and Tom are more used to hard work than I," murmured Peabody.

"If you did not feel able to work, you should not have come to
California. A man must work harder here than at home, and then he stands
a chance of succeeding better."

"Then you won't take me?" asked Peabody, sadly.

"Are you in debt to Captain Fletcher for board?"

Peabody reluctantly admitted that he was, but had no idea how much he
owed.

"Fletcher tells me that he shall not trust you any longer."

Lawrence Peabody looked frightened.

"What shall I do?" he faltered. "I shall starve."

"You can't blame the captain; he knows that you spend the little money
you do earn at the saloon. But he will give you a chance. There is no
one to wash clothes in the camp, and we have all observed that you keep
yours looking well. If you will set up a laundry, you can make more
money than in any other way."

"But then I should be a common washer-woman," objected Peabody. "What
would my friends in Boston say?"

"They won't hear of it. Besides, a man can do here what he would not do
at home."

It may be stated here that Peabody, finding work absolutely needful,
went into partnership with a Chinaman, who arrived at the camp a day or
two later, and succeeded in making a fair living, which hitherto he had
been unable to do. After he was employed, his visits to the saloon
became less frequent. At times he was disturbed by the fear that his
friends at home might learn the character of his employment; apart from
this he found his new business, with the income it yielded, not
distasteful.




CHAPTER XIV.

A NEW ACQUAINTANCE.


Having made all necessary preparations, Ferguson and Tom set out on
their way. They took a course differing somewhat from that chosen by
John Miles, one object being to survey the country, and find, if
possible, a suitable place for continuing their search for gold. After
their three months' steady work both of our travellers were prepared to
enjoy the journey. Their road was difficult at times, from its
steepness, and more than once they found it necessary, out of
consideration for the horse, to get out and walk. But this only added to
the romantic charm of the trip.

"It's like a constant picnic," said Tom. "I should like to travel this
way for a year, if I did not feel the need of working."

"We might tire of it after a while," suggested Ferguson,--"in the rainy
season, for example."

"That would not be so pleasant, to be sure," Tom admitted. "Do you have
such fine scenery in Scotland, Mr. Ferguson?"

"Our mountains are not so high, my lad, nor our trees so gigantic; but
it's the associations that make them interesting. Every hill has a
legend connected with it, and our great novelist, Walter Scott, has
invested them with a charm that draws pilgrims from all parts of the
world to see them. Now this is a new country--beautiful, I grant, but
without a history. Look around you, and you will see nothing to remind
you of man. It is nature on a grand scale, I admit, but the soul is
wanting."

"I like mountains," said Tom, thoughtfully. "There is something grand
about them."

"There are some famous mountains in your native State, New Hampshire,
are there not, Tom?"

"Yes; but I have only seen them from a distance. They are not above
thirty miles away from where I was born; but poor people don't travel in
search of scenery, Mr. Ferguson."

"No, my lad, and there's another thing I have noticed. We don't care
much for the curiosities that are near us. The people about here, if
there are any settled inhabitants, care nothing about the mountains, I
doubt."

"That is true. In our village at home there is an old man nearly eighty
years old who has never visited the mountains, though he has lived near
them all his life."

"I can well believe it, my lad. But what is that?"

The sound which elicited this exclamation was a loud "Hollo!" evidently
proceeding from some one in their rear.

Both Tom and the Scotchman turned, and their eyes rested on a horseman
evidently spurring forward to overtake them. Tom, who was driving,
reined in the horse, and brought him to a stop. The horseman was soon
even with them.

He was evidently a Yankee. All Yankees do not carry about with them an
unmistakable certificate of their origin, but Ebenezer Onthank was a
typical New Englander. His face was long and thin, his expression shrewd
and good-natured, his limbs were long and ungainly. In later life, with
the addition of forty or fifty pounds of flesh, he would be much
improved in appearance.

"Good-morning, gentlemen," said he. "It seems kinder good to see a human
face again. It ain't very populous round here, is it?"

"We haven't seen any large towns," said Tom, smiling.

"Where are you steerin'?" inquired the Yankee. "I'm expectin' to fetch
up at San Francisco some time, if I don't get lost in the woods."

"That is our destination, my friend," returned Ferguson.

"Would you mind my joining your party?" asked Onthank. "It's lonesome
travelin' by one's self without a soul to speak to."

"We shall be glad of your company," said the Scotchman, sincerely, for,
though naturally cautious, he could not suspect the new-comer of
anything which would make him an undesirable companion.

"Perhaps you'd like to know who I am," said the new acquaintance. "My
name is Ebenezer Onthank, from Green Mountain Mills, in Vermont. My
father is deacon of the Baptist Church at home."

"I suppose you will take his place when you get older," said Tom,
gravely.

"No, I guess not. I wonder what Susan Jones would say to my bein' a
deacon!" and Ebenezer burst into a loud laugh.

"Is Miss Jones a particular friend of yours?" asked Tom, slyly.

"I should say she was. Why, I expect to marry her when I get home."

"I congratulate you."

"Don't be too fast. We ain't hitched yet. Say, boy, where do you come
from?"

"From Vernon, in New Hampshire."

"You don't say! Why, that ain't more'n fifty miles from Green Mountain
Mills; cu'rus we should meet so fur away from hum, ain't it? When did
you start?"

"Seven or eight months ago."

"I've been in California six months. Does that gentleman come from your
town?"

"My friend," answered the Scotchman, not without a touch of pride, "I am
not an American; I am from the Highlands of Scotland."

"You be? Sho! Well, of course you can't help that."

"Help it, sir? I am proud of hailing from the land of Scott and Burns."

"Well, I guess it's a pretty nice sort of country," said Mr. Onthank,
patronizingly. "I guess you'll like America best, though."

"I am by no means sure of that, my friend," said Ferguson, a little
nettled. "America's all very well, but--"

"Why, you could put Scotland into its waist-coat pocket, and there'd be
plenty of room left," said Ebenezer, energetically.

"I admit that, as regards size, Scotland cannot compare with this
country."

"Say, have you got mountains as high as them, or trees as high as that?"
pointing to a gigantic redwood.

"No; but size is not everything."

"That's so. Vermont is a little State, but she's smart, I tell you. But
you haven't told me your names yet."

"I am called Donald Ferguson, Mr. Onthank. My young friend here answers
to the name of Thomas Nelson."

"Commonly called Tom," added our hero, smiling.

"Why, I've got a brother Tom," said Mr. Onthank. "Cu'rus, isn't it?"

Considering that Tom is by no means an uncommon name, it could hardly be
called very remarkable, but Tom politely assented.

"Is he older than I am?" he inquired.

"Yes, my brother Tom is twenty-one years old. I expect he voted at the
last town-meeting. I'm four years older than Tom."

"Have you been fortunate so far in California, Mr. Onthank?"

"Can't say I have. I guess I've wandered round too much. Been a sort of
rollin' stone; and my granny used to say that a rollin' stone gathers no
moss. I've got about enough money to get me to San Francisco, and I own
this animal; but I haven't made a fortune yet. What luck have you two
had?"

"Pretty fair, but it will take a good while to make our fortunes. We own
this team, and that's about all we do own."

"A sort of an express wagon, isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Ain't goin' into the express business, be you?"

"Probably not. We bought it on speculation."

"That reminds me of old Sam Bailey in our town. He was always tradin'
horses. Sometimes he made money, and then again he didn't. How much did
you give?"

Tom told him.

"That was a pretty stiff price, wasn't it?"

"It would be considered so at home, but we hope to get a good deal more,
when we come to sell it."

Their new friend kept on with them, amusing them with his homely
sayings, and original views of things. His conversation beguiled the
tedium of the journey, so that all were surprised when the shadows
deepened, and supper-time came. Selecting a favorable place they
encamped for the night.




CHAPTER XV.

A GRIZZLY BEAR.


Ebenezer Onthank was an early riser. He had been brought up on a farm,
where, during a part of the year it was the custom for the "menfolks" to
rise between four and five o'clock in the morning to begin the labors of
the day. His old habit clung to him, and at five o'clock, when Tom and
Ferguson were yet asleep, Mr. Onthank sprang from his leafy couch
refreshed and vigorous.

Seeing his companions yet sleeping, he concluded to take a walk.

"It'll give me an appetite for breakfast," thought he, "and a chance to
see something of the country."

As to the appetite, Ebenezer was generally well provided. Indeed,
latterly his appetite had exceeded his means of gratifying it, and more
than once he had longed to be back at his old home in the Vermont
farm-house, where the table was always generously, if not elegantly,
furnished. If Ebenezer had a special weakness it was for doughnuts,
which he called nut-cakes.

"If I only had a few of marm's nut-cakes," he had said the night before
to his new-found friends, "I'd be a happy man."

"What are nut-cakes?" asked the Scotchman, puzzled.

"Don't you know what nut-cakes are?" inquired Ebenezer, astonished at
Ferguson's ignorance.

"I never heard of them before," said Ferguson.

"Well, I declare! I thought everybody knew what nut-cakes are,"
ejaculated the Yankee. "Don't you ever make 'em in Scotland?"

"Not that I ever heard."

"Then you don't know what is good. You know what they are, Tom?"

"Oh, yes," said Tom, smiling. "We often have them at home. Perhaps Mr.
Ferguson would understand better if he heard them called doughnuts or
crullers."

Thus defined Mr. Ferguson acknowledged that he had heard of them, and he
thought he had once tasted one. Scotland, however, fell considerably in
the estimation of Mr. Onthank, when he learned that his favorite article
of food was almost unknown in that distant country.

"You Scotchmen don't know what is good," he said. "If you ever come to
Green Mountain Mills, I'll get marm to fry a batch of nut-cakes, and
you'll say they're goloptious."

This last word was not familiar to Ferguson, but the smack of the lips
with which it was accompanied made it sufficiently intelligible. He
assured Ebenezer politely that he hoped some day to accept his kind
invitation.

When Ebenezer left the camp he had no definite plan of exploration.
Everything was alike new to him, and it mattered little in what
direction his steps led him. It was a charming morning. The sun had
risen, and hill and valley were glorified by its slanting rays. The air
was bracing, and Ebenezer, though neither a poet nor a sentimentalist,
felt his spirits rise, as with vigorous steps he strode on, letting his
eyes wander at will over the landscape.

"Looks kinder han'some," he said to himself. "I wish Susan Jones was
with me now. Gals like to walk round and look at scenery, and pick
flowers, and so on. As for me, a good field of corn suits me better than
all the flowers in the world. They're only good to smell of; out here
though I'd like a good 'claim' best. It seems cu'rus to think how much
money you can get sometimes from a hole in the ground. Beats cornfields
for profit, by a great sight, if you only get hold of the right place. I
just wish I could find a big nugget, as big as my head. I guess it would
make me the richest man in Green Mountain Mills. I'd be a bigger man
than the old deacon. They'd be glad to make me selectman, and perhaps
send me to Montpelier after a while to make laws. Well, there's no
knowin' what may turn up. Why shouldn't I light on a nugget as well as
the next man?"

In this pleasant channel the thoughts of our Yankee adventurer were
running as he strode over the uneven ground, with all the vigor gained
by his hardy training. But his walk was destined to be interrupted in a
decidedly unpleasant manner. All at once he became conscious of a huge
object, scarcely thirty yards distant, whose attention he had already
attracted. Mr. Onthank had been long enough in California to recognize
in the huge, unwieldy figure--a grizzly bear!

Ebenezer Onthank was no coward, but it must be admitted that when he saw
the eyes of the grizzly fixed upon him he turned pale, and his limbs
trembled. He had heard from fellow-miners stories of the great strength
and ferocity of this most formidable beast. The grizzly bear shows no
fear of man. He is always ready to make an attack, even when not
stimulated by hunger. Even the lion is crafty and cunning, and likes to
attack his enemy unawares; but the grizzly boldly advances to the attack
without seeking to surprise his adversary. If out of humor it makes no
account of odds, but will as readily attack a party as a single foe.
Col. Albert S. Evans, the author of an interesting volume, containing
sketches of life in California, says, "I am satisfied that an average
grizzly could at any time whip the strongest African lion in a fair
stand-up fight, while a full-grown bull is no more to him than a rat is
to the largest house-cats."

Twenty-five years ago the grizzly was to be found in various parts of
California. As the State has become settled his haunts have become
contracted, but even now, as the writer just quoted assures us, he is
still found in great numbers in the Coast Range Mountains from San Diego
to Del Norte. In describing Samson, a famous specimen once on exhibition
in San Francisco, we are told that "his strength was that of an
elephant, and his claws, eight inches in length, curved like a rainbow
and sharp as a knife, would enable him to tear open anything made of
flesh and blood as you or I would open a banana."

Such was the new acquaintance who confronted Mr. Onthank, and barred
his progress.

"Jerusalem!" ejaculated the surprised and dismayed Yankee, and he
instinctively felt for his rifle. But, alas! he had left it in the camp.
It was thoughtless and imprudent to venture out unarmed; but the scene
was so quiet and peaceful that no thought of danger had entered the mind
of our unlucky friend.

The bear sat upon his haunches, and stared at the intruder. Ebenezer,
brought to a stand-still, returned his gaze. They were less than a
hundred feet apart, and the situation was decidedly critical.

"I guess he wants to chaw me up for his breakfast," thought Ebenezer,
despairingly, "and I don't see what I can do to prevent it."

The bear, however, seemed in no hurry to commence the attack. He
surveyed our Yankee with dignified gravity, conscious that he had him at
advantage. When Ebenezer felt for his rifle he uttered a low growl,
being possibly aware of his purpose. Possibly he laughed in his sleeve
(some of my young critics may suggest that bears have no sleeves) at his
failure.

Ebenezer looked about him despairingly. No man will surrender at
discretion to a grizzly, for he can hope for no mercy. But what could be
done? Once subjected to the terrible hug, and the life would be crushed
out of him in less than a minute.

"If Ferguson and Tom were only here!" thought poor Ebenezer.

But the camp was at least two miles away, and his two companions,
unconscious of his terrible peril, were calmly sleeping, and not likely
to awaken till he was a crushed and bleeding corpse.

In great crises the mind travels rapidly. I shall not attempt to record
the thoughts that chased one another through the mind of the luckless
adventurer. But they were by no means pleasant.

"I shall never see Green Mountain Mills again," he thought, with an
inward groan. "I shall never marry Susan Jones, or eat any of marm's
nut-cakes. If I only had my rifle here, I'd make one effort for my life.
I'd spoil the beauty of that ugly devil anyhow."

Still, as if charmed, he stood staring open-eyed at the grizzly.

Bruin, deciding that this had lasted long enough, began in a slow and
dignified manner to approach the intruder upon his solitude.

This broke the charm. With a wild shout Ebenezer Onthank took to his
heels and flew over the ground at a rate of speed which Weston, the
champion runner, would scarcely be able to equal.

The grizzly accepted the challenge, and increased his own speed,
developing an activity hardly to be expected of his huge and unwieldy
form.

It was man against beast, with the odds decidedly in the favor of the
latter.




CHAPTER XVI.

UP A TREE.


The race between the Yankee and the bear was an exciting one, to the
former at least. He was fleet of foot, and in a hundred yards' dash
would have won without great difficulty; but in wind and endurance the
grizzly excelled him. So, as the race continued, Mr. Onthank, looking
back from time to time, was painfully conscious that his enemy was
gaining upon him. The perspiration came out upon his face in large
drops, and he panted painfully. He felt that the chances were against
him, and he could almost feel in advance the fatal hug which would
slowly press the life out of him. As he felt his strength failing he
looked around him despairingly. Just before him was a moderate-sized
tree. Though he knew that bears can climb, he gathered his remaining
strength, seized a low hanging branch, and swung himself up just in
time to avoid his persistent foe, who was close upon his heels. He did
not tarry where he was, but climbed higher up, until from a height of
twenty feet he could look down upon the bear.

Bruin looked up placidly, but did not begin to climb at once. Probably
he was fatigued with his race. Moreover he knew that his intended victim
could not get away. The latter was emphatically and literally "treed."
The bear sat upon his haunches and complacently regarded the Yankee.

Ebenezer Onthank made himself as comfortable as he could under the
circumstances. He was by no means easy in mind, however. He was "holding
the fort," it is true; but the enemy was in force outside, and evidently
intended to remain. Worse still, he would probably after a while climb
the tree, and this would bring matters to a crisis.

"You pesky critter! Why don't you go along about your business?"
exclaimed the unhappy adventurer, shaking his fist at the foe.

Bruin deigned no reply, but continued to survey him with steady,
unwinking eyes.

"If I only had a gun, I'd pepper you," continued Ebenezer. "I should
like to put a bullet into that impudent eye of yours."

Though the bear had never received an English education, his instinct
probably enabled him to understand the feelings of his intended victim,
but he remained as placid as ever.

So an hour passed. At the end of that time the situation remained
unchanged. The unfortunate Yankee was getting hungry, as well as tired
of his somewhat constrained position. Bears probably have more patience
than the human family, for Bruin had scarcely moved, except occasionally
to wag his great head. He felt that in the game that was being played it
was his adversary's turn to make the next move.

"I wish Tom and the Scotchman would find me out," thought Onthank. "What
on earth makes them sleep so late?" he continued, irritably. "They must
be naturally lazy."

He may be excused for feeling irritated, though there was no particular
reason to expect his two friends to curtail their hours of slumber
because he had done so. But he was not in a position where it is easy to
be reasonable, and in his situation every minute seemed to him as long
as five.

Meanwhile, in the camp, a mile away, Tom and Ferguson had awakened.

"How did you sleep, Tom?" asked the Scotchman.

"Tip-top. Did you rest well?"

"I have a gift of sleep," replied Ferguson. "But where is our Yankee
friend?"

"I suppose he has taken an early walk," said Tom. "He will be back
before long, I guess. We'd better not wait breakfast for him. I'm hungry
for one."

The two friends proceeded to break their fast, washing down the rather
stale provisions with water from a spring near by.

"I wish it were coffee," said Tom. "I'm tired of cold water."

"Doubtless the coffee would be more gratifying to the palate, Tom; but
it's likely the water is better for the health."

"I suppose you would refuse a cup of hot coffee, Mr. Ferguson, if it
were offered you," said Tom, smiling.

"I don't say that, Tom. I would risk its effect upon my health for once.
But, as we haven't got it, we may as well make the best of what we
have."

Soon after their simple meal, which did not consume much time, Tom
suggested to his companion that they set out in search of Mr. Onthank.
He did not suspect that their missing companion was in trouble, but he
thought that it would be pleasant to take a walk.

"You can go, if you like, Tom," said Ferguson, with characteristic
caution. "I will remain behind to look after the camp."

"All right, Mr. Ferguson. I'll soon be back."

"Don't go too far away, my lad; and mind your bearings, so that you can
find your way back."

"Never fear, Mr. Ferguson. It wouldn't be very easy to be lost here.
I'll keep my eyes open, and bring Mr. Onthank back with me if I see him
anywhere."

Ferguson sat down, and indulged himself in reading, probably for the
hundredth time, Walter Scott's Marmion, of which he had a small pocket
edition; while Tom went on his way.

A fortunate chance directed our hero by an almost straight course to the
very tree where Ebenezer Onthank was still perched with the grizzly
standing guard beneath. From time to time he looked about him anxiously,
in the hope of seeing the approach of one of his travelling companions.

It was with a feeling of joy, not wholly unmingled with anxiety, that he
descried Tom descending a hillock not many rods away. As yet it was
evident that our hero had not caught sight of the bear and his prisoner.
It was very necessary to put him on his guard.

"Tom!" shouted Mr. Onthank, at the top of his voice.

Tom heard the call in spite of the distance, and looked about him, but
did not immediately catch sight of the speaker. It did not occur to him
to look upwards.

"Tom!" shouted the Yankee again. "Here I am. Look up in the tree."

That time Tom's glance detected his companion, and, not yet having
discovered the bear, he was led to wonder why Mr. Onthank had climbed
the tree. As he was advancing incautiously, Onthank shouted again,
"There's a cursed grizzly under the tree. Don't come too near."

Tom saw the bear, and he paused suddenly. He was startled in truth, for
he had been long enough in California to be aware that it was a
dangerous beast.

"Isn't Ferguson with you?" asked Onthank, anxiously, for he knew that a
boy of sixteen, even if armed, was no match for the king of the
California sierras.

"No, he's behind in the camp," shouted Tom, in reply.

By this time the bear became aware that there was a second intruder
within his precincts. He turned his head deliberately and surveyed our
hero. It is not within the range of the author to read the thoughts of a
grizzly, but, from the indifference with which he turned away and
resumed his watch, it may be inferred that he considered Tom too small
game to merit his attention. This was rather satisfactory to our young
hero, who was not ambitious to come in close quarters with so formidable
an antagonist.

Startled as he was, Tom maintained his ground. He wanted to help
Onthank; but he did not know how to do it.

"What can I do to help you, Mr. Onthank?" shouted Tom.

"Blamed if I know," answered the Yankee, helplessly. "I wish Ferguson
were here. It won't do for you to attack the beast single-handed."

"Shall I go back for Ferguson?" asked Tom.

"I don't know; how far away is the camp?"

"It must be as much as a mile."

"While you are away the brute may take it into his head to climb the
tree, and then I am gone up."

"Haven't you any weapon?"

"No."

"I'll fire at the bear if you say so."

"It would be of no use. If you missed, or only grazed him, he would make
for you."

"I wish you had my rifle," said Tom.

"So do I. I'd let him have it straight in the eye. Have you had
breakfast?"

"Yes."

"I'm as hungry as a bear--as this bear who probably wants me for his
breakfast. O Tom, if I was only back at Green Mountain Mills once more,
I'd be content to live and die there, and all the gold in California
wouldn't bring me out here again."

Tom stood silent and perplexed. While he was considering whether he
could do anything to help his friend, the bear slowly rose, approached
the tree, and, grasping it between his paws, prepared to climb. He was
evidently tired of waiting.

"He's coming, Tom!" shouted Onthank. "O Lord, what shall I do?"




CHAPTER XVII.

AN EXCITING PURSUIT.


Mr Onthank's reflections when the grizzly was slowly but steadily
climbing the tree were by no means pleasant.

"If he once grips me, I am gone," he said, despairingly.

"Shall I shoot?" asked Tom, looking on in excitement.

"You might hit me," said Ebenezer, who knew nothing of Tom's skill as a
marksman.

"No, I won't."

"I think I'll swing off," said the Yankee, "and join you."

Whether this was or was not a wise thing to do Tom did not feel
qualified to decide. It was evident that Onthank must do something
speedily, or he would be in the power of the bear. He waited nervously
till Bruin was uncomfortably near, and then, seizing the branch with
his hands, swung to the ground. The height was considerable, and the
fall jarred him; but, quickly recovering himself, he ran towards Tom.

"Now we must run for our lives, Tom," he said, suiting the action to the
word.

Tom fully understood the necessity, and followed suit, first hazarding a
glance at the discomfited bear.

When the grizzly witnessed the escape of his victim he showed no
excitement, nor did he accelerate his motions. He began deliberately to
back down the tree. This required some little time, which Tom and his
friend made the most of.

"Give me your rifle," said Onthank.

"I'd rather keep it," said Tom.

"I can make better use of it," said the Yankee.

"I don't know about that," said Tom. "At any rate I will keep it."

He felt that it was hardly reasonable to expect him, in the presence of
such a danger, to give up his only instrument of defence.

"You are only a boy," said his companion, discontented.

"I can shoot," answered Tom, briefly.

Onthank was not in general an unreasonable man, but danger makes men
selfish.

"Give it to me," he said, in a tone of authority, and he tried to wrest
it from Tom's hands.

"You shall not have it," exclaimed Tom, indignantly. "Take away your
hand, or I'll shoot you!"

Of course Tom was excited, and would not have carried out his threat,
but he was fully resolved to stand up for his rights.

Whether Ebenezer would have yielded the point, being stronger than Tom,
is uncertain; but our hero shouted "Look out for the bear!" and the
Yankee, in alarm, released his hold, and the two entered upon a race, in
which the Yankee's superior length of limb enabled him to keep the first
place.

Bruin was now on terra firma, and was on his way, wagging his great
head, developing an alarming rate of speed. Tom was somewhat hampered
by the weapon which he carried, and he was getting out of breath.
Onthank was three or four rods ahead of him. The situation had changed,
and it was now Tom that was in the greater peril.

"Don't give out, Tom!" called out Ebenezer, encouragingly.

"I won't," gasped Tom, "if I can help it."

"Is he gaining on us?"

"Yes," returned our hero.

"Then I'll try another tree," said Onthank, and he caught a branch, and
clambered up into a tree quite similar to the other in which he had been
besieged.

Tom would gladly have followed his example, but the branch was too high
for him to reach readily, and the grizzly was too near to give him
adequate time. Poor boy! He began to despair, and was at an utter loss
what to do. To face round and fire at the foe seemed about all that was
left him, but he wanted to reserve his fire to the last. He caught sight
of another tree, of a larger trunk than the one which Onthank had
ascended, and ran towards it, pursued by the grizzly. Then commenced a
dodging game, which seemed to afford but a brief respite from
destruction.

"This can't last long," thought poor Tom. "I suppose I must die."

In that brief time of peril many thoughts passed through his mind. To
die at his age would be sad enough; but the thought that his expedition
would be a failure, only involving his father deeper in difficulty and
debt chiefly troubled him. The mortgage would be foreclosed, and his
father and whole family deprived of their humble home. Onthank watched
the boy's peril, unable to give him assistance. To do him justice he
almost forgot his own danger in the more apparent and immediate peril of
his young companion.

"Be careful!" he shouted, quite needlessly. "Don't let him grip you.
Give it to him right in the eye."

Tom was so absorbed, and his mind so painfully occupied by his efforts
to keep out of his enemy's clutches, that he was not conscious of the
warning.

Active and alert as he was, the result was hardly a matter of doubt. He
would tire sooner than the bear, and if he ran again he was sure to be
overtaken. This, however, was what he did. Of course the grizzly
instantly pursued him. Poor Tom breathed a prayer for help, though there
seemed no chance of his prayer being answered; but sometimes God sends
assistance when there seems no chance of escape.

The galloping of a horse was heard. There was a whirling sound, and
Bruin, already within two yards of Tom, was jerked back, and brought to
a stand-still by a lasso which wound about his neck. A shout caused Tom
suddenly to turn his head, and to his joy he saw a mounted Mexican
_vaquero_, who had brought him timely relief.

Bruin growled angrily on finding himself balked of his prey. He was not
disposed to yield to his new antagonist. Rising and sitting on his
haunches he began coolly to draw in the lasso, against the combined
strength of man and horse. The muscular force of a big grizzly is
simply enormous. Usually he is attacked from two sides, two lassos being
thrown around him. For a single antagonist he is sometimes more than a
match, as seemed likely in the present case. The _rieta_ being attached
to the pommel of the saddle, of course the bear, in pulling as he did,
hand over hand, steadily brought the _vaquero_ and his steed nearer. The
horse, terrified, trembled in every limb, and tried to rear; but his
strength was as nothing when opposed to the steady power of his massive
antagonist.

Relieved from the immediate attentions of the grizzly, Tom did not
continue to run, but stood still, and, forgetting his own peril,
remained an excited spectator of the struggle between the bear and the
_vaquero_.

The Mexican in an excited manner shouted to him to shoot. This brought
Tom to a sense of his duty. A third person had been brought into danger
by an effort to give him assistance, and he was too manly to leave him
to his fate. He raised his rifle, and, taking quick aim, fired. Our
young hero was of course inexperienced, and it was only by a piece of
good fortune that his bullet inflicted a serious wound, striking the
bear in the throat. The blood began to flow and the grizzly, growling
fiercely, slackened his hold on the lasso. The _vaquero_ followed up
Tom's shot by another, equally effective, and the powerful animal
dropped to the ground, dangerous still if approached, but unfitted for
pursuit.

The _vaquero_ reined his horse back, and his dark face became illumined
with a smile of satisfaction.

"He will do no more harm," he said in good English, but with a foreign
accent. "The danger is over."

"Is the critter used up?" shouted Onthank, cautiously, from his elevated
perch. "Is he defunct?"

"He soon will be," answered Tom. "I guess it will be safe to come down."

Ebenezer Onthank needed no second invitation. He "shinned" down the tree
in a manner not unlike the grizzly, and approached the spot where the
huge foe was lying, the life-blood flowing from his throat.

"I'd like to kick you, you big brute!" said Mr. Onthank.

The bear slowly turned upon him his glazing eyes, and they expressed so
much ferocity that almost involuntarily the Yankee drew back. The bear
partly raised himself, and tried to drag himself towards his
adversaries; but the effort was vain.

"He is one of the largest I have seen," said the _vaquero_. "See how
strong he is!"

"It was lucky for me that you came up," said Tom. "He was almost upon
me."

"I had about given you up, Tom," said Onthank, "and I thought my turn
was coming next."

"We are much indebted to you, sir," said Tom, gratefully, to the
Mexican. "You have saved my life."

The _vaquero_ courteously expressed his satisfaction, and, remounting
his horse, resumed his journey.

"I never want to see another grizzly," said Onthank. "This one is enough
for me, darn his ugly pictur'!"

"I quite agree with you, Mr. Onthank," said Tom.




CHAPTER XVIII.

TOM'S OLD HOME.


Leaving Tom for a time, we will cross the continent, and, a little
earlier in point of time, look in upon Mark Nelson and his family at
their humble home in New Hampshire.

For years Mr. Nelson had been struggling to provide a comfortable living
for his wife and children. The struggle was not an easy one. His small
farm was sterile, and yielded grudgingly its annual crops. Then the
mortgage held by Squire Hudson imposed a burden of interest very hard to
meet. Each half year sixty-six dollars must be raised somehow to satisfy
the squire's demand. Though a rich man, with ready money in plenty, he
never failed to call for his money on the very day it was due. Once or
twice he had granted a delay of a day or two; but his manner was so
unpleasant that the farmer, except from dire necessity, was hardly
likely to ask a renewal of the favor.

The six months immediately following Tom's departure from home were not
favorable to his father. There was a drought of considerable duration,
which made the crops smaller than usual, and thus materially decreased
the farmer's income. When the semi-annual interest became due, with the
most energetic effort Mark Nelson had got together but thirty-six
dollars towards it, leaving a deficit of thirty dollars.

"I feel anxious about to-morrow, Mary," he said, as the little family
sat together the night before in the plain sitting-room. "I have never
been so much behindhand before with the interest."

"How much do you lack, Mark?" asked Mrs. Nelson.

"Thirty dollars."

"That is a good deal of money," said his wife, gravely.

"Yes; I don't know where to raise it. If Squire Hudson were only a
little considerate. But he isn't, and, even if he were, I am afraid
there is no prospect of my raising the money at present."

"You may get some money from Tom soon," suggested Sarah.

"I can't rely upon that. Tom will doubtless send when he is able, for he
understands my circumstances, and is a thoughtful boy; but it is going
to take time for him to earn a surplus--enough to send on."

"He may find a big nugget," said Walter, the second boy, who eagerly
read the letters from California which from time to time appeared in the
weekly paper.

"He _may_, but the chances are against it."

"I was reading in last week's paper about a man finding a nugget worth
over two thousand dollars."

"Such nuggets are as rare as large prizes in a lottery, I suspect," said
Mark Nelson, who had a large share of plain common-sense.

Walter looked rather disappointed, having made up his mind that Tom
would certainly find a big lump of gold, and come home rich.

"Don't you think Tom will find some gold?" he asked.

"Yes, I have no doubt he will gather some gold-dust. I have no doubt,
too, that he will earn more than he or I can do at home; but I haven't
much faith in these extraordinary pieces of good luck."

"Still, Tom _may_ find a nugget," persisted Walter.

"Yes, he _may_, and I shall be very glad if he does; but we must not
build too many air-castles on that chance."

"I wish I could see the dear boy again," sighed his mother, looking up
from the stocking she was laboriously darning.

"So do I," said Walter. "He would have a lot to tell us."

"California seems so far away," resumed Mrs. Nelson, "and he has no one
there to look after him, and mend his clothes--"

"And darn his stockings," said Walter, smiling.

"If he walked all the way across the continent," said Sarah, "I don't
believe he would have larger holes in his stockings than you have,
Walter."

"Oh, well, I exercise a good deal," said Walter. "Ask father if I
don't."

"Walter will be more successful as a farmer than as a scholar," said Mr.
Nelson. "He helps me a good deal."

"Tom was a good scholar," said Sarah, "and he was always ready to work
too. Walter will never astonish or electrify the world by his learning."

"I don't want to," said her brother. "It isn't in my line."

"That's true enough."

"Don't tease Walter," said Mrs. Nelson. "He helps your father a good
deal, and he is not a dunce."

"Thank you, mother, for taking my part. Sarah is going to be a
strong-minded woman. I should not wonder if she came out as a lecturer
on 'Woman's Rights' some time. I think I see her, with a pair of
iron-bowed spectacles on her nose, and her back hair tied up in a big
knot, flinging her arms about, and--"

"That'll do, Walter," said Sarah. "It is an unusually powerful effort
for you. I have no desire to lecture on 'Woman's Rights,' though I think
they ought to have them all the same."

"I guess you'll get yours. You'll make your husband stand round, if you
ever get one."

Sarah laughed good-naturedly, and retorted, "I shall pity your wife, if
she has to darn your stockings."

The next day about dinner-time Squire Hudson walked up to the front
door, and knocked. His approach was witnessed, not without trepidation,
for he was not an easy creditor.

The squire looked about him searchingly as he entered. He suspected that
the interest was not ready, and the farmer's grave face confirmed his
suspicions. That he was glad of this of course Mark Nelson did not
dream, for he was not aware of his creditor's deep-laid plans.

"A fine day!" said the squire, with suavity. "I hope you are well, Mrs.
Nelson."

"Pretty well, thank you, sir."

"Have you heard from Tom lately?"

"Yes; he had just reached California."

"Then of course he could not say anything of his prospects?"

"It was too soon."

"You must miss him a good deal--all of you."

"I am thinking of him all the time," said Mrs. Nelson.

"To be sure, that is natural in a mother. But if the boy does well, that
will repay you hereafter."

"If I only felt sure he would do well."

"Oh, he is young and industrious. He will be sure to make his way. He'll
like it too. Why, my Sinclair envies him the chance of leaving home. He
wanted to go with him."

"Sinclair would not like to go in the same way as Tom, with the prospect
of having to work hard after he got there," said Mark Nelson.

"To be sure not, neighbor Nelson. My boy has never been brought up to
work. My circumstances--ahem!--have not made it necessary."

"Sinclair is fortunate in having a rich father," said the farmer.

"So I tell him," said the squire, complacently. "His fortune is already
made."

"What are you going to do with him, squire?"

"Oh, I shall make a professional man of him,--a lawyer, most likely,"
said the rich man, complacently. "I can give him a suitable income till
he gets into a paying practice."

"That will be a good many years," thought Sarah, "unless Sinclair works
harder than he has lately at school;" but the shrewd young lady kept
this thought to herself.

One by one wife and children left the room, for it was well understood
that the squire came on business, and would be likely to desire a
private interview with the farmer. They went into the kitchen, closing
the door behind them, and awaited anxiously the result of the
interview.

"I do hope Squire Hudson will be considerate," said Mrs. Nelson,
anxiously.

"I am afraid he won't be, mother," said Sarah. "He is a hard man."

"Sinclair puts on no end of airs," said Walter. "By the way he struts
round you would think he owned the whole town. You had better set your
cap for him, Sarah, for he will be rich some day."

"I would rather be an old maid than marry him," said Sarah, decidedly.

"Very likely your wish will be gratified," said her brother.

Mrs. Nelson did not smile at this sally, for her mind was too full of
anxiety.




CHAPTER XIX.

A MODERN SHYLOCK.


"I believe your interest falls due to-day, Mr. Nelson," said the squire,
when he found himself alone with his debtor.

"Yes," answered the farmer, slowly. It was not very likely to slip his
mind.

"I suppose you have the money ready," continued the squire, who supposed
no such thing.

"I have a part of it ready," said Mark Nelson, with an effort.

"A part," repeated his creditor, with a frown.

"Yes; I can give you thirty-six dollars to-day."

"_Only_ thirty-six dollars! The amount due is sixty-six."

"I know it, Squire Hudson; but this has been a bad year for the farmers,
as you probably know. Owing to the drought, my crops fell off at least
one quarter."

"I can't help that," said the squire, coldly.

"If you will be a little patient," said Mr. Nelson, uneasily.

"Neighbor Nelson," said his creditor, interrupting him, "I wish to ask
you one question. When I lent you money on mortgage was there a
stipulation that if there was a drought I was to wait for my just
interest?"

"No, Squire Hudson."

"To be sure not; I would not of course lend you money on any such terms.
It was understood that my interest was to be paid semi-annually,--was it
not so?"

"Yes, but--"

"Wait a moment. You must certainly agree that I am entitled to prompt
payment. A bargain is a bargain."

"I don't dispute it, Squire Hudson, and I have tried to be ready for
you; but in spite of all my efforts I am thirty dollars short."

"Do you expect me to be content with this explanation?"

"I think you are rather hard on me, squire. It isn't as if I had the
money and objected to pay. I am a poor man, but no one ever lost a
dollar by me; and I don't mean that any one shall, while I have my life
and strength."

"That's all very well, but it won't make up the thirty dollars in which
you are delinquent."

"What would you have me do? I cannot _make_ money."

"I wouldn't give much for an investment when the interest is delayed. It
is no longer worth its face. If any of my railroad bonds defer their
usual interest they at once drop in value."

"I know very little of railroad bonds, never having any money to invest
in them; but I think my farm will be full security for all the money I
owe you."

"Suppose I should foreclose--you would consider it an unkind thing and a
great hardship, wouldn't you?"

"It would take away my means of supporting my family. I don't think you
would go to extremes, for the sake of thirty dollars."

"It isn't the amount of money, neighbor Nelson, that is to be
considered. It is the principle that is involved."

This is a very common pretext with men who have made up their minds to
do a mean thing. Generally speaking it is false, and the money is the
first consideration.

"Will you give me two months to pay the balance of interest?" asked Mark
Nelson.

"What better prospect have you of being able to pay me then?"

"As soon as Tom has any money to send, he will remit to me. I think it
probable that I shall hear from him in the course of two months."

"If that is your reliance," said the squire, shrugging his shoulders, "I
am afraid you are leaning upon a broken reed. I know boys pretty well,
and I fancy Tom will find a use for all the money he earns."

"You don't know him, Squire Hudson. He is a very conscientious boy, and
understands very well the sacrifice I made in raising money to send him
to California. He is not very likely to forget that."

"It seems to me that the sacrifice was mine," said the squire, with a
half sneer. "If I remember rightly, I advanced the money which he took
away with him."

Mark Nelson flushed, and he answered warmly, "You did advance the money,
Squire Hudson, but I gave you security for it."

"And the very first interest that has come due you are not prepared to
meet. You can't blame me for feeling a little doubt as to the wisdom of
my advance."

"Are you very much in need of the thirty dollars?" asked Mr. Nelson,
nettled at the squire's tone.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Is it subjecting you to any great inconvenience to wait a couple of
months for it? That is what I mean."

"My circumstances are not such," returned the squire, haughtily, "as to
make me feel even the loss of thirty dollars."

"I wish I could say the same, but I cannot. Since, then, it will
occasion you no inconvenience, I ask you as a favor that you will let
the balance rest for two months."

Squire Hudson saw that he was cornered; but none the less was he
disposed to yield the point. He even felt provoked with the farmer for
having forced from him an acknowledgment that he did not need the money
he so persistently demanded.

"I told you before," he said, "that it was not the amount of money, but
the principle, that I care for. You cannot have forgotten this."

"I don't see how any principle is involved, Squire Hudson."

"You look at the matter solely from a debtor's point of view. If you
held the mortgage, instead of myself, you would change your view very
quickly."

"I don't think I should," said the farmer, slowly. "I would be
considerate to a poor neighbor, even if it did inconvenience me a
little."

"The poor neighbor should not have borrowed money on which he was unable
to pay interest," said Squire Hudson, severely.

"How could I anticipate the drought that has diminished my crops?" said
Mark Nelson, with spirit.

"That is neither here nor there. You knew that the interest must be
paid, drought or no drought, crop or no crop."

"I cannot argue with you further, since you refuse to consider
circumstances over which I have had no control. You refuse to grant me
any delay?"

"I do."

"Since I have not the money to pay you, will you tell me what you
require?"

"How many cows do you keep?"

"Three."

"You can give me one of these, and I will consider it an equivalent for
the thirty dollars."

"Do you require this?" asked the farmer, uneasily.

"Yes; unless you have some other satisfactory arrangement to propose."

"I am afraid I have nothing else which you would regard as satisfactory.
The loss of a cow will diminish my income. Instead of three, I ought to
have four or five. I shouldn't like to be reduced to two."

"Very likely not; but an honest man is willing to make a sacrifice in
order to meet his just liabilities. Besides, you expect to have the
money, you say, in a couple of months. When it has come, you may have
your cow back, on paying two months' interest on the deferred payment.
That is only fair."

"Say no more, Squire Hudson," said the farmer. "I must, of course,
consent to this arrangement since you insist upon it. How soon do you
wish for the cow?"

"You had better let your son Walter drive it over this afternoon."

"He is losing no time," thought Mark Nelson, bitterly. "He does not even
appear to be willing that I should have the benefit of this night's
milking."

"You may send me Whiteface," continued Squire Hudson, who knew that this
was the most valuable of the three cows.

"That is my best cow," protested the farmer "That makes little
difference, as you expect to redeem it in two months."

Mark Nelson was silent. He felt indignant with Squire Hudson for his
cruel exaction; but he felt that he was in his power, and that he must
submit to his exactions.

"You will attend to this matter?" asked the squire, as he rose and
prepared to go.

"Yes," answered the farmer, coldly.

When his creditor was gone he went into the kitchen and acquainted the
family with what had passed. Great were the grief and indignation of the
children, and Walter expressed a desire that Squire Hudson might lose
all his property as a fitting reward for his meanness.

"Heaven help me if I can't meet the next interest!" said Mark Nelson,
later in the day, to his wife.

"Don't be too much troubled about the future, Mark," said his wife, who
was of a more hopeful temperament than her husband; "I am sure that you
will get some help from Tom before six months are over."

"I hope so," answered her husband; but for the rest of the day he was
very grave.

Walter drove over Whiteface, at his father's request; but he came near
crying, stout boy as he was, at the loss of the faithful animal which
his father had reared from a calf.




CHAPTER XX.

AT SACRAMENTO.


After his escape from the grizzly Tom had no further adventures of an
exciting character. One afternoon he and his companions arrived at
Sacramento. It was but a small settlement, but was more town-like than
any place they had yet seen in California. They drove to a two-story
frame building, which was the chief hotel in the town. Taking the
precaution to inquire the price of board and lodging, they were dismayed
by the extravagance of the charges. Tom saw that his reserve fund of
twenty dollars would scarcely last him forty-eight hours.

"I can't stay here, Mr. Ferguson," he said. "I will take my chances and
camp out, if necessary."

"I agree with you, lad; I'm not inclined to waste my substance on
luxurious living."

"There won't be much luxurious living, I guess," said Ebenezer Onthank,
who, with Yankee curiosity, had already visited the kitchen and obtained
some idea of the fare to be expected. "I kin get better board at Green
Mountain Mills for three dollars a week, and folks are darned glad to
accommodate you for that price. These chaps seem to think and act as if
we were made of money."

"I wish some of your Green Mountain Mills boarding-houses were here,"
said Tom. "I could save plenty of money then."

"Well, gentlemen, do you want to stay here?" inquired the landlord.

"We'd like to, squire, but not bein' millionaires I guess we'll have to
put it off till times are better."

"Just as you say," said the landlord, indifferently. "There's others
waiting for the only room I have empty." Then, noticing for the first
time the express wagon which Tom had left outside, he asked, in a tone
of interest, "Who owns that team?"

"It belongs to this boy and myself," answered Ferguson.

"Where did it come from?"

"The States."

"You don't want to sell, do you?"

Tom was about to reply in the affirmative, but the Scot, more shrewd,
answered indifferently, "We may sell it when we get to San Francisco."

"I need just such a team as that," said the landlord, eagerly. "I'll
give you a good price for it. You can go down the river to Frisco."

"I suppose we might," said Ferguson, slowly, "if it was worth our
while."

"What'll you take, cash down?" inquired the landlord, earnestly.

"Nay, my friend, I prefer to hear your views as to the price."

"I will give you eight hundred dollars for the wagon."

This was certainly an excellent profit, for but three hundred had been
paid for horse and wagon. Tom's heart beat fast with excitement, for he
remembered that one-third of the money would come to him. If it had
depended upon him he would have clinched the bargain at once, but he
wisely left the matter in the hands of his companion and partner.

"That seems a fair offer," said Ferguson; "but I think we may as well
wait till we reach San Francisco. Besides, we want to sell the horse,
too."

"I will give you a thousand dollars for the two," said the landlord.

A man with his pantaloons tucked in his boots, a coarse woolen shirt,
and a wide-brimmed sombrero, which overshadowed a face bearing a beard
of a week's growth, was leaning against the door-post.

"Landlord," said he, "I see your price, and I'll go two hundred better."

Tom stared at the speaker in surprise. He looked like a man who would
have found it hard to raise twelve dollars, yet he had made an offer of
twelve hundred. Our hero did not learn till afterwards that the man had
"struck it rich" at the mines, sold out his claim for ten thousand
dollars, and for the time being was the lucky possessor of a large bank
account.

"Now, Tom Scott," expostulated the landlord, "this ain't fair. I want
the wagon more'n you do, and you're a-raisin' the price on me."

"How do you know that?" drawled Scott. "I've got a pile, and I mean to
take it easy while it lasts. I'm going back to the mines like a
gentleman, with my own team, you bet, if I've got money enough to buy
one."

The landlord was satisfied that, if he wanted the team, he must outbid
his competitor, and advanced his offer to thirteen hundred dollars. But
Tom Scott was not terrified. His money had come easily, and he would not
let two or three hundred dollars stand in the way of his wishes.

"I'll go fifteen," he drawled.

The landlord shrugged his shoulders, and said, in a disappointed tone,
"You'll have to take it, Scott. You've gone ahead of my pile."

"Well, stranger, is it a bargain?" asked Scott.

The Scotchman, though inwardly elated as well as astonished at the
extraordinary offer he had received, answered quietly, "If my partner
agrees."

"I guess we'd better sell," said Tom, trying not to betray his inward
satisfaction.

"All right," said Scott, appearing to be well pleased. "You can have
your money when you want it. If you are going to Frisco, I'll give you
an order on my banker there."

"Tom Scott's a square man, and his order will fetch the money," said the
landlord, observing Ferguson's prudent hesitation.

"That is satisfactory," replied Ferguson.

In five minutes more the business was concluded, and Ferguson and Tom,
longing to congratulate each other on their good fortune, walked off
together.

"We're in luck, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom. "I don't know whether I stand
on my head or my heels. I never expected such a price."

"Twelve hundred dollars is a great profit," said Ferguson. "I almost
doubt whether we are justified in asking such an extortionate price of
the poor man."

"He is pleased with his bargain, and I don't think we need to trouble
ourselves about that," answered Tom. "Besides, you know we can't compare
prices with those at home."

"No doubt there is reason in what you say, my lad; but it's not easy at
first to make allowance for the difference."

"That's so, Mr. Ferguson. When shall we go to San Francisco?"

"We will go to-morrow, if we can. I suppose you will wish to send some
money to your father."

"Yes, I am in a hurry to send to him, for I am sure he needs it already.
I can hardly realize that I am worth five hundred dollars."

"Five hundred?"

"Yes, I had a third share in the team."

"That isn't my way of looking at it, Tom."

"Is it possible Mr. Ferguson would cheat me out of my fair share?"
thought Tom, but he only harbored the suspicion for an instant. He had
seen too much of his friend to believe such a thing, and he quietly
waited for an explanation.

"I'll tell you how I propose that we divide it, Tom. First we'll take
out the money each of us put in, one hundred for you and two hundred for
me, and then we'll divide the profit equally."

"But," protested Tom, "you are entitled to two-thirds."

"Then I won't take it," said Ferguson, decidedly. "I only want half of
the profit. That will give me eight hundred dollars, and that ought to
satisfy me."

"And I shall have seven hundred," said Tom, his eyes sparkling.

"Precisely."

"How kind you are, Mr. Ferguson!" exclaimed Tom, eagerly seizing the
Scotchman's hand.

"No, my lad; I am only just. I am glad to help a boy who is working for
his father and family."

"I shouldn't deserve to succeed if I didn't," said Tom, earnestly.

"Always bear that in mind, my lad, and God will smile on your efforts,
and raise you up friends."

In spite of the high price, Tom and his partner felt justified now in
stopping over night at the hotel where they had met with such a piece of
good luck, and the next day started down the river for San Francisco.




CHAPTER XXI.

TOM BUYS A BUSINESS.


It was an interesting moment for our two friends when they landed in San
Francisco. The future Western metropolis was only a town of scattered
wooden and adobe houses, with irregular streets and a general lack of
uniformity in its buildings; but everybody seemed on the alert. The
number of drones was wonderfully small; even the constitutionally lazy
could not resist the golden incentives to labor. Money was looked upon
with very different eyes there and at the East. No one took the trouble
to dispute prices; and a man who landed with an article rare or
desirable could often obtain twenty times its value. Within ten minutes
of his arrival Tom witnessed a case of this kind.

Just as he was entering Montgomery street he noticed a man--evidently a
new-comer--with a fine bunch of pineapples in his hand. He had just
arrived in the steamer Columbus, then anchored out in the stream.

"I shouldn't mind having one of those pineapples," said Tom to Ferguson.

"Doubtless they are high-priced, being a rarity," said the Scotchman.

Just then a passer-by, attracted like Tom, and feeling a similar
longing, stepped up to the new-comer.

"Are those pineapples for sale?" he asked.

"Yes, if you'll pay enough," was the half-jocular reply.

"Name your price."

"Ten dollars."

"Here is your money;" and he put a gold piece into the hand of the
astounded passenger, which represented ten times the sum he had paid for
the fruit at San Blas.

"That's a pretty steep price," said Tom, "for six pineapples."

"It is very wasteful to spend such a sight of money to pamper the
appetite," said the canny Scot. "Truly, a fool and his money are soon
parted."

He was destined to be still more surprised. The purchaser within five
minutes transferred half his purchase to another for fifteen dollars.

"Gold seems to be plenty here," said Tom.

"I hope all provisions are not as high," said Ferguson, "or we shall
soon have a chance to spend all we have."

"Where shall we go first?" asked Tom.

"We had better go to a public house, and secure a lodging," said
Ferguson.

"I wish I knew some one here to direct me."

Scarcely had Tom uttered these words than he cried out in surprise,
"Why, there's John Miles!"

They were passing a little, unpainted, wooden building, of one and a
half stories, used as a grocery. A German name was on the sign; but
behind the rough counter stood the familiar form of John Miles.

Tom dashed into the store, followed by his more dignified companion.

"How are you, John?" he exclaimed.

"Why, if it isn't Tom," returned Miles, his face showing the joy he
felt. "And here's Mr. Ferguson, too."

Then there ensued a hearty shaking of hands, followed by the question,
"When did you get here?"

"About twenty minutes ago."

"And you came straight to me. That's good."

"So it is; but it's an accident. We had no idea where you were. So you
are a grocer, John. Is the place yours?"

"If it is, then I've changed my name," said Miles, pointing to the sign
bearing the name:--

     JOHN SCHINKELWITZ.

"The first name's right, at any rate," said Tom, laughing. "I suppose
you are the clerk, then."

"Yes."

"How long have you been here?"

"Four weeks."

"Is it a good business?"

"Very good. My Dutch friend pays me five dollars a day, and I sleep
here."

"Among the groceries?"

"Yes; it saves me the expense of a bed outside, and that is a good deal.
I haven't saved quite enough to pay you yet, Tom, but I can soon."

"No hurry, John. I have been lucky since I saw you."

"I am glad to hear it, Tom. Did the claim prove more productive?"

"No; but I have been speculating. Guess how much money I have with me."

"A hundred and fifty dollars."

"More."

"Two hundred."

"More yet."

"Not three hundred, Tom?"

"I won't make you guess any more. I have seven hundred dollars. No
wonder you look surprised. I'll tell you how I made it;" and Tom
repeated the story of his purchase and its profitable sale.

"I am not so much surprised now," said Miles, "for in this country a man
will have what he takes a fancy to, no matter what it costs. I am glad
the good luck came to you and Mr. Ferguson. I shouldn't mind having that
amount of money myself."

"What would you do with it?"

"I would buy out my employer, and then I could make money fast."

"Does he want to sell?"

"Yes, he wants to go to the mines."

"Would he sell for such a small sum?"

"Yes; there isn't much of a stock, but we are constantly replenishing. I
tell you what, Tom, _you_ buy him out, and I'll manage the business."

"Are you in earnest, John?"

"Certainly I am."

"But I want to send some money home," objected Tom.

"How much?"

"A hundred dollars at least."

"I'll lend you the hundred, my lad," said Ferguson, "and fifty more, and
you can take your own money and buy the business. I don't favor acting
hastily, in general, but I have faith in our friend here, and I am led
to believe that the enterprise will be a profitable one."

"You'll be my partner, Tom, and I'll give you a third of the profits
without your doing a thing. If you work with me, you shall have as much
more as will be satisfactory."

"I would rather go back to the mines, John, and leave you to manage this
business by yourself. A quarter of the profits will satisfy me."

"No, it shall be a third. As you furnish the capital, that is only
fair."

"We may be counting our chickens too soon. Perhaps your Dutch friend,
whose name I can't pronounce, won't sell."

"Here he is to speak for himself."

A short German, with a ponderous frame, and a broad, good-humored face,
here entered the grocery, panting with the exertion of walking, and
looked inquiringly at Tom and the Scotchman.

"Herr Schinkelwitz, this is my friend, Tom Nelson," said Miles.

"Glad to see you, mine vriend," said the German, addressing Ferguson.

"No, that is Mr. Ferguson," said Miles, smiling. "I should have
introduced him first."

"Wie gehts, Herr Ferguson?" said the grocer. "You have one strange
name."

"Your name seems strange to me," said the Scotchman.

"Oh, no; Schinkelwitz is a very common name. Most peoples admire my
name."

Tom was considerably amused, but Herr Schinkelwitz did not observe the
smile which he could not repress.

"I have told my friends you would like to sell out the business," said
Miles.

"Oh, ja, it is a good business, but my health is not good. I think it
will be much better at the mines. You will do well to buy it yourself."

"I would if I had money enough."

"Ja, I must have the money, for I shall need it."

"My friend here has money, and may buy of you," said Miles, indicating
Tom.

"What, the boy?"

"Yes."

"Where did he get so much money?"

"At the mines."

"Oh, ja, that is a good place to get gold. Well, my young vriend, I will
sell cheap."

It will not be necessary to enter into a detailed account of the
negotiation. It is enough to say that for the sum of seven hundred
dollars Herr Schinkelwitz made over the business to Herr Tom, as he
called him, and our hero found himself penniless, but the owner of a
grocery. In half an hour it was all completed.

"Now, Tom, you are my boss," said Miles. "Shall I put your name
outside?"

"No, John, put your own. I am only a silent partner, you know."

"I congratulate you, Tom," said Ferguson. "Here are two hundred dollars,
for which you can give me your note."

"Two hundred?"

"Yes; you will need some yourself, besides what you send to your
father."

"Suppose I can't pay you back?"

"Then I will levy on the grocery, my lad," said Ferguson.




CHAPTER XXII.

A GAMBLING-HOUSE.


Having completed this important business arrangement, the two friends
went out to explore the town. The limits were narrow compared with those
of the flourishing city of the present day. Where the Palace and Grand
hotels now stand was a sand-hill, and the bay encroached upon the
business part of the city far more than now.

Scarcely a stone's throw from the grocery, on Montgomery street, between
California and Sacramento, was the office of Adams' Express, which
advertised to forward gold-dust and packages by every steamer.

"I will go in here, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom. "I shall not feel
comfortable till I have started this money homeward. I am sure it will
be wanted."

"Right, my lad. We will attend to it, by all means."

They entered the building,--a very humble one it would now be
considered,--but they found other customers before them, and had to wait
for their turn.

"What can I do for you?" asked the clerk, in a quick, business-like
tone.

"I want to send home a hundred dollars," said Tom.

"Give me the address."

This was done, the money paid over, and a receipt returned in two
minutes.

"How long before my father will receive the money?" asked Tom.

"The steamer starts in three days. About a month will be needed."

Then Tom moved aside, and the next man took his place.

"I am glad that is attended to," said Tom, relieved. "Now, Mr. Ferguson,
I will go wherever you wish."

"We had better secure a lodging," said the Scotchman. "When we are sure
of a bed we can walk about at our leisure."

Lodgings were to be had, but they were generally very dear. The first
room looked at was five dollars per day, without board,--a price our
friends were unwilling to pay. Finally they found a decent, though small
room, with rather a narrow bed, which could be had for three fifths of
that sum, and they engaged it.

"We will have to go back to the mines soon," said Tom. "San Francisco is
too expensive for us to live in."

"You can afford it better than I, Tom," said his friend.

"Why?"

"Because you have a business that brings you in an income."

"Oh, I forgot that," said our hero, smiling. "Things happen so fast here
that I haven't got used to my new position. Do you think I invested my
money wisely, Mr. Ferguson?"

"Yes, my lad, since your agent is a trustworthy, honest man."

"I am sure I can trust John Miles."

"If I were not confident of it, also, I would not have encouraged you to
take so important a step."

"I think I won't write to father about it," said Tom, after a pause. "He
might think I had acted foolishly, and become anxious. If I succeed,
then I shall be glad to surprise him. I think I shall make money; but I
don't want to count on it too much. I shall be ready to go back with you
to the mines whenever you say the word."

As they sauntered about, gazing curiously at the motley sights around
them, they heard strains of music. It appeared to proceed from a large
wooden building, with a jutting roof, under which, on benches, lounged a
number of persons, some of them Mexicans, in their native costumes,
smoking cigarettes. A large American flag was displayed over the door,
and a crowd was constantly passing in and out.

"Let us go in," said Tom.

His companion making no objection, they entered. The first sight of the
interior made clear the character of the place. There were numerous
tables, spread with games,--faro, monte, and roulette,--each surrounded
by an absorbed and interested group. "Easy come, easy go," was the rule
with the early California pioneers, and the gaming-table enlisted in its
service many men who would not have dreamed at home that they could ever
be brought to tolerate such an instrument of evil.

Tom was a country boy, and unsophisticated, but he could not help
understanding the nature of the business which brought so many to the
place.

"I suppose they are gambling," he said.

"Yes, poor, deluded creatures!" said the Scotchman, who had been brought
up to an abhorrence of games of chance. "They are wasting their time and
their substance, and foolishly laying up for themselves future misery."

Had this remark been heard it would have excited indignation, and
perhaps subjected the speaker to insult; but the players were too
intent upon their varying chances to pay any attention to the remarks of
by-standers.

"I hope, Tom, you will never yield to the seductive lures of the
gaming-table," continued Ferguson.

"I don't think there is much danger," said Tom. "I have always been
taught that gambling is wicked."

"May you long feel so, my lad!"

Tom did, however, watch the players with interest. He saw money lost and
won, without understanding exactly how it was decided. From the game his
attention was drawn to the gamesters. He was led to notice,
particularly, a young man of prepossessing countenance, who was
evidently profoundly excited. From time to time he drew out a roll of
gold pieces, which he placed on a card, and invariably lost. He must
have had a considerable sum; but, small or large, he was in ill-luck,
and constantly lost. As he neared the end of his resources the feverish
blush upon his handsome features was succeeded by a deep pallor, and
there was no mistaking the expression of deep anguish and despair which
announced that he had reached the end.

Tom became painfully interested in the young man, and silently drew the
attention of his companion to him. When the end came, and the victim,
thoroughly "cleaned out," turned to go out, Tom said, in a low voice,
"Let us follow him."

Ferguson acquiesced. He, too, had become interested, and the young man's
expression as he passed our two friends was so despairing that Ferguson
felt some alarm as to the effect of his disappointment upon his mind.

Once in the street, Ferguson and Tom followed the unfortunate young man
into an obscure street, keeping up with difficulty, for his pace was
rapid and excited. It proved to be a fortunate thing, for when he
supposed himself free from observation the young man drew a pistol, and,
with an incoherent exclamation, placed it in contact with his temple.

Tom sprang forward, and so did the Scotchman; but the boy was the
quicker and more agile, and dashed the pistol aside just in time to
prevent a suicide.

"Why did you do that?" asked the baffled would-be-suicide, gloomily,
turning his gaze upon Tom.

"I was afraid you were going to kill yourself."

"So I was."

"What could induce you to take such a rash step?" asked Ferguson.

"I have been a reckless fool. I have lost all my money at the accursed
gambling-table, and my life is not worth retaining."

"It appears to me," said the Scotchman, quietly, "that you set too high
a value upon money. You have certainly been very foolish to risk it at
the gaming-table, and the loss will no doubt inconvenience you; but was
your money all you had to live for?"

The young man regarded Ferguson with some surprise; but his excitement
was evidently abated. The quiet tone of the speaker had a favorable
effect upon him.

"I didn't think of it in that light," he admitted.

"Have you no relatives to whom your life is of value?"

"Yes," answered the young man. "I have a mother and sister."

"Would not your death affect them more than the loss of money?"

"Yes."

"It seems to me that to take your life would be to treat them cruelly."

The young man was evidently agitated by contending thoughts.

"I suppose you are right," he said, slowly; "but let me tell you all,
and you can judge me better: I arrived in California six months since.
My home is in Ohio, not far from Cincinnati. I was fortunate enough to
commence mining at a point on the western slope of the Sierra Nevada
Mountains where I was almost alone. I 'struck it rich,' and two days
since arrived in San Francisco with over two thousand dollars in
gold-dust."

"You were certainly in luck," said Ferguson, surprised.

"I turned it into money, and, in strolling about the city, was lured
into that accursed den. I looked on and was fascinated. I thought I
would try my luck. I began with a small stake, and kept on till I had
lost every dollar. In one hour the fruits of six months' labor are gone.
Do you wonder that I am reduced to despair?"




CHAPTER XXIII.

A NEW SCHEME.


"I see no cause for despair," replied Ferguson, in the same calm tone.

"I have not a penny left out of the two thousand dollars I had only an
hour since."

"I understand all that."

"I am a ruined man," said the young man, despondently.

"I don't admit that. How old are you?"

"Twenty-one."

"You are well and strong, are you not?"

"Oh, yes, I have nothing to complain of on that score."

"Then it appears to me that your loss is not serious. Your capital still
remains."

"My capital?" repeated the young man.

"Yes; your strong arms, your education, your capacity to labor."

"But I shall have to begin over again."

"Beginning over again at your age, when, possibly, fifty years of life
lie before you, is not such a serious matter. Were I in your
situation,--and I am twice as old as you,--I should not thing of
despairing. Don't you think it would be rather foolish for two thousand
dollars, which you have been only six months in accumulating, to throw
away fifty years, and all that you can make in that time, thereby
bringing a life-long grief to your mother and sister?"

The calm, logical tone of the Scotchman had its effect.

"I see that I was about to add to one piece of folly another far
greater," said the young man. "I don't know who you are, sir, but I
heartily thank you and your son for saving my life."

"This is not my son, but my young friend, Thomas Nelson," said Ferguson.
"I am not so fortunate as to have a son."

"Well, God bless you both, and good-night!"

"Excuse my persistency, but may I ask where you are going?"

"I am not going to repeat my folly of just now, if that is what you
mean."

"I did not suspect you of that; but are you sure of a bed anywhere?"

"No; I have no money to pay for one. I shall walk the streets, or
possibly lie down in some quiet place. I was accustomed to roughing it
at the mines, and can do it again if necessary."

"Tom and I have a room in which you are welcome to find a shelter. I am
sorry that our bed is too narrow to hold another."

"Thank you. That will be better than to sleep in the streets. But are
you not afraid to make me this offer?"

"Why should I be?"

"I might rob you during the night."

"You might, but you don't look like one who would so reward confidence."

"You are right. If you had fifty thousand dollars I would not touch a
dollar of it. I will accept your offer. How can I repay you for your
kindness?"

"There may be a way. We will talk of that this evening."

Nine o'clock found the three collected in the small room which had been
hired by Ferguson for himself and Tom.

"My friend," said Ferguson, "you told us that you found a favorable
place for mining up in the Sierras."

"Yes, I 'struck it rich.'"

"I take it for granted that you did not exhaust the wealth of the
place?"

"Far from it. I only dipped into it. There is abundance left."

"Is this place known to many?"

"To only one, so far as I know. He and I worked independently, but were
company for each other."

"But what induced you to leave so rich a claim?"

"I was tired of working, and wanted to come to the city for a change.
You know what a change I have experienced here."

"Why don't you go back and start anew in the place where you met with
your former good fortune?" asked Ferguson.

"Because I am penniless. I must find something to do here for a while.
When I have got together a little fund, sufficient for the purpose, I
will go back."

"Would you go back now, if you had the chance?"

"Would I? Certainly I would, for I could make money faster there than
here."

"Would you have any objection to let Tom and myself accompany you?"

"Not the least. I should be glad of your company. There is gold enough
for us all."

"Then we will start to-morrow, that is, if you and Tom are willing."

"I am ready," said Tom, promptly.

"But I have nothing. I don't like to be an expense to you," objected the
young man.

"We will pay your expenses. We shall be more than recompensed by the
richness of the mines. We might find something to do here, but both Tom
and myself prefer the freedom of the mining camp, and, if the spot is
as rich as you have led us to suspect, we shall make more money there."

"Agreed!" said the young man, promptly. "Name the hour of starting, and
rely upon me to be ready."

Ferguson was evidently well pleased with this response. He felt that his
new acquaintance would be so far away from the city, and would sooner
retrieve his fortunes at the mines. He hoped, too, to find opportunity
to strengthen his principles, and guard him against the temptations of
the city when he should again visit it. Again, he had reason to think
that the arrangement would benefit Tom and himself in a pecuniary way,
and the Scotchman was by no means indifferent to that consideration;
though, as we have seen, he did not unduly exalt the power or value of
money.

Tom, too, was pleased with the prospect. He was grateful and attached to
Ferguson, whom he felt to be a true friend, but he was glad to have
another companion nearer his own age. The young man was of a
prepossessing exterior, and when he had shaken off his present
disquietude looked as if he might be a cheerful and agreeable companion.

"Since we are to live together, for a time at least, and become
fellow-workers," said Ferguson, "we ought to know each other better. I
will introduce myself first."

Hereupon Ferguson gave a brief account of himself, which need not be
repeated, and then called upon Tom, who followed his example.

"Now it is my turn," said their new acquaintance. "You don't even know
my name yet, though you have done me such an important service. I have
already told you that I am from Ohio. My name is Richard Russell, though
my friends generally call me Dick. My father, whom I had the misfortune
to lose several years since, was at one time a member of Congress. He
left a small property, the income of which is barely sufficient to
provide my mother and sister with the comforts of life. I had a fair
education, including enough Latin and Greek to fit me for entering
college. My mother desired me to enter; but I knew that she could not
keep me there without practicing pinching economy, and I secured a place
with a small salary in a business house in Cincinnati. A year since,
when the papers were full of the gold discoveries on this coast, I was
seized, like so many others, with the golden fever, and arranged to
start overland. It would have proved a wise step had I not been so rash
a fool as to squander my earnings; for two thousand dollars in six
months compare very favorably with twelve dollars a week, which I was
earning at home. I might have gone home by the next steamer, and had
money enough to carry me through a course of legal study, had I desired.
I am out of patience with myself when I think of how I have thrown away
my good fortune."

"Don't think too much of the past, which cannot be recalled. Resolve not
to repeat your folly, and all may yet be well."

"I have fully resolved upon that," said Russell, earnestly.

"Do you think you shall study law, if you are again fortunate, Mr.
Russell?" asked Tom.

"If you please don't call me Mr. Russell, unless you want me to call you
Mr. Nelson. Call me Dick."

"I will," said Tom, smiling, "for I am not ready to be called Mr. Nelson
yet."

"Now, to answer your question: if I can get two thousand dollars
together again, I shall probably study law. Of course I don't mean to be
a miner all my life any more than you. Now, Tom, what are your plans?"

"I think I should like to be a lawyer, too, but I must earn more than
two thousand dollars first."

"Two thousand ought to be sufficient to educate you if you are
economical."

"It would be, but I want to pay off a mortgage on my father's farm
before I begin to lay up money for myself."

"You are a good fellow, Tom, and I wish you success."

"Thank you, Dick. I will succeed if hard work can bring success."

"Good-night to you both," said Ferguson. "I want to sleep well to
prepare myself for starting to-morrow."

In half an hour all three were sleeping soundly.




CHAPTER XXIV.

PREPARING FOR A NEW START.


When Tom opened his eyes he did not at first remember where he was, but
a glance at Dick Russell, his new acquaintance, stretched out on the
floor and still sleeping, quickly recalled the important events of the
day previous. Mr. Ferguson was already dressed.

"Well, Tom, are you rested?" he asked.

"Yes, Mr. Ferguson; I slept like a top. What time is it?"

"It is seven o'clock. Our new friend is still asleep."

"I suppose he was on his feet all day yesterday."

"I don't know whether I ought to hurry you away from San Francisco so
soon, Tom," said his Scotch friend. "We only arrived yesterday, and you
have not had time to see the place, and enjoy yourself after your hard
work at the mines."

"I don't care for that, Mr. Ferguson. I am anxious to be at work again.
I didn't come out here to enjoy myself, but to make money for my
father."

"You have succeeded pretty well thus far, Tom."

"Yes; but I have made more by the sale of the team than by work at the
mines."

"True; but that is a legitimate transaction. If our friend here has
reported correctly, we shall find mining more profitable in the place he
mentions than at River Bend."

"I have no objection to that, though I was satisfied with River Bend.
Wouldn't it be splendid, Mr. Ferguson, if we could do as well in the
next six months as he did?"

"Making two thousand dollars each?"

"Yes."

"We may accomplish it; but it is best not to calculate upon it."

"If I could only free the farm from that troublesome mortgage I should
be proud and happy. It has worn upon father, as I could see, and he has
been compelled to toil early and late to pay the interest, besides
supporting us all."

"How much is the mortgage, Tom?"

"Twenty-two hundred dollars."

"You have made a good beginning towards it already, Tom. You have seven
hundred dollars invested in business."

"But out of that I owe you a hundred and fifty, Mr. Ferguson."

"Don't trouble yourself about that, Tom. Unless I should stand in great
need of it, I will wait till you have paid off the mortgage before
asking to have it repaid."

"You are very kind, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom, gratefully. "A part of my
seven hundred dollars rightfully belongs to you, for you owned
two-thirds of the horse and wagon."

"I couldn't have bought them without your help, Tom. So you see that you
enabled me to make money. I am quite satisfied with an equal
partnership."

"And I am very well satisfied with my partner," said Tom, smiling.
"Shall we wake up Russell?"

"Yes, for we have much to do to-day."

"John Miles will be surprised at my leaving the city so quick."

"By the way, Tom, as he is to remain here, while you are out of the
reach of post-offices, it may be well to ask your father to direct
future letters to his care, and he can forward them as he has
opportunity."

"That is a good idea. I will write to-day so as to catch the next
steamer, and I will also speak to John."

Tom had to shake Dick Russell energetically before that young man opened
his eyes.

"What's the matter?" he ejaculated, drowsily.

"Don't you want some breakfast?" asked Tom.

"Oh, it's you, Tom! Yes, you have touched the right chord. I have a
first-class appetite--and no money," he added, his face clouding.

"Mr. Ferguson is treasurer," said Tom, lightly, wishing to divert
Russell from the thoughts of his heavy loss, and the folly to which he
owed it; "but we know very little of the city. Can you guide us to a
good restaurant?"

"To a good one, but not a cheap one. Everything is high here."

"Then it is fortunate we are going to leave so soon."

In a small restaurant, on Montgomery street, our three friends partook
of a hearty breakfast. It might not have attracted an epicure, but
neither of the three was fastidious; and, though the charge was five
dollars, Ferguson, economical as he was, paid the bill cheerfully. It
was the first "civilized" breakfast he had eaten for months, and it
might be months before he would be able to partake of another as good.

"I wish we could breakfast like this at the mines," said Tom.

"So say I," chimed in Dick Russell; "but you know that the gold-hunter
must sacrifice home comforts."

"I shan't complain of that, if I can do as well as you did," said Tom.

"I see no reason why you can't. There is plenty of gold there, and all
that is needed is work and perseverance."

"I am willing to contribute them," said Tom. "I mean to do my best to
succeed."

"None of us can do more, my lad," said Ferguson. "Let us hope that God
will prosper our undertakings."

"I say, I am glad I have met with you two," said Dick Russell. "You'll
keep me on the right track; and, in spite of my past folly, I hope in
time to win success."

"I am glad to hear you speak so sensibly, my young friend," said the
Scotchman, kindly. "It's a great deal better to put your back to the
wheel once more, than to take the life God gave you."

"Don't speak of that again, Mr. Ferguson," said Russell, shuddering. "I
don't like to think of it."

"He'll do," thought Ferguson, with satisfaction. "His mind is now in a
healthy condition, and I have great hopes of him."

The rest of the day was devoted to the purchase of supplies. Ferguson
also bought a mule, in behalf of the party, which was of service in
carrying a part of their burdens. It was not until afternoon that Tom
found an opportunity to call on John Miles, and acquaint him with his
almost immediate departure.

"I am sorry you are going away so soon, Tom," said Miles. "I thought you
would stay at least a week."

"So I would if I were not so anxious to be at work once more. You know
how my father is situated, John, for I have told you more than once."

"Yes, Tom; but I see no reason why you should feel uneasy. With the help
you are to send him, there will be no trouble about his paying his
interest regularly."

"I know that, John; but I shall feel uneasy until the mortgage is paid
off, and he is out of Squire Hudson's power."

"For how long a time has the farm your father owns been encumbered with
this mortgage?"

"For ten years, at least."

"Is the mortgage for any specified term of years?"

"I don't think so."

"It merely runs from year to year then?"

"I suppose so."

"In that case this Squire Hudson could foreclose at any time, could he
not?"

"Yes," answered Tom, soberly.

"Don't make yourself uneasy about it, however," said Miles, observing
that Tom seemed apprehensive. "As your father's farm is not particularly
valuable, there can be no danger of foreclosure. By the way, wouldn't
you like to have me remit your father something next month out of the
profits of the business?--I can charge it to your account."

"I am glad you mentioned it, John. You may send him fifty or
seventy-five dollars, if my share should amount to so much."

"I will."

"And I am going to have my home letters directed to your care. You can
forward them to me whenever you have an opportunity."

"I won't fail, Tom. If there is anything you need sent out to you, you
have only to write me, and I will attend to your commissions."

"It is very convenient to have an agent in the city," said John,
smiling. "I shall feel much more comfortable out at the mines."

"I wish you good luck, Tom; but remember, even if you don't succeed in
your search for gold, I shall be making money for you here."

"You make me feel quite like a capitalist, John."

"I hope you may be one some day. Good-by!"

They shook hands and parted. Before night-fall Tom had started on his
new journey in quest of gold.




CHAPTER XXV.

WHITEFACE.


Mark Nelson missed sorely the cow which he had been compelled to yield
to the squire on account of default of interest. Whiteface was his best
cow, and a great favorite with all the children. She gave nearly as much
milk as the other two, and had been one of the main dependences of the
family. It was worth considerably more than the thirty dollars for which
the squire took it; but he insisted upon that and no other, and
Whiteface had to go.

Six months had passed, and there seemed to be very little chance of
redeeming the lost cow. Squire Hudson had agreed to give her back on
payment of the balance due, with accrued interest; but neither he nor
Mark Nelson expected that such an offer would be made.

"I was passing Squire Hudson's to-day, and saw poor Whiteface," said
Walter, one evening. "I think she knew me, for when I called her she
lowed back."

"I wish we had her back," said Sarah. "It was heartless in the squire to
take her. He had a dozen cows of his own."

"He hasn't any heart," said Walter, "or, if he has, it must be pretty
small."

"We must not forget that he was entitled to some security for the
balance of interest I owe him," said the farmer.

"The cow was worth a good deal more than thirty dollars," said Sarah.

"Yes, she was; but I am not sure whether I could have got any more money
for her at a forced sale. Then you know the squire is pledged to give
her back whenever I can pay him the thirty dollars, with interest."

"I wish you could pay it now, father," said Walter.

"So do I, my boy; but I cannot, unless your brother sends me some
money."

"It is three weeks since we have heard from Tom," said Mrs. Nelson,
anxiously. "I am afraid he is sick."

"Don't worry yourself with imaginary fears, Mary," said her husband.
"Tom may be sick, of course; but he is strong and healthy, and we won't
fear such a thing without some ground. Probably a letter is on the way
from him now."

"I hope he is making money," said Walter. "I wish I were with him."

"I would never consent to have you go too," said Mrs. Nelson, hastily.

"I don't think Walter seriously thinks of asking leave," said Mr.
Nelson, smiling. "As he is only thirteen years old, I should be inclined
to object myself. I must have him at home to help me with the farm."

"I should be perfectly contented to stay at home if we had Whiteface
back," said Walter. "I've a great mind to steal her out of the squire's
yard. I bet she'd be glad to come."

"Don't speak in that way, Walter," said his father. "I dislike to have
you speak of stealing, even in fun."

At this moment there was a knock at the front door. Farmer Nelson's
house was an old-fashioned one, and not provided with a bell.

"Go to the door, Sarah," said her father.

Sarah obeyed.

"Good-evening, Nahum," she said to the village expressman.

"I've got a small package for your folks," said Nahum. "It's marked all
over. Guess it came from Californy."

"It must be from Tom," exclaimed Sarah, in delight.

"That's what I thought," said the expressman, who knew everybody in the
village, and could probably give a fairly correct list of their sisters,
cousins, and aunts, with a fair guess at their worldly circumstances.

"Is there anything to pay, Nahum?"

"Only fifty cents,--the expressage from Boston. Never mind about it now,
for I'm in a hurry. Your father can hand it to me next time he sees me."

"O father, here's a package from Tom," said Sarah, hurrying into the
room where they were all sitting.

"Open it quick," said Walter. "See if there's any money in it."

The cord was cut, and a small box was disclosed containing a hundred
dollars in gold pieces and a line from Tom, stating that he was doing
well, and that he hoped soon to send some more money.

"A hundred dollars! What a lot of money!" exclaimed Walter, gazing on
the little pile of coins as if fascinated.

"I am so glad the dear boy is doing well," said Mrs. Nelson.

"Now we can have Whiteface back, can't we, father?" asked Walter,
joyfully.

"Yes, Walter," said Mark Nelson, almost as excited as his son. "I will
go over the first thing in the morning."

"Can't we go over this evening?" asked Walter, impatiently.

"No, it is dark, and Whiteface is stalled for the night."

"You'll have seventy dollars left over, father, won't you?"

"Yes; and that will provide for my next interest. I feel grateful and
happy at Tom's success and his thoughtfulness."

Could Tom have seen the effect of his remittance it would have made his
heart glad, and he would have felt abundantly repaid for his labor and
self-denial.




CHAPTER XXVI.

SQUIRE HUDSON'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


If Whiteface was missed at her old home, she was scarcely less
appreciated by her new possessor. On the very morning succeeding the day
when Tom's remittance was received the squire remarked to his head
workman, "Whiteface is an excellent cow, Abner."

"Yes, squire, I calculate she's the best you've got."

"I don't know but she is, Abner," said the squire, complacently. "I
consider her worth at least fifty dollars."

"So she is, every cent of it."

"And she cost me only thirty," thought Squire Hudson, with a smile of
content.

He was a rich man, and abundantly able to pay his poor neighbor the full
value of the cow; but somehow it never occurred to him to do it. He was
not above taking an unfair advantage of a man who was unluckily in his
power. Of course the squire knew that Farmer Nelson had a right to
redeem the cow at the price agreed upon with interest; but he felt
pretty safe on this point. The farmer was not very likely to have thirty
dollars to spare, and as for a remittance from Tom the squire was pretty
sure none would be received.

"It'll be all the boy can do to take care of himself out there," he
reflected, "let alone sending money home. He may send ten dollars or so
some time; but it's very doubtful, very doubtful!"

Squire Hudson turned to go back to the house when he saw the man of whom
he had been thinking coming up the road. He stopped short, thinking the
farmer might wish to speak to him.

"Good-morning, Mr. Nelson," he said, pleasantly, for he was in
good-humor.

"Good-morning, squire."

"Your Whiteface has got to feel quite at home in my barn-yard."

"She is a good cow, Squire Hudson."

"Yes, tolerable, tolerable."

"She is worth more than the thirty dollars for which you took her."

"Well, I don't know about that. Cows are pretty cheap nowadays."

"I see how it is," thought the squire. "Nelson wants me to allow him
more for the cow; but a bargain is a bargain, and I shan't do it."

"I always valued her at a considerably higher price."

"No doubt, no doubt. You raised her yourself, didn't you?"

"Yes."

"That makes a difference, of course. You attach a sentimental value to
her; but that doesn't affect her real value. I really can't allow you
any more for her."

"I don't want you to, Squire Hudson."

The squire looked astonished.

"What is the man driving at?" he thought.

"She may not be worth any more to you, and so you won't mind my taking
her back."

"Taking her back!" ejaculated the squire.

"Certainly; it was agreed that I could redeem her at any time, by paying
you the thirty dollars and interest."

"Not after two months," said the squire, hastily.

"It is not two months. It was only six weeks yesterday. The fact is,
squire, I've come for Whiteface, and I've got the money for you."

"Have you heard from Tom?" asked the squire, with a blank look of
disappointment.

"Yes; I heard from him yesterday."

"And he sent you some money?"

"Yes; he reports that he is doing well."

"Did he send you thirty dollars?"

"Rather more than that," said Mark Nelson, not caring to gratify the
curiosity of his creditor.

"I think you had better keep your money, and leave Whiteface with me,"
said Squire Hudson, after a pause.

"I would rather not, squire. The fact is, Whiteface is a sort of pet at
home, and we all want her back."

Squire Hudson was disconcerted. He had not expected that Mr. Nelson
would be able to redeem the cow, and he was reluctant to give her up.
But there was no excuse for retaining her. His agreement stood in the
way.

"Neighbor Nelson," he said, after a pause, "I don't mind giving you five
dollars over and above what you owe me for Whiteface. Come, that's a
good offer."

Mark Nelson shook his head.

"She's worth more than that," he said. "But that's neither here nor
there. I raised the animal, and it was sorely against my will that I
parted with her six weeks ago. Now that I have the money to pay you I
want her back."

"I think you are standing in your own light, Mr. Nelson," said the
squire. "I have taken a fancy to the cow, and am willing to pay more for
her than she is worth. I will say ten dollars."

Mark Nelson shook his head.

"I'd rather have Whiteface than the money," he said.

"If she comes into my possession again," said Squire Hudson, "I shall
not be willing to grant you the privilege of redeeming her. It won't be
many months before another payment becomes due."

"I hope to be ready to meet it, squire," said the farmer, not appearing
at all anxious.

"He seems very independent," thought the squire, watching, moodily, the
cow driven away by her former owner. "He may sing another tune on
interest day. I wonder how much the boy sent home."

Had he known that Mr. Nelson had in his pocket enough money to pay the
whole of the next accruing interest, he would have felt more doubtful
about recovering the cow which he now coveted more than ever.

"Well, Abner, I've lost her," said the squire, hurrying to his
assistant; "but she'll be back here some day, mark my words!"

"I thought you bought her, squire," said Abner, in surprise.

"Well, not exactly. I took her for a debt; but Nelson had the right of
redeeming her, and he has done it. His boy sent him the money."

"That Tom Nelson is a smart boy," said Abner, who, though in the
squire's employ, was friendly to our hero.

"Well, so-so," remarked the squire, indifferently. "I helped him to go
to California; but I am not sure whether it was a wise step. I let my
feelings get the better of my judgment."

"Then it is the first time," was Abner's unspoken comment.

"It may turn out for the best," he said aloud.

"I doubt if I shall ever see my money again," said the squire; but he
did not seem to take it to heart, judging from his manner and tone.

"Didn't you have security for the loan?" asked Abner.

"Well, ye-es," answered the squire, slowly; "but not very good. The farm
was already mortgaged for its full value."

"The squire is getting benevolent," thought Abner, "or he wants me to
think so; but I'm inclined to think he has some object under it all.
What is it?"

A few weeks later Farmer Nelson's heart was gladdened by the receipt of
another remittance this time sent by John Miles, out of the profit of
the business in which Tom was his partner. The amount this time was
seventy-five dollars. It made him feel quite rich.

"Mary," he said, "we all need some new clothes, and I propose to use
this money for that purpose. Now I want you to consider how we can spend
it to the best advantage. To begin with, you must buy a new dress. You
have long needed one."

Mrs. Nelson demurred a little, but was forced to admit that the dress
was needed. So the purchases were made at once. It is wonderful how far
seventy-five dollars will go in an economical family of plain tastes. It
was soon apparent to the neighbors that the Nelsons were exhibiting
signs of prosperity.

"It must be Tom," they decided.

Efforts were made to ascertain just how much our hero had sent home; but
on this point the Nelsons would not speak definitely. They reported in
general terms that Tom was doing well.

Of course Squire Hudson was not ignorant of the apparent improvement in
the fortunes of his debtor. Strange to say, he seemed rather annoyed. He
was pleased, however, by the outlay for dress.

"They're getting extravagant, Abner," he said, cheerfully. "I thought
Mark Nelson was a man of more sense. Because his son has sent home a
little money, he must rig out the whole family in new clothes. 'A fool
and his money are soon parted.'"

"Mark Nelson is no fool," said Abner, stoutly.

"He is in this instance," said the squire, sharply. "However, I don't
object to it, if he likes to violate the rules of prudence. It strikes
me, however, that it would be well for him to pay up the money I
advanced for Tom's expenses, before buying new clothes wholesale."

Abner repeated this to Mr. Nelson.

The farmer answered quietly, "The squire is not wholly wrong. It is good
doctrine to pay your debts before you spend money for what you don't
need. In this case, however, we did need the clothes we bought. Now that
we are provided, I hope, before very long, if Tom is prospered, to pay
back the two hundred dollars the squire advanced for him."

"I hope you will, I'm sure," said Abner. "That's a smart boy of yours,
and I always said so."

"He is a good boy, and I am sure he will do what is right."

"He's a blamed sight better than the squire's boy. Sinclair is a
stuck-up jackanapes, and it would do me good to kick him."

"It might not do him any good."

"I am not sure about that; I think he needs it."




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE NEW DIGGINGS.


Meanwhile Tom and his party, pursuing their journey by easy stages, for
they sensibly determined not to overtask their strength, reached at last
the spot of which Russell had spoken. Ferguson and Tom soon found that
he had not exaggerated. The new diggings were certainly far richer than
those at River Bend. It was, in fact, the bed of a dead river upon which
Russell had stumbled without knowing it. My readers are probably aware
that in the beds of rivers or creeks the early miners found their first
harvest of gold, and, that, where practicable, these were mined by
turning the stream in the dry season, when the water was low. As it may
not be so well understood what is meant by a dead river, I quote a
passage from an article in the "Overland Monthly," as found in the pages
of the "Pacific Coast Mining Review," for the year 1878-79:--

"A dead river is one which formerly existed, but exists no longer. In
volcanic regions it sometimes happens that the liquid lava, seeking the
lowest ground, fills up the beds of the rivers which die and are
replaced by water-courses running in other channels and in different
directions. These dead streams are so few, and of so little importance
elsewhere, that, as yet, I believe, no class name has been given to
them; but in California they are among the chief source of its mineral
wealth, and among the most remarkable features of its geological
formation. They take us back to a remote era, before the time of Rome,
of Greece, or of Egypt; far back beyond the origin of history or
tradition, before our coast had taken its present shapes; before Shasta,
and Lassen, and Castle Peaks had poured out their lava floods; before
the Sacramento river had its birth; and while, if not before, the
mastodon, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the horse, the mammoth bull, the
tapir, and the bison lived in the land. They are indeed among the most
remarkable discoveries of the age, and among the greatest wonders of
geology. They deserve some common name, and we have to choose between
'extinct' and 'dead.' We speak of 'extinct volcanoes,' and of 'dead
languages,' and, as the latter is Saxon and short, we prefer it. They
have been called 'old channels;' but this name does not convey the
proper idea, since a channel is not necessarily a river, and an old
channel is not necessarily a dead one. A dead river is a channel
formerly occupied by a running stream, but now filled up with earthy or
rocky matter, and is not to be confounded with a channel that is open
and remains dry during the greater part of the year because of a lack of
water, or that has been abandoned by the stream for a deeper channel
elsewhere. A dry river-bed is not a dead river.

"The dead rivers of California, so far as are known, are on the western
slope of the Sierra Nevada, from five hundred to seven thousand feet
above the level of the sea. They are all gold-yielding, and therefore
they have been sought and examined. They have yielded probably _three
hundred millions_ in all; they now produce perhaps eight million dollars
annually. They are not less interesting to the miner than to the
geologist, not less important to the statesman than to the antiquarian."

At the risk of being considered tedious by some of my boy-readers, I
will transcribe the writer's explanation of the existence of these dead
rivers. For the reason we must go back to a remote geological epoch:
"The main cause must have been the subsequent rise of the Sierra Nevada.
Suppose that a range of mountains, seven thousand feet high, were
upheaved thirty miles east of the Mississippi; that the bed of that
stream were on the mountain side, three thousand feet above the sea, and
that thirty miles west the country maintained its present level; the
result would be that the present Mississippi would soon be a dead river;
it would be cut across by streams running down the mountain side, and
flowing into a new Mississippi, thirty miles or more west of the present
one. We know that the Sierra Nevada has been upheaved; that a large
stream ran on what is now the mountain side, and that it has been
succeeded by a new river farther west, and we must infer that the death
of the old and the birth of the new river were caused by the upheaval."

Reference is here made to the Big Blue Lead, the largest dead river
known in California, which has been traced for a distance of sixty-five
miles, from Little Grizzly, in Sierra County, to Forest Hill, in Placer
County. The original river, however, is thought to have run for many
hundreds of miles. Eventually traces of its existence may be found
elsewhere.

It is not to be supposed that Tom and his friends knew anything about
dead rivers, or troubled themselves as to how the rich deposits had been
made, or how long they had been waiting discovery. They were chiefly
engaged with more practical considerations. They found a rich harvest in
the ravines, and they went to work energetically.

The work was monotonous, and a detailed account of their progress would
be tiresome. What we chiefly care about is results, and these may be
gathered from a conversation which took place some five months later.

Under a tent, at night-fall, reclined the three friends. They looked
contented, and on good terms with the world; but, though prosperous,
they certainly did not look it. In fact, they were all three
exceedingly, almost disreputably, shabby. They looked more like tramps
than respectable gold-miners.

"Tom, you are looking very ragged," said Dick Russell, surveying our
hero critically.

"I know it, Dick. I feel as though I had just come out of a rag-bag. I
can't say that you look much better, nor Ferguson either."

"This rough work is hard on clothing," said Russell. "I wish there were
a ready-made clothing store near by."

"So do I. I would pay a high price for a good suit."

"If our friends at home could see us, what would they think, eh, Tom?"

"That we were candidates for the poor-house."

"That's so. I've been into several poor-houses in the course of my life,
but I never saw any of the inmates quite so poorly clad as we are."

"You are right," said Ferguson; "but there are generally compensations.
I was taking account of stock, and I estimate that I have from sixteen
to eighteen hundred dollars' worth of gold-dust."

"I have nearly as much," said Tom.

"My pile won't vary far from Tom's," said Russell.

"That is a pretty good showing for five months, my friend," said the
Scotchman.

"It will make up for the old clothes," said Tom.

"I have been thinking," said Ferguson, "that we need a vacation. What do
you say to starting next week for San Francisco?"

"I agree," said Russell, promptly.

"And I," said Tom. "I should like to see John Miles."

"Very well. We will continue our work about a week longer, and then
start."




CHAPTER XXVIII.

A RICH DEPOSIT.


About the middle of the next forenoon Tom suddenly stopped work.

"What's the matter, Tom? Are you tired?"

"No, but I feel like exploring a little. Who goes with me?"

"Not I," answered Ferguson. "Let well enough alone."

"I'll go with you," said Russell. "I should like a holiday. Besides, we
may discover something."

"'A rolling stone gathers no moss,'" said Ferguson.

"True, but there's another proverb: 'All work and no play makes Jack a
dull boy.' Tom and I will try a little play."

The two friends sauntered away in an idle mood; yet, combining business
with pleasure, they watched carefully the surface indications, ready to
avail themselves of any that were favorable.

"It's a strange life we are leading, Tom," said Russell. "It is free,
and independent, and healthful; but I shouldn't like to live so all my
life."

"Nor I," answered Tom. "No amount of gold would repay me."

"Because gold is only valuable for what it will bring. Here it brings
nothing."

"Except the hope of future ease and comfort," suggested Tom.

"Of course; that is what we are working for. We have made a good
beginning."

"Yes, Dick. I have almost accomplished what I have had in view ever
since I left home."

"I know. You mean paying off your father's mortgage."

"That's it. It amounts to twenty-two hundred dollars, and I have but a
few hundred dollars more to earn. I would stay here a month or two
longer, if my clothes would hold together; but I can't risk it."

"You need rest, at any rate, Tom, leaving clothes out of the question."

As he spoke, Tom, without special thought, drove his pick into the
ground. It was a lucky inspiration. Some shining particles attracted the
attention of Russell.

"Tom," he exclaimed, in excitement, "do you see that, and that? I
believe you've struck a bonanza."

Upon that both set to work in earnest. A further investigation showed
that Russell was right. Tom, by good luck, had chanced upon a deposit of
far greater richness than any they had yet encountered.

"If it holds out, our fortunes are made, Tom," said Russell. "Go and
call Ferguson, and I will remain on guard till you come back."

Tom stood not on the order of his going, but went at once.

"What's the matter, Tom?" asked the Scotchman, as, panting and
breathless, Tom stood before him. "Has anything happened to Russell?"

"No; it's good news--splendid news, Mr. Ferguson. We've found a place
ten times as rich as this. Come at once, and see."

Ferguson made preparations to accompany Tom with what seemed to our hero
to be provoking deliberation. In truth the Scotchman, with his national
caution, was rather skeptical as to Tom's news, and did not suffer
himself to become enthusiastic or excited. Tom had hard work to
accommodate his impatient steps to the measured pace of his more sedate
companion. When at length they reached the spot they found Russell no
less impatient.

"I thought you would never come," he said.

"Tom wanted to fly," said Ferguson; "but I am too old for that. Now,
what is it you have found?"

When he was shown what had been discovered he admitted that it was very
promising.

"If it holds out, we shall be lucky," he said.

"It _will_ hold out," said Russell, enthusiastically.

"It isn't well to be too confident," said Ferguson, cautiously.

"You are very cold-blooded, Mr. Ferguson," said Russell, impatiently.
"Won't anything excite you?"

"What good would it do to become excited?" returned the Scotchman. "I am
as ready to test the matter as you are, and I shall rejoice if your
sanguine expectations are realized. Do not expect too much, however, and
you will guard against possible disappointment."

But there was no disappointment awaiting them. They worked steadily for
two weeks, with marvelous results. In this time they unearthed six
thousand dollars' worth of gold, which by arrangement they divided
equally between them; and still the gold deposit was far from being
exhausted.

At the end of the fortnight they were visited by a party of capitalists
from San Francisco, who were out on an exploring expedition. They
recognized the richness of the new discoveries, and after some
negotiation offered the three friends ten thousand dollars for their
claims. One consideration decided them to accept. It was absolutely
necessary for them to go to the city for clothing and other articles, of
which they stood in imperative need. They closed the bargain and started
on their return.




CHAPTER XXIX.

BAD NEWS FROM HOME.


Arriving in the city late in the afternoon, Tom went at once to see John
Miles. When the latter caught sight of Tom, in his ragged attire, he
came to the natural conclusion that our hero had met with hard luck.

"Why, Tom, where did you spring from?" he exclaimed, grasping the hand
of his young partner.

"I am just in from the mines."

"I suppose you are in want of money," said Miles, his voice betraying
sympathy.

Tom laughed.

"How do you like my appearance, John?" he asked.

"Never mind that, Tom. I see you have had a rough time; but I have been
earning money for you."

"Did you send money regularly to father?"

"Yes; I have sent him three hundred dollars in all."

"That's good," said Tom, in a tone of satisfaction. "That has made him
easy. I suppose that took up about all I was entitled to?"

"No; I have as much more to your credit. I am ready to pay it to you at
once."

"I see, John, you think I have not been doing well."

"You don't look very prosperous, Tom, I must acknowledge."

"Well, John, appearances are deceitful. I have been wonderfully lucky."

"I am delighted to hear it, Tom," said Miles, cordially. "How much is it
now?"

"What do you say to a thousand dollars?"

"Excellent."

"Two thousand?"

"You don't mean it!"

"I won't keep you in suspense, John. I don't know exactly how much I've
got, but it's over six thousand dollars!"

John Miles stared at our hero in undisguised astonishment.

"Are you sure you're quite right _here_?" he said, touching his
forehead. "You haven't been sun-struck, have you?"

"No, John, it's all as I tell you. Let me explain how my luck came."

In a few sentences Tom made it clear to his partner that his luck was
real.

"As to the three hundred dollars due me from you, John," concluded Tom,
"I make you a present of it."

"But, Tom--" protested Miles.

"Let it be so, and for the future you shall pay me my share. Have you
any letters for me?"

"I have three."

"Give them to me, quick. I am hungry for news from home."

Tom sat down on a keg, and fairly devoured the letters, two of which
were from his father. One of these gave him much to think of. I will
transcribe the passages which gave Tom most concern:--

"Yesterday I paid Squire Hudson his regular semi-annual interest,
amounting to sixty-six dollars. Thanks to your liberal remittances, I
had no difficulty in making the payment. Indeed, I had two hundred
dollars left over. Imagine my dismay when the squire told me he had made
up his mind to call in the mortgage, having another use for the money.

"'But I can't pay it up,' said I.

"'You ought to be able to obtain the money somewhere,' he returned.

"'You are the only capitalist with whom I am acquainted,' said I.
'Since I have paid you the interest promptly, what more can you desire?'

"He insisted that he needed the money. I offered to pay him the two
hundred dollars which he had advanced for your journey. He seemed
surprised, but repeated that he must have the whole. The upshot of it
was that he gave me a formal notice of three months, as stipulated in
the mortgage. At the end of that time, unless I am ready to pay the
twenty-two hundred dollars, he will foreclose, and the old farm must be
sold. Of course it will be sold much below its real value. Probably the
squire will get it for the amount of the mortgage, and we shall be
thrown upon the world, without a home. It seems hard, Tom, and very
selfish; but might makes right, and Squire Hudson has the power on his
side."

In a postscript Mark Nelson added, "I understand that Squire Hudson has
a connection, his wife's brother, for whom he wants the farm. That
explains his resolute refusal to give me time to redeem it. Of course it
is too early to decide upon any plans. I must hire some tenement to move
into when I have to leave here. It will be hard upon us all to give up
the old farm. Walter, who has a taste for farming, and whom I look to be
my successor, feels very sad. Don't let this news depress you too much,
Tom. We shall not suffer. Thanks to you, I have some money ahead, and we
shall not lack for comfort."

Tom looked up when he had finished reading the letter.

"John," he said, quickly, "when does the next steamer start for New
York?"

"Day after to-morrow."

"Where can I engage passage?"

"Are you going home?"

"Yes, John, it is absolutely necessary. Squire Hudson is about to
foreclose the mortgage on my father's farm. I must be there to stop it."

"Have you money enough?"

"Three times over. He shall be defeated in his wicked purpose, or my
name isn't Tom Nelson."

Tom spoke in a quick, indignant tone, and his voice had a manly ring.

"Wait, John, let me read you the letter."

"The man's a mean rascal!" said Miles. "A rich man who will take
advantage of a poor man's necessity to deprive him of his home deserves
to be horsewhipped."

"I shan't attempt that," said Tom, smiling; "but I will disappoint him.
He little thinks I have it in my power to defeat his plans."

That very evening Tom engaged passage to New York, and two days later he
sailed out of the Golden Gate.

"I don't know how long I shall be gone, John," he said. "You need send
me no remittances, for I have money enough with me. You will hear from
me as soon as I have reached home, and transacted my business with
Squire Hudson."

"You will come out here again, Tom, won't you?"

"Yes, and before long. I have been so busily occupied making money that
I have seen almost nothing of San Francisco."

Tom did not journey alone. Ferguson, having thriven beyond his
expectations, decided to sail to New York, and thence to Scotland, on a
visit to his relatives, though he thought it probable he should come
back within a year. Dick Russell also was now in a position to study law
at home, and gave up the business of gold-mining forever.

"I owe all my present prosperity to you two," he said. "But for you I
should have blown my brains out five months since."

"We owe our prosperity to you also," said Tom. "You guided us to the
mines from which we gathered a golden harvest."

"We have worked together, and been mutual helpers," said Ferguson. "God
has favored us all, and to Him be the thanks!"




CHAPTER XXX.

THE NIGHT BEFORE THE AUCTION.


It was a sad household, that of Mark Nelson, on the day preceding the
departure from the farm. There was to be an auction the next day, at
which the farm-stock and farm-implements were to be sold. It was well
understood that Squire Hudson was to be the buyer of the farm, and as he
was not likely to have any competitor there was little hope that it
would fetch more than the amount of the mortgage.

During the afternoon Mr. Nelson called on Squire Hudson to make the best
terms he could at private sale.

"The farm is worth at least a thousand dollars more than the mortgage,
Squire Hudson," said the farmer.

"It is worth what it will fetch, Mr. Nelson," said the squire.

"Do you mean that an article always commands its full value at auction,
Squire Hudson?"

"Ahem! it brings its market value, Mr. Nelson."

"Which may be far below its intrinsic value. Suppose a diamond worth ten
thousand dollars were put up at auction in our village, do you consider
that it would bring a fair price?"

"Ahem! you are wandering from the subject. We are talking of farms, not
diamonds."

"As to the farm, then, you are likely to be the only bidder, unless you
allow the mortgage to remain."

"If I were inclined to do that I would not disturb you as long as you
paid the interest promptly."

"Then you decline to buy the farm at private sale?"

"I do."

"I don't think you will be any better off in the end, Squire Hudson, for
oppressing a poor man, and robbing him of his little all," said Mark
Nelson, bitterly.

"You don't look at the matter from a business point of view," said the
squire, coldly. "I am acting as any business man would under the
circumstances."

"I cannot believe you, sir. All business men are not so hard-hearted."

"I really don't think there is any use in prolonging this interview,"
said Squire Hudson, stiffly. "I have resolved upon my course, in which I
am perfectly justified, however you may choose to regard it."

This removed the farmer's last hope, and he had only to look about for
another home for his family. There was small choice of houses in the
little farming town. In fact there was but one house,--a shabby,
dilapidated building, a mile from the church and store. This, Mr.
Nelson, having no choice, engaged for a period of three months.

"It makes me homesick to think of going to live in that barn," said
Sarah, as they were sitting together after supper.

"It may not be so bad as you think for, Sarah," said her mother; but
she secretly sympathized with her daughter.

"I wish Squire Hudson had to live there himself," said Walter, in an
angry outburst.

Usually Walter was checked by his father when uttering such speeches;
but to-night Mark Nelson took no notice of his son's angry remark. He
felt that it would only be a righteous retribution upon the squire for
his cold selfishness.

While they were sitting in the plain room endeared to them by the
association of years, a sound of wheels was heard, and the village stage
stopped before the door.

"Who can it be?" said Sarah, wonderingly.

The whole family hurried to the window. What youthful, yet manly figure,
was that actively descending from his perch beside the driver?

"It's Tom!" exclaimed Mrs. Nelson. "Heaven be praised! It is my dear
boy."

Tom was almost suffocated by the embraces which he received on entering
the house.

"How you have grown, Tom!" said Sarah. "And how well you look!"

"Thank you for the compliment," said Tom, laughing. "But I don't feel
well."

"What is the matter?" asked his mother, with maternal solicitude.

"I am as hungry as a bear. Have you got anything to eat in the house?"

This hint was enough. Fresh tea was made, and the wanderer was soon
sitting before a bountiful supply of food, cooked in his mother's best
style.

"It seems good to be at home," said Tom, looking around him, his face
beaming with happiness.

"Did you get my letter, Tom, announcing the squire's intention to
foreclose the mortgage?" asked his father, gravely.

"Yes, father; is it really true?"

"Yes; he will listen to no persuasions."

"When does the sale take place?"

"To-morrow."

"I shall be present. Have you thought of any other house, father?"

"The old Belcher house is the only one I can hire."

"That is a poor place."

"It must do for lack of a better."

"I didn't think the squire would act so meanly. At any rate, father, I
will see that you don't any of you suffer for lack of money."

"Have you been doing well, Tom?" asked Walter.

"Ask me to-morrow, Walter. To-night I want to hear all the news, and
everything that has happened since I went away."




CHAPTER XXXI.

BIDDING FOR THE FARM.


"I apprehend," said the squire to his brother-in-law the next morning,
"that we shall get the farm at our own price."

"I hope we shall, squire," said the poor relative, deferentially. "I
suppose this man Nelson is sorry to part with it."

"Of course; he charges me with meanness, oppressing the poor, and so on;
but of course I don't mind that. It's a matter of business; as I told
him."

"To be sure."

"I am not to be moved by sentimental considerations. Business is
business; but he won't see it in that light."

"You consider the farm worth considerable more than the amount of the
mortgage, of course?"

"It is worth four thousand dollars, in my opinion," said the squire,
complacently.

"If you get it for twenty-two hundred, it will be an excellent bargain."

"Father," exclaimed Sinclair, entering the breakfast-room, rather
hurriedly, "Tom Nelson has got home."

"Where did you hear this, my son?" asked Squire Hudson, in surprise.

"At the store. He got home by coach last evening."

"Got discontented, I suppose," said the squire, in a tone of triumph. "I
thought that was how it would turn out. He can't expect me to advance
money to take him out there again."

"I wish you would let me go," said Sinclair.

"Some day I may take a trip out there with you, my son. Have you seen
Thomas?"

"No, he keeps mighty close. He hasn't even been round at the store."

"He is ashamed to show himself, I suppose. He will have to work on the
farm--on a farm again."

"I suppose that will be a hard pill for him to swallow," said Sinclair.

"No doubt. He is poor and proud, like his father before him. I am glad
of one thing,--that I am sure of getting back the two hundred dollars I
advanced for his journey. I wonder where he raised money to get back."

       *       *       *       *       *

Though there were not likely to be any competitors for the farm, a
considerable number gathered at the sale. There was a general feeling of
sympathy for the Nelsons, but no one was able to express that sympathy
in a tangible form, Squire Hudson cared little for the opinion of his
neighbors. Some of them were in debt to him, and he looked down upon
them with the arrogance of wealth.

Tom received many friendly greetings. He was plainly dressed, quiet in
his manner, and seemed to take matters very coolly.

At length the farm was put up, the auctioneer naturally turning towards
the squire, who responded pompously, "I bid twenty-two hundred dollars,
the amount of the mortgage I hold upon the property."

"Is there any other bid?" asked the auctioneer.

"I bid twenty-five hundred dollars," said a clear, boyish voice.

All were startled, and all eyes were turned upon Tom Nelson, who came
slightly forward.

"Twenty-five hundred!" repeated the auctioneer, hesitating whether he
should receive the bid.

"I protest against this outrage," exclaimed Squire Hudson, angrily. "The
bid is ridiculous."

"Why is my bid ridiculous, Squire Hudson?" asked Tom, calmly.

"Because you haven't got the money. It is a transparent attempt to run
up the price of the farm."

"You know nothing of my circumstances, Squire Hudson," said Tom,
independently. "I stand ready to pay the sum I bid, and, should you
outbid me, I am ready to prove to any committee you may appoint, that I
possess the money, or all my bids shall go for nothing, and you can have
the farm at your first offer."

"That is fair!" cried all.

"This is all nonsense," said the squire. "Those of you who choose may
believe this boy; I don't."

"Going at twenty-five hundred!" said the auctioneer.

"Twenty-five hundred and fifty!" said the squire, adding, "I make the
bid on the terms proposed by the boy."

"Twenty-eight hundred!" said Tom.

"And fifty!" bid the squire.

"Three thousand!" instantly came from Tom.

No one was more surprised than Tom's own family at this unexpected
scene. He had not dropped a hint as to his intentions, choosing to take
all by surprise. Mark Nelson was perplexed. Though he had great
confidence in Tom, he feared that he could not make good his bold bids.

At length the farm was knocked down to our hero at three thousand five
hundred dollars.

"Now," said the squire, angrily, "I demand that this farce come to an
end. I believe the bidding of this boy to be a premeditated swindle. If
so, I will do my best to have him punished."

"And I," said Tom, boldly, "have an equal right to demand that Squire
Hudson submit proof that he is responsible for the amount of his
offers."

"Curse your impudence!" exclaimed the squire, foaming with rage.

"But I waive that right," continued Tom, "and will ask Squire Hudson to
name two gentlemen present to examine the proofs which I have to offer
of my ability to back my bids."

"I name Mr. Jones and Mr. Howe," said the squire, quickly, "and request
them to act at once."

"That is my desire," said Tom.

In five minutes the committee reported that Tom had shown them
bank-books, of two Boston banks, certifying that he held two thousand
dollars on deposit in one, and four thousand in the other.

"Is that satisfactory?" asked Tom, coolly.

"No," shouted the squire; "I believe that the books are bogus."

But the rest of those present entertained no doubts, and our hero was at
once surrounded by admiring friends, who shook his hand till it fairly
ached.

"Squire Hudson, your mortgage shall be paid whenever you desire," said
Tom.

"Three cheers for Tom Nelson!" proposed some one, and the cheers were
given with a will. During the confusion the squire and his
brother-in-law slipped out of the house, thoroughly discomfited.




CHAPTER XXXII.

MANHOOD.


If Squire Hudson was surprised at Tom's suddenly revealed wealth, Mr.
Nelson was no less so. When Tom first commenced bidding his father
feared that he was only trying to annoy the squire, or, perhaps, seeking
to force him to pay a higher price for the farm. But when investigation
revealed the fact of Tom's riches, and he saw the mountain of debt
lifted from his little property, he was overjoyed and grateful.

"I can't understand it, Tom," he said; "how could you possibly get
possession of so much money?"

"I have worked hard, father; but that won't explain it. I have been very
lucky, and my good luck has enabled me to save the farm."

"I think you will be easier with me than the squire, Tom," said his
father, smiling. "I will make out a mortgage to you, since your money
has been used to redeem the farm."

"I shall have no claim on the farm," said Tom, "or if I have I give it
to you. I have money enough for myself, and hope to earn a good deal
more besides."

"If that is the case, Tom, I will gladly accept your gift. It will be a
great relief to think that I have no interest to pay. Now I shall be
able to get along easily. I have over two hundred dollars on hand."

"I want to make your life easier, hereafter, father. I think you need a
larger income than the farm will yield you, and I will therefore send
you a hundred dollars every quarter."

"You are very generous, Tom; but I fear you will soon get rid of all
your money at this rate."

"I will explain my circumstances, father, and then you will think
differently. I have a business in San Francisco which will yield me at
least a thousand dollars a year, without my personal attention, and
after paying the squire what is due him I shall have about four
thousand dollars left. This I mean to invest securely in Boston."

"I can hardly realize that you are so rich, Tom."

"I can scarcely realize it myself, father. When I think of the change
that fifteen months have made in my circumstances I consider myself the
luckiest boy in the world, and have great cause for gratitude."

It will be understood that, though Tom had bid thirty-five hundred
dollars for the farm, all he was required to pay was the amount of the
mortgage, the bid having been made in his father's interest. In a few
days the business was completed, and Mr. Nelson found himself the owner
of an unencumbered property.

Tom remained a week longer in the village, and then started once more
for California. His mother urged him to remain at home, now that he had
so much money; but Tom reminded her that he was partner in a business in
San Francisco, and that he needed to look after his interests there.
John Miles might be sick, or die, and in that case he might meet with
serious losses.

Returning to San Francisco Tom became an active instead of a silent
partner. The business was considerably enlarged, and became much more
profitable. At the end of two years Tom sold out to his partner for
several thousand dollars, and, entering an office, studied law, devoting
a portion of his time to general study. At a comparatively early age he
was admitted to the bar of his adopted city, and by degrees got into
lucrative practice. He had become so much attached to California that he
decided to make it his permanent home.

Up among the New Hampshire hills his father still tills his little farm,
but he no longer depends upon it for his entire living. Tom regularly
sends the allowance he promised, and in addition his brothers are often
the recipients of handsome gifts. Harry, developing a taste for study,
was sent to Exeter Academy, from which in due course he was transferred
to Harvard. He, too, was destined for the law, and when he had taken
his legal degree joined Tom in California, and is now his partner.

Other changes there are in the little village. Squire Hudson is dead,
and Sinclair, making haste to sell the homestead, removed to New York,
engaged in speculation, and lost everything. One day, shabbily dressed,
he entered Tom's office in San Francisco, and asked for the loan of
fifty dollars to enable him to reach the mines. Tom gave it, for old
acquaintance' sake. It was not the last request for money made by
Sinclair. Nothing has been heard of him for some years, and it is
probable that a life which was of no service to any one is finished. He
had the best start in life, but misused his advantages. Tom has worthily
employed the talents committed to his charge, and is happy, honored, and
prosperous.

THE YOUNG EXPLORER;

_or_,

AMONG THE SIERRAS,

will be the next volume.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Young Miner, by Horatio Alger, Jr.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNG MINER ***

***** This file should be named 22669-8.txt or 22669-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/6/22669/

Produced by David Edwards, Marcia Brooks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain material
produced by Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
