The Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventure of a Kite, by Harriet Myrtle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Adventure of a Kite

Author: Harriet Myrtle

Release Date: August 2, 2006 [EBook #18968]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURE OF A KITE ***




Produced by David Edwards, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The University of Florida, The Internet
Archive/Children's Library)









                          [Illustration]

                          [Illustration]



                         ROSE BUD STORIES

                       Mrs. Harriet Myrtle

                             NEW YORK

                        SHELDON & COMPANY

       *       *       *       *       *


                      The Rose-Bud Stories,

                       FOR YOUNG CHILDREN.

                           Illustrated.

       *       *       *       *       *

                       Adventure of a Kite.



                                BY

                       MRS. HARRIET MYRTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *




                            New York:

                       SHELDON AND COMPANY.

                              1870.



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866, by
SHELDON AND COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court
of the Southern District of New York.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Adventure of a Kite.


One evening, when Mary, her mamma, and Willie had all taken their
seats near the window, and the story was about to begin, Mary
reminded her mamma of a merry adventure that she had mentioned as
having happened when she and her brother and Master White went
out to fly their "new Kite."

"Do, mamma, tell us about that," said Mary.

Her mamma said she would, and after thinking for a few minutes,
to recollect all about it, she began.

One fine, breezy morning in October, Master White came suddenly
to our house, with his eyes looking so bright, and his cheeks so
red from running in the fresh air, and quite out of breath
besides.

"What is the matter, James?" we all cried out. "What a red face
you've got!"

"Have I?" said he; "my nose is so cold! I ran here as fast as I
could, there is such a beautiful breeze for a Kite. Come, both
of you, and let us fly the Kite high up in the blue sky; come as
many of you as can, and this day you shall see what a Kite can
do!"

Up we all jumped, the Kite was brought down, and away we all
started into the meadows, running nearly all the way, and James
White never ceasing to talk of the wonderful things he intended
the Kite should this day perform.

We arrived in a large, grassy meadow, sloping down to a low
hedge. Beyond the hedge was a very large field, and beyond that
field another large field, which had some high trees at the
farthest end. In the tops of these trees was a rookery; we knew
these trees very well, because we often used to walk that way,
partly because it was a nice walk, and partly because an old
woman, whom we were all very fond of, kept an apple and
gingerbread-nut stall under the largest tree. However, as I said
before, these trees were a long way off--two whole fields
off--more, two whole fields and all the meadow. At the top of the
meadow, near where we stood, there was also a high tree, and at
the foot of this we laid down the Kite.

"O, James," said my brother, "do you think we shall be able to
make the Kite fly as high as the tree we are under?"

"As high!" said James White, "six times as high, at the very
least."

He now carefully unfolded the tail from the body of the Kite,
being very particular to undo all the tangles near the tassel,
which made quite a bunch; but he brought it out perfectly. One
end of the ball of twine was now attached to the body of the
Kite. He then raised it up with the right hand, holding out the
tail in three great festoons with the left, and in this way
walked to and fro very uprightly and with a stately air, and
turning his head in various quarters, to observe the direction of
the wind. Suddenly he dropped the tail upon the ground, and
lifting up the Kite with his right hand in the air, as high as he
possibly could, off he ran down the meadow slope as fast as his
legs could carry him, shouting all the way, "Up, up, up! rise,
rise, rise! fly, Kite, in the air!" He finished by throwing the
Kite up, continuing to run with the string in his hand, allowing
it to slip through his fingers as the Kite rose. The breeze
caught the Kite, and up it went in fine style. It continued to
rise rapidly, and we ran to and fro underneath, shouting all the
time, "O, well done, James White, and well done, Kite!"

By the excellent management of James, the Kite rose and rose,
till we all said, "O, how high! how wonderful!" And then James
White said he was satisfied.

Now you are all to recollect that this Kite was very large. In
the story I told you in summer, where the making of this Kite was
described, you remember that it was said to be as tall as James
White himself, and of course very much broader. The consequence
was, that this Kite was extremely strong. So we all sat down on
the grass to hold the string, which James White said was
necessary, as the Kite struggled and pulled so hard. It was now
up quite as high as the string would allow it to go. But the wind
seemed to be increasing, and James White said he began to be
rather afraid that he must draw the Kite downwards, for fear it
should have a quarrel with the wind up in the clouds, and then
some accident might happen. We accordingly began to draw down the
Kite slowly, winding the string upon the stick as it gradually
descended. But notwithstanding all this care, an accident did
happen after all.

Before the Kite was half-way down, a strong wind suddenly caught
it sideways, and the Kite made a long sweep downwards, like a
swallow, rising up again at some distance, swinging its tail
about in a most alarming manner. "Bless my heart!" said James
White.

Up we all jumped from the grass. "Help me to hold her!" cried James
White; "how she struggles!" Again came the wind, again the Kite
made a sweep down and rose up again, as if indignant--then shook
her tail and wings as if threatening to do some mischief--then made
a quick motion to the right and a dance to the left--then made a
very graceful courtesy deep down, as though she was very politely
saluting the wind, but suddenly rose up with a sharp jerk, as
though she had spitefully altered her mind--and the next moment
made a dart first to the right and then to the left, and continued
to do this till James White said he was sure something must happen.

We all held the string as fast as we could, and tried to pull
down the Kite; but it was impossible, for instead of bringing
her down, we were all three dragged along down the meadow slope,
crying out, "Somebody come and help us! somebody come and help
us!" But nobody else was near. In this manner the Kite was
pulling us along, the string cutting our hands, and running
through our fingers like fire, till at last I was obliged to let
go, and being unable to get out of the way, was knocked down, and
being also unable to roll myself out of the way, my brother fell
over me. James White was thus left alone with the Kite, and was
dragged struggling and hallooing down the meadow slope.

He was determined, however, not to let go; nothing could make him
loose the string; he was determined not to be conquered; but
before he had got to the bottom of the slope, the string of the
Kite broke about half-way down, and up sprang the Kite again
towards the sky, taking its course over the meadow towards the
great field beyond. We all three followed of course, as fast as
we could, staring up, and panting, and not knowing what to do.
The Kite continued to fly in rather an irregular manner over the
first great field. It then made a pitch downwards, and several
tosses upwards, and flew straight over the second great field, in
the direction of the high trees. "O, those trees!" cried James
White, "it is flying towards the trees!"

He was right, the Kite did fly directly towards the trees, as James
White said it would. Just as it arrived nearly over those trees, it
made a great pitch downwards, right into the top of the largest
tree, and completely knocked over one of the rooks' nests that was
built there. We came running up as soon as we could, and then we
saw that it was the very tree, at the foot of which was the stall
of our dear old woman, who sold apples and gingerbread-nuts.

"Make haste!" cried she;--"the Kite is safe among the boughs; I
can see its long tail hanging down. But do look here! the Kite
has made us a present of five young rooks; two are fluttering
among the golden pippins, and three are hopping and gaping among
the gingerbread-nuts."

James White scarcely looked at the rooks; he said he had more
important business to attend to. He took off his jacket, and
immediately began to climb up the tree. In less than twenty
minutes he succeeded in bringing down the Kite, with only two
small rents in its left shoulder, and the loss of one wing, all
of which he said he could easily repair.

We took the five young rooks home with us, and had great
amusement in rearing and feeding them, and as soon as they were
old enough, we took them out into their native fields, and let
them fly directly under the tree where they were born.




An Autumn Flood.


"I am going," said Mary's mamma, on another evening, to tell you
a story about Scotland, and about some children who went there by
sea, in a large steam-ship.

Their names were Charlotte, Helen, and Robert, and they went with
their papa and mamma to visit their uncle and aunt. They went in
August, when the weather is fine, and the days are long. They
left home in the evening, for the steamer was to start at ten
o'clock at night. There was a great bustle when they came to the
place where the ships lie in the river Thames. Many people were
getting their trunks and boxes in, and hurrying about. They liked
to see all this bustle, and to see their own trunks and boxes put
in. Then they stepped on board, across a wide, firm plank, and
jumped for joy to find themselves really in the ship, and going
to Scotland.

It was such a large steamer! They were surprised to see what a
length it was. Then they went into a handsome cabin, called the
saloon, beautifully lighted, with a great many people in it; and
after being there a little while they grew very tired, and their
mamma took them to the cabin where they were to sleep. When they
saw their beds, they all began to laugh. They looked just like
beds made on shelves, one above another. Two were on one side and
two on the other, of a kind of closet. But they soon crept in,
Charlotte and Helen one above another, and little Robert
opposite. The fourth bed was for their nurse, who was going with
them. They were all soon asleep. They never knew when the
steamer began to go fast down the river towards the sea.

In the morning when they awoke, first one and then another heard
a constant "thump, thump! bump, bump!" going on. This noise was
made by the great engine that turned the paddle-wheels, and moved
the ship on. And they felt the ship shaking, and trembling, and
rocking, and then they were surprised to hear that they were
already out of the river Thames, and had got into the salt sea.
They were in a great hurry to be dressed, and when they ran up
on the deck they saw the land on one side of them, and numbers of
ships all round them, with their white sails shining in the sun,
for it was a very fine morning. They tried to count them, but it
was very difficult; Charlotte counted a hundred, and Helen a
hundred and ten. As to little Robert, he was too delighted to
keep steady enough to count, and after trying once or twice,
declared that there must be a thousand.

Very soon they were called to breakfast in the saloon, and sat by
their papa and mamma very happily; but they ran away before they
had finished, to see a town called Yarmouth, by which they
passed so closely that they could see the houses, and bathing
machines, and people. All the morning they had plenty to look at.
They met other steamers, and fishing-boats, and ships, and saw
different places on the coast. But before dinner-time they had
lost sight of land, and saw nothing all round them but sea, and
did not meet so many ships and boats. Their papa then took them
to see the engine, and the great fires down in the engine-room,
and made them look at the paddle-wheels, that go foaming round
and round. Then came dinner-time, and they were very hungry; and
afterwards they amused themselves with running about on the deck
and reading story books. Soon after tea they went to bed and fell
fast asleep.

Next morning they were glad to see the coast again. They were
passing high cliffs and dark rocks, and they saw many sea-birds;
gulls, with large flapping wings, that gave a strange, wild cry;
and divers--pretty little creatures, that swam, riding along on
the waves, and every now and then dipped down quite under, and
then came up again at a little distance. On went the great
steam-ship, and soon their papa told them that the land they now
saw was Scotland.

Presently they came to some very fine rocks, higher than any they
had seen, and then they passed some rocky islands. Now they began
to see a great many large white birds flying about, stretching
out their long necks, and their papa told them that these were
called Solan geese, and that they had their nests on a great
rock, standing out in the sea, called the Bass Rock. They soon
came in sight of it, and when they passed near it they could see
that its sides were all white with hundreds of these geese that
were sitting there, and great numbers were flying in the air over
it and round it. When they were able to leave off looking at all
this, they saw on the top of the high cliff opposite to the Bass
Rock a large ruined castle, called Tantallon Castle, which they
thought very beautiful.

"Do you remember reading about the Black Douglas in 'Tales of a
Grandfather'?" asked their papa.

"O, yes," said first one, and then another.

"Well, that was his castle," he replied.

[Illustration]

They looked at Tantallon Castle for a long time, as long as it
was in sight. Charlotte said it was a great pity it was so
ruined, and Robert wished he could see where the drawbridge used
to be.

Now there began to be a great bustle in the ship, for they were
getting near Edinburgh, where they were to land. At last
Edinburgh was in sight. It is the capital city of Scotland, just
as London is of England, and it is very beautiful. They saw it
quite plain from the sea, with hills behind it and on each side
of it, of many forms; some bare and rocky, others clothed with
trees. When they came quite opposite to it, a gun was fired in
the ship. It made such a noise that everybody started, and some
of the ladies screamed. Charlotte and Helen did not like it; but
Robert did very much indeed. Very soon afterwards they came up to
a fine pier, stretching out into the sea, and there they all
landed.

"So now they were in Scotland," said Willie.

They found their uncle's carriage waiting for them, and it took
them to his house in the country, about fifteen miles off.

Well, at this place they were very happy. There was plenty of
green grass to play about upon, and there were large, spreading
trees, and sheep, and cows, and horses, and ponies; and there was
a nice garden, with plenty of fruit and flowers. But what I am
going to tell you most about is a little river that ran along
just outside the garden wall; because this little river was the
cause of a curious adventure, that happened in the month of
September, after they had been several weeks in this pleasant
place.

This river was narrow, and rather deep in some places; but in
others it was broader, and very shallow. It was so shallow in
dry weather that you could cross it without wetting your feet,
by choosing some part where there were large stones standing up,
and where there was not much water. But then you must go
steadily. Charlotte could do it very easily; Helen generally
stopped short, after she had placed her foot on the second stone,
and turned back; but as to Robert, he jumped from stone to stone,
and a day hardly ever passed that he did not go souse into the
water, and get quite wet half up his legs. The proper way to
cross was by a long plank, laid from one bank to the other, or
by a little wooden bridge not far off.

You would hardly think that such a little gentle river as this
could suddenly swell into a foaming flood, and do all manner of
mischief. But so it was.

This river rose, or began to flow, among a range of hills at some
miles distance; and when you are older, you will understand how
it is that rivers that rise among hills or mountains are apt to
overflow when there is much rain. It happened one day, when all
the family, except the children, had gone out on a visit, that it
rained from morning till night, and when night came it still
rained heavily. In the morning, when nurse went to dress the
children, she told them to look out of the window. Their surprise
was great to see the little stream, that they were used to step
across, changed into a wide, rapid, foaming river. It made such a
sound that they could hear it quite plain in their bed-room. It
no longer looked clear and blue, but was thick, muddy, and of the
color of red clay. They did not like to see it so; and what was
worse it still rained, and the water rose more and more. The
plank across it had been carried away in the night by the water,
and had gone swimming down the stream. Before they had done
breakfast, they heard that the wooden bridge was broken down; and
now, when they looked out, they saw that the water had spread
half over the meadow on the opposite side. The trees were
standing in it, and looked as if they grew in a lake. The cows
were all collected on a high bank, among some trees, and were
lowing and appearing quite angry and offended at this strange
conduct in the river. The sheep had gone as far as they could out
to the very hedge, to keep on dry ground. The ponies had found a
high part of the field, that had water all round it, so that it
looked like a green island, and were feeding quite contentedly.
Now and then they looked up, and shook their manes, as much as to
say, "You can't get at us. It's of no use to want a ride."

At last it stopped raining, and the children were well wrapped
up, and put on good thick shoes, and went out to look at all this
nearer. On their way they met the gardener running down to try to
save his stack of pea-sticks; but he was too late, it was already
swimming away; all his fine stack, that he had piled up ready
for spring; and he had had so many more important things to take
care of that he had not had time to remove it sooner.

Many things now came floating down on the water. Young trees,
branches, parts of railings and fences, broken bridges and
planks, all went hurrying along, and the water foamed, and
roared, and surged, and looked quite fearful.

While they all stood looking on, the gardener still lamenting
over his pea-sticks, they saw something that looked like a large
covered basket come floating along. It chanced that it passed
very near the bank on which they stood, and little Robert cried
out, "Stop it!" and began to try to reach it with a long pole he
had in his hands, with which he had been pretending to be a ship,
and holding this up for the mast. He could not reach it; but the
gardener took the pole, and after failing once or twice, managed
to push and poke at the basket till he got it so near that the
dairy-maid and nurse reached it with their hands, and pulled it
to the bank. It was only covered with a few arched sticks, over
which a white cloth was fastened.

They all crowded round it to see what it contained. They lifted
up the white cloth. O, wonder and surprise! What did they see?

"What was it? _What_ did they see?" cried Mary and Willie both at
once.

They saw a pretty little baby fast asleep, and at its feet a cat
coiled up comfortably.

"And was the baby not hurt, mamma?"

No, it was quite safe, and did not awake directly. Puss awoke and
jumped out, and ran off before any one could stop her.

The gardener said, that the basket, which they now saw to be a
cradle, must have floated away from some cottage in the village
just above. "Some poor woman is perhaps now in great grief about
her child," said he.

[Illustration]

"But we've got it safe," said Charlotte. "We'll take great care
of it, and give it back to her. Let us take it into a warm room."

As she said this the baby opened its eyes and began to cry. Nurse
lifted it up and tried to quiet it, and they all went in with it,
the children kissing its poor little red arms, and saying all
sorts of soothing things to it. When they got into the house,
nurse asked for some warm whey with a little sugar in it. She
said that was the best thing for such a little baby; and it
sucked it in, and seemed to like it, and soon began to smile, and
crow, and kick about its feet, and throw about its arms. The
children were quite delighted at this; and now being happy about
the baby they began to think of poor puss; and Robert and Helen
went out to look for her. They found her just outside the house
door, mewing and making a great fuss. Helen ran away and got a
saucer full of milk, and put it down in the lobby. At this, puss
began to walk slowly in, and then ran up to it and lapped it all
up; and then she let Helen take her up, and carry her into the
room where the baby was.

While they were all engaged in this way, they heard sounds of
voices shouting and calling out near the river, and ran to the
window to see what it was. They saw far out, on the other side of
the water, near the edge of the meadow, five or six men and a
woman, and the gardener was making signs and calling out to them.

"O!" said nurse, "you may be sure that is the poor mother of the
baby."

"Let us run out and hold up the baby, to show her it is safe!"
cried Charlotte. "Come quick! O, how happy she will be!"

Nurse wrapped up the baby in a warm shawl, and out they went.
Helen carried the cat, and little Robert came bustling after them
with the cradle, shouting as loud as he could, "They're all safe!
here they are! look here!"

When the gardener saw them coming, he ran and caught up little
Charlotte in his arms, and nurse gave her the baby, and she held it
up as high as she could. The poor woman, who was indeed the mother,
saw it directly, and seemed hardly able to bear so much joy, for
her husband who was by her, threw his arm round her as if to
prevent her falling down. She clasped her hands together--then held
them out towards her child--then raised them upwards.

Mary and Willie could not sit still any longer, they both jumped
up, and began to clap their hands and dance for joy.

"Did she come to the house to bring away her baby?" asked Mary.

Yes; she walked about two miles off, to a part of the river where
there was a stone bridge; it was impossible to get across
nearer, so she came in about an hour.

"But did she see that puss was there?" said Willie.

O, yes; I forgot to tell you that after she had a little
recovered of the first joy of seeing her child safe, nurse held
up Helen with puss in her arms, and Robert climbed up on the
stump of a tree, and held up the cradle as high as he could.

"And then what did they do when the mother came?" said Mary.

She kissed her baby, and cried over it, and held it a long time
in her arms; and her husband, who came also, told them that the
flood had risen so suddenly that it had carried away part of the
wall of their cottage, and swept away everything they had, while
he and his wife were trying to save their stack of wood; and that
when they turned round, at the sound of the rushing water, they
found that the cradle was gone; and then they forgot every thing
else, and ran with several of their neighbors by the side of the
river; but never hoped to find their child alive.

"But it _was_ alive, and safe, and well," said Mary, "with these
kind little girls and little Robert."

And when their uncle and aunt came home they were very kind to
the father and mother. They had their cottage built up again and
furnished, and gave them help in putting their garden in order,
and there always continued to be kind feeling between them. As to
the baby, it grew up to be a fine strong boy, and its parents
named it Robert, in memory of the little boy who had helped to
save it from the water.




The Little Milk-maid.


There was once a little Milk-maid, who lived at a farm-house. Her
name was Sally. On the summer mornings she used to be up and
dressed at five o'clock. Then she took her bright milk-pail on
her head, and her three-legged stool in her hand, and called her
little dog Trusty, and tripped over the dewy grass to the stile
that led to the field where the cows fed. The wild thyme gave out
a sweet scent as she walked along; and the green leaves glistened
in the sun, for the dew was still on them; and the lark flew up
high, and his song came pouring down over her head. When she got
to the stile, she saw all the four cows quite at the other side
of the field. One was called Dapple, one Brindle, one Frisky, and
one Maggie. They saw her get over the stile, but never stirred a
step towards her. Dapple looked up for a moment, and then began
eating again; Brindle did not seem to mind her; Maggie was lying
down, and did not move; and Frisky lashed her tail and shook her
head, and went on eating.

"O, this will never do!" said Sally. "Trusty, Trusty! go and
bring me Dapple."

Dapple was brown all over, except a white face and tail. Trusty
ran behind Dapple, and barked two or three times, just to tell
her to move on. And she began to walk slowly and gravely towards
Sally. Then Sally put down her little three-legged stool, and sat
down by Dapple and milked her. When she had done, she gave her a
pat, and said, "Now you may go." Then Dapple began to eat again.

"Now, Trusty," said Sally, "go and bring me Brindle." Brindle was
all white. Trusty ran up to her, and she began to walk on; but
when she had got to the middle of the field, she stopped to eat,
and Trusty was obliged to bark pretty sharply, and tell her it
was shameful of her. Then she went on and was milked.

Sally next sent Trusty to bring Frisky. She was brown and white,
prettily spotted; but she was sometimes quite naughty when she
was milked, and this time she seemed to mean to be so; for, as
soon as Trusty got up to her, she set off and galloped up to
Sally. Then, just as Sally began to milk her, she walked on, and
left her and her stool behind, and very nearly knocked the pail
over besides. So Sally had to get up, and move stool and pail
onwards, and then she said, "Stand still, Frisky," and stroked
and patted her. So she stood still, and was very good.

"Now, Trusty, bring pretty Maggie," said Sally. Maggie was black
and white, and very gentle and pretty. She came directly, and
stood quite still, and was milked. Then they were all done.

Sally now lifted the pail, which was quite full, on her head, and
carried it so firmly and steadily, that she had not to put her
hand up to it, not even when she got over the stile, and in this
way she walked along back to the farm.

Then she went into the cool, fresh dairy, and Trusty lay down at
the door. The dairy had a stone shelf all round it, with shallow
round pans ranged along it, all filled with sweet, rich milk,
covered with thick, yellow cream. Here she took down her pail;
and first she filled a large jug with the new milk for breakfast.
She then poured all the rest into two or three pans, like the
others on the shelf. Next, she took a flat wooden spoon, and
skimmed the cream off several of the others, and poured it all
into a square wooden machine, called a churn. It had a handle
which turned round. She threw in some salt, and then began to
turn the handle round and round, and it turned a wheel inside,
and the wheel beat and splashed the cream round and round in the
churn. Presently she looked in, and said, "It's not come yet."
Then she turned the handle round again for some time. At last,
when she looked in, there was a large lump of fine fresh butter,
and all about it a thin white liquid, called butter-milk, and all
the cream was gone. She took out the butter, and put it into a
bowl of cold spring water, and made it up into three large rolls
with two flat wooden knives. Next she cut off three or four
slices, made them up into nice little rounds, and pressed them
with a wooden stamp, with a rose-bud and leaves cut out upon it,
and when she took it off, there were the rose-bud and leaves
marked on the butter.

Then Sally poured all the butter-milk, and all the milk from
which she had skimmed the cream, into a clean wooden pail, and
stirred in some barley meal, and carried it off to the pig-sty.
She stood outside the paling of the pigs' little yard, and
called, "Pig--pig--pig!" and out came the pigs from their sty,
little and big, grunting and squeaking and scrambling, and
tumbling over one another. Then she poured all her pailful into
the pigs' trough, and then they began squeaking and grunting and
scrambling more than ever, and put their long noses in, some of
them up to their eyes, and some got their feet in, and all of
them gobbled it up as fast as they possibly could.

After Sally had fed the pigs, she took out some corn, and went to
the poultry yard, and called, "Chuck--chuck--chuck!" and then the
cocks and hens, and ducks and geese, came running round her,
crowing and clucking, and quacking, and cackling, and the pigeons
flew down and helped to eat, and all of them pecked up the corn,
as fast as they could. In the afternoon they had boiled potatoes
and sopped bread and vegetables, and curd, too, if Sally had been
making whey.

When Sally had done all this, she went back into her room, and
opened the bed curtains; and there was lying a little rosy-cheeked
girl with light curly hair. And when Sally looked at her, she
opened two large blue eyes, and held out her arms, and Sally kissed
her, and said, "Are you ready to get up, little Annie?" And she
said, "Yes." This was Sally's little sister, that her kind
mistress let her have with her to love and take care of.

Then Sally took up little Annie, and got a large brown pan for
her bath, and stood her in it, and brought a jug of fresh cold
water to pour over her.

Little Annie stood very still, but when the water was coming, she
held up her hands and said, "Will it be cold?"

"O, no!" said Sally; "it's a beautiful warm morning." Then she
washed and dressed little Annie, and afterwards they had their
breakfast together in a nice comfortable kitchen. Sally had a
good appetite after having been so busy, and little Annie had a
large basin of boiled bread and milk, and she always gave some to
Trusty. This was the end of the little Milk-maid's morning
work.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ROSE-BUD STORIES.


GOING TO THE COTTAGE.

EGGS AND CHICKENS.

THE GOAT AND HER KID.

BERTHA AND THE BIRD.

THE DUCK HOUSE.

MAY DAY AT THE COTTAGE.

ADVENTURE OF A KITE.

A DAY IN THE WOODS.

THE PET LAMB.

TWO DEAR FRIENDS.

LITTLE AMY'S BIRTHDAY.

CHRISTMAS EVE AT THE COTTAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventure of a Kite, by Harriet Myrtle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURE OF A KITE ***

***** This file should be named 18968.txt or 18968.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/9/6/18968/

Produced by David Edwards, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The University of Florida, The Internet
Archive/Children's Library)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
