Project Gutenberg's Chronicles of Martin Hewitt, by Arthur Morrison

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chronicles of Martin Hewitt

Author: Arthur Morrison

Release Date: October 22, 2011 [EBook #37820]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF MARTIN HEWITT ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Rory OConor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)








  Appletons' Town and Country Library
  No. 191




  CHRONICLES OF MARTIN HEWITT


  BY

  ARTHUR MORRISON
  AUTHOR OF TALES OF MEAN STREETS, ETC.


  [Illustration]


  NEW YORK
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
  1896


  COPYRIGHT, 1895, 1896,
  BY D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.




CONTENTS.


                                  PAGE

  THE IVY COTTAGE MYSTERY            1

  THE NICOBAR BULLION CASE          42

  THE HOLFORD WILL CASE             94

  THE CASE OF THE MISSING HAND     138

  THE CASE OF LAKER, ABSCONDED     187

  THE CASE OF THE LOST FOREIGNER   228




CHRONICLES OF MARTIN HEWITT.




THE IVY COTTAGE MYSTERY.


I had been working double tides for a month: at night on my morning
paper, as usual; and in the morning on an evening paper as _locum
tenens_ for another man who was taking a holiday. This was an exhausting
plan of work, although it only actually involved some six hours'
attendance a day, or less, at the two offices. I turned up at the
headquarters of my own paper at ten in the evening, and by the time I
had seen the editor, selected a subject, written my leader, corrected
the slips, chatted, smoked, and so on, and cleared off, it was very
usually one o'clock. This meant bed at two, or even three, after supper
at the club.

This was all very well at ordinary periods, when any time in the morning
would do for rising, but when I had to be up again soon after seven, and
round at the evening paper office by eight, I naturally felt a little
worn and disgusted with things by midday, after a sharp couple of
hours' leaderette scribbling and paragraphing, with attendant sundries.

But the strain was over, and on the first day of comparative comfort I
indulged in a midday breakfast and the first undisgusted glance at a
morning paper for a month. I felt rather interested in an inquest, begun
the day before, on the body of a man whom I had known very slightly
before I took to living in chambers.

His name was Gavin Kingscote, and he was an artist of a casual and
desultory sort, having, I believe, some small private means of his own.
As a matter of fact, he had boarded in the same house in which I had
lodged myself for a while, but as I was at the time a late homer and a
fairly early riser, taking no regular board in the house, we never
became much acquainted. He had since, I understood, made some judicious
Stock Exchange speculations, and had set up house in Finchley.

Now the news was that he had been found one morning murdered in his
smoking-room, while the room itself, with others, was in a state of
confusion. His pockets had been rifled, and his watch and chain were
gone, with one or two other small articles of value. On the night of the
tragedy a friend had sat smoking with him in the room where the murder
took place, and he had been the last person to see Mr. Kingscote alive.
A jobbing gardener, who kept the garden in order by casual work from
time to time, had been arrested in consequence of footprints exactly
corresponding with his boots, having been found on the garden beds near
the French window of the smoking-room.

I finished my breakfast and my paper, and Mrs. Clayton, the housekeeper,
came to clear my table. She was sister of my late landlady of the house
where Kingscote had lodged, and it was by this connection that I had
found my chambers. I had not seen the housekeeper since the crime was
first reported, so I now said:

"This is shocking news of Mr. Kingscote, Mrs. Clayton. Did you know him
yourself?"

She had apparently only been waiting for some such remark to burst out
with whatever information she possessed.

"Yes, sir," she exclaimed: "shocking indeed. Pore young feller! I see
him often when I was at my sister's, and he was always a nice, quiet
gentleman, so different from some. My sister, she's awful cut up, sir, I
assure you. And what d'you think 'appened, sir, only last Tuesday? You
remember Mr. Kingscote's room where he painted the woodwork so beautiful
with gold flowers, and blue, and pink? He used to tell my sister she'd
always have something to remember him by. Well, two young fellers,
gentlemen I can't call them, come and took that room (it being to let),
and went and scratched off all the paint in mere wicked mischief, and
then chopped up all the panels into sticks and bits! Nice sort o'
gentlemen them! And then they bolted in the morning, being afraid, I
s'pose, of being made to pay after treating a pore widder's property
like that. That was only Tuesday, and the very next day the pore young
gentleman himself's dead, murdered in his own 'ouse, and him going to be
married an' all! Dear, dear! I remember once he said----"

Mrs. Clayton was a good soul, but once she began to talk some one else
had to stop her. I let her run on for a reasonable time, and then rose
and prepared to go out. I remembered very well the panels that had been
so mischievously destroyed. They made the room the show-room of the
house, which was an old one. They were indeed less than half finished
when I came away, and Mrs. Lamb, the landlady, had shown them to me one
day when Kingscote was out. All the walls of the room were panelled and
painted white, and Kingscote had put upon them an eccentric but charming
decoration, obviously suggested by some of the work of Mr. Whistler.
Tendrils, flowers, and butterflies in a quaint convention wandered
thinly from panel to panel, giving the otherwise rather uninteresting
room an unwonted atmosphere of richness and elegance. The lamentable
jackasses who had destroyed this had certainly selected the best feature
of the room whereon to inflict their senseless mischief.

I strolled idly downstairs, with no particular plan for the afternoon in
my mind, and looked in at Hewitt's offices. Hewitt was reading a note,
and after a little chat he informed me that it had been left an hour
ago, in his absence, by the brother of the man I had just been speaking
of.

"He isn't quite satisfied," Hewitt said, "with the way the police are
investigating the case, and asks me to run down to Finchley and look
round. Yesterday I should have refused, because I have five cases in
progress already, but to-day I find that circumstances have given me a
day or two. Didn't you say you knew the man?"

"Scarcely more than by sight. He was a boarder in the house at Chelsea
where I stayed before I started chambers."

"Ah, well; I think I shall look into the thing. Do you feel particularly
interested in the case? I mean, if you've nothing better to do, would
you come with me?"

"I shall be very glad," I said. "I was in some doubt what to do with
myself. Shall you start at once?"

"I think so. Kerrett, just call a cab. By the way, Brett, which paper
has the fullest report of the inquest yesterday? I'll run over it as we
go down."

As I had only seen one paper that morning, I could not answer Hewitt's
question. So we bought various papers as we went along in the cab, and I
found the reports while Martin Hewitt studied them. Summarised, this was
the evidence given--

_Sarah Dodson_, general servant, deposed that she had been in service at
Ivy Cottage, the residence of the deceased, for five months, the only
other regular servant being the housekeeper and cook. On the evening of
the previous Tuesday both servants retired a little before eleven,
leaving Mr. Kingscote with a friend in the smoking or sitting room. She
never saw her master again alive. On coming downstairs the following
morning and going to open the smoking-room windows, she was horrified to
discover the body of Mr. Kingscote lying on the floor of the room with
blood about the head. She at once raised an alarm, and, on the
instructions of the housekeeper, fetched a doctor, and gave information
to the police. In answer to questions, witness stated she had heard no
noise of any sort during the night, nor had anything suspicious
occurred.

_Hannah Carr_, housekeeper and cook, deposed that she had been in the
late Mr. Kingscote's service since he had first taken Ivy Cottage--a
period of rather more than a year. She had last seen the deceased alive
on the evening of the previous Tuesday, at half-past ten, when she
knocked at the door of the smoking-room, where Mr. Kingscote was sitting
with a friend, to ask if he would require anything more. Nothing was
required, so witness shortly after went to bed. In the morning she was
called by the previous witness, who had just gone downstairs, and found
the body of deceased lying as described. Deceased's watch and chain were
gone, as also was a ring he usually wore, and his pockets appeared to
have been turned out. All the ground floor of the house was in
confusion, and a bureau, a writing-table, and various drawers were
open--a bunch of keys usually carried by deceased being left hanging at
one keyhole. Deceased had drawn some money from the bank on the Tuesday,
for current expenses; how much she did not know. She had not heard or
seen anything suspicious during the night. Besides Dodson and herself,
there were no regular servants; there was a charwoman, who came
occasionally, and a jobbing gardener, living near, who was called in as
required.

_Mr. James Vidler_, surgeon, had been called by the first witness
between seven and eight on Wednesday morning. He found the deceased
lying on his face on the floor of the smoking-room, his feet being about
eighteen inches from the window, and his head lying in the direction of
the fireplace. He found three large contused wounds on the head, any one
of which would probably have caused death. The wounds had all been
inflicted, apparently, with the same blunt instrument--probably a club
or life preserver, or other similar weapon. They could not have been
done with the poker. Death was due to concussion of the brain, and
deceased had probably been dead seven or eight hours when witness saw
him. He had since examined the body more closely, but found no marks at
all indicative of a struggle having taken place; indeed, from the
position of the wounds and their severity, he should judge that the
deceased had been attacked unawares from behind, and had died at once.
The body appeared to be perfectly healthy.

Then there was police evidence, which showed that all the doors and
windows were found shut and completely fastened, except the front door,
which, although shut, was not bolted. There were shutters behind the
French windows in the smoking-room, and these were found fastened. No
money was found in the bureau, nor in any of the opened drawers, so that
if any had been there, it had been stolen. The pockets were entirely
empty, except for a small pair of nail scissors, and there was no watch
upon the body, nor a ring. Certain footprints were found on the garden
beds, which had led the police to take certain steps. No footprints
were to be seen on the garden path, which was hard gravel.

_Mr. Alexander Campbell_, stockbroker, stated that he had known deceased
for some few years, and had done business for him. He and Mr. Kingscote
frequently called on one another, and on Tuesday evening they dined
together at Ivy Cottage. They sat smoking and chatting till nearly
twelve o'clock, when Mr. Kingscote himself let him out, the servants
having gone to bed. Here the witness proceeded rather excitedly: "That
is all I know of this horrible business, and I can say nothing else.
What the police mean by following and watching me----"

_The Coroner_: "Pray be calm, Mr. Campbell. The police must do what
seems best to them in a case of this sort. I am sure you would not have
them neglect any means of getting at the truth."

_Witness_: "Certainly not. But if they suspect me, why don't they say
so? It is intolerable that I should be----"

_The Coroner_: "Order, order, Mr. Campbell. You are here to give
evidence."

The witness then, in answer to questions, stated that the French windows
of the smoking-room had been left open during the evening, the weather
being very warm. He could not recollect whether or not deceased closed
them before he left, but he certainly did not close the shutters.
Witness saw nobody near the house when he left.

_Mr. Douglas Kingscote_, architect, said deceased was his brother. He
had not seen him for some months, living as he did in another part of
the country. He believed his brother was fairly well off, and he knew
that he had made a good amount by speculation in the last year or two.
Knew of no person who would be likely to owe his brother a grudge, and
could suggest no motive for the crime except ordinary robbery. His
brother was to have been married in a few weeks. Questioned further on
this point, witness said that the marriage was to have taken place a
year ago, and it was with that view that Ivy Cottage, deceased's
residence, was taken. The lady, however, sustained a domestic
bereavement, and afterwards went abroad with her family: she was,
witness believed, shortly expected back to England.

_William Bates_, jobbing gardener, who was brought up in custody, was
cautioned, but elected to give evidence. Witness, who appeared to be
much agitated, admitted having been in the garden of Ivy Cottage at four
in the morning, but said that he had only gone to attend to certain
plants, and knew absolutely nothing of the murder. He however admitted
that he had no order for work beyond what he had done the day before.
Being further pressed, witness made various contradictory statements,
and finally said that he had gone to take certain plants away.

The inquest was then adjourned.

This was the case as it stood--apparently not a case presenting any very
striking feature, although there seemed to me to be doubtful
peculiarities in many parts of it. I asked Hewitt what he thought.

"Quite impossible to think anything, my boy, just yet; wait till we see
the place. There are any number of possibilities. Kingscote's friend,
Campbell, may have come in again, you know, by way of the window--or he
may not. Campbell may have owed him money or something--or he may not.
The anticipated wedding may have something to do with it--or, again,
_that_ may not. There is no limit to the possibilities, as far as we can
see from this report--a mere dry husk of the affair. When we get closer
we shall examine the possibilities by the light of more detailed
information. One _probability_ is that the wretched gardener is
innocent. It seems to me that his was only a comparatively blameless
manoeuvre not unheard of at other times in his trade. He came at four
in the morning to steal away the flowers he had planted the day before,
and felt rather bashful when questioned on the point. Why should he
trample on the beds, else? I wonder if the police thought to examine the
beds for traces of rooting up, or questioned the housekeeper as to any
plants being missing? But we shall see."

We chatted at random as the train drew near Finchley, and I mentioned
_inter alia_ the wanton piece of destruction perpetrated at Kingscote's
late lodgings. Hewitt was interested.

"That was curious," he said, "very curious. Was anything else damaged?
Furniture and so forth?"

"I don't know. Mrs. Clayton said nothing of it, and I didn't ask her.
But it was quite bad enough as it was. The decoration was really good,
and I can't conceive a meaner piece of tomfoolery than such an attack on
a decent woman's property."

Then Hewitt talked of other cases of similar stupid damage by creatures
inspired by a defective sense of humour, or mere love of mischief. He
had several curious and sometimes funny anecdotes of such affairs at
museums and picture exhibitions, where the damage had been so great as
to induce the authorities to call him in to discover the offender. The
work was not always easy, chiefly from the mere absence of intelligible
motive; nor, indeed, always successful. One of the anecdotes related to
a case of malicious damage to a picture--the outcome of blind artistic
jealousy--a case which had been hushed up by a large expenditure in
compensation. It would considerably startle most people, could it be
printed here, with the actual names of the parties concerned.

Ivy Cottage, Finchley, was a compact little house, standing in a compact
little square of garden, little more than a third of an acre, or perhaps
no more at all. The front door was but a dozen yards or so back from the
road, but the intervening space was well treed and shrubbed. Mr. Douglas
Kingscote had not yet returned from town, but the housekeeper, an
intelligent, matronly woman, who knew of his intention to call in Martin
Hewitt, was ready to show us the house.

"_First_," Hewitt said, when we stood in the smoking-room, "I observe
that somebody has shut the drawers and the bureau. That is unfortunate.
Also, the floor has been washed and the carpet taken up, which is much
worse. That, I suppose, was because the police had finished their
examination, but it doesn't help me to make one at all. Has
_anything_--anything _at all_--been left as it was on Tuesday morning?"

"Well, sir, you see everything was in such a muddle," the housekeeper
began, "and when the police had done----"

"Just so. I know. You 'set it to rights,' eh? Oh, that setting to
rights! It has lost me a fortune at one time and another. As to the
other rooms, now, have they been set to rights?"

"Such as was disturbed have been put right, sir, of course."

"Which were disturbed? Let me see them. But wait a moment."

He opened the French windows, and closely examined the catch and bolts.
He knelt and inspected the holes whereinto the bolts fell, and then
glanced casually at the folding shutters. He opened a drawer or two, and
tried the working of the locks with the keys the housekeeper carried.
They were, the housekeeper explained, Mr. Kingscote's own keys. All
through the lower floors Hewitt examined some things attentively and
closely, and others with scarcely a glance, on a system unaccountable to
me. Presently, he asked to be shown Mr. Kingscote's bedroom, which had
not been disturbed, "set to rights," or slept in since the crime. Here,
the housekeeper said, all drawers were kept unlocked but two--one in the
wardrobe and one in the dressing-table, which Mr. Kingscote had always
been careful to keep locked. Hewitt immediately pulled both drawers open
without difficulty. Within, in addition to a few odds and ends, were
papers. All the contents of these drawers had been turned over
confusedly, while those of the unlocked drawers were in perfect order.

"The police," Hewitt remarked, "may not have observed these matters.
Any more than such an ordinary thing as _this_," he added, picking up a
bent nail lying at the edge of a rug.

The housekeeper doubtless took the remark as a reference to the entire
unimportance of a bent nail, but I noticed that Hewitt dropped the
article quietly into his pocket.

We came away. At the front gate we met Mr. Douglas Kingscote, who had
just returned from town. He introduced himself, and expressed surprise
at our promptitude both of coming and going.

"You can't have got anything like a clue in this short time, Mr.
Hewitt?" he asked.

"Well, no," Hewitt replied, with a certain dryness, "perhaps not. But I
doubt whether a month's visit would have helped me to get anything very
striking out of a washed floor and a houseful of carefully cleaned-up
and 'set-to-rights' rooms. Candidly, I don't think you can reasonably
expect much of me. The police have a much better chance--they had the
scene of the crime to examine. I have seen just such a few rooms as any
one might see in the first well-furnished house he might enter. The
trail of the housemaid has overlaid all the others."

"I'm very sorry for that; the fact was, I expected rather more of the
police; and, indeed, I wasn't here in time entirely to prevent the
clearing up. But still, I thought your well-known powers----"

"My dear sir, my 'well-known powers' are nothing but common sense
assiduously applied and made quick by habit. That won't enable me to see
the invisible."

"But can't we have the rooms put back into something of the state they
were in? The cook will remember----"

"No, no. That would be worse and worse; that would only be the
housemaid's trail in turn overlaid by the cook's. You must leave things
with me for a little, I think."

"Then you don't give the case up?" Mr. Kingscote asked anxiously.

"Oh, no! I don't give it up just yet. Do you know anything of your
brother's private papers--as they were before his death?"

"I never knew anything till after that. I have gone over them, but they
are all very ordinary letters. Do you suspect a theft of papers?"

Martin Hewitt, with his hands on his stick behind him, looked sharply at
the other, and shook his head. "No," he said, "I can't quite say that."

We bade Mr. Douglas Kingscote good-day, and walked towards the station.
"Great nuisance, that setting to rights," Hewitt observed, on the way.
"If the place had been left alone, the job might have been settled one
way or another by this time. As it is, we shall have to run over to your
old lodgings."

"My old lodgings?" I repeated, amazed. "Why my old lodgings?"

Hewitt turned to me with a chuckle and a wide smile. "Because we can't
see the broken panel-work anywhere else," he said. "Let's see--Chelsea,
isn't it?"

"Yes, Chelsea. But why--you don't suppose the people who defaced the
panels also murdered the man who painted them?"

"Well," Hewitt replied, with another smile, "that would be carrying a
practical joke rather far, wouldn't it? Even for the ordinary picture
damager."

"You mean you _don't_ think they did it, then? But what _do_ you mean?"

"My dear fellow, I don't mean anything but what I say. Come now, this is
rather an interesting case despite appearances, and it _has_ interested
me: so much, in fact, that I really think I forgot to offer Mr. Douglas
Kingscote my condolence on his bereavement. You see a problem is a
problem, whether of theft, assassination, intrigue, or anything else,
and I only think of it as one. The work very often makes me forget
merely human sympathies. Now, you have often been good enough to express
a very flattering interest in my work, and you shall have an opportunity
of exercising your own common sense in the way I am always having to
exercise mine. You shall see all my evidence (if I'm lucky enough to get
any) as I collect it, and you shall make your own inferences. That will
be a little exercise for you; the sort of exercise I should give a pupil
if I had one. But I will give you what information I have, and you shall
start fairly from this moment. You know the inquest evidence, such as it
was, and you saw everything I did in Ivy Cottage?"

"Yes; I think so. But I'm not much the wiser."

"Very well. Now I will tell you. What does the whole case look like? How
would you class the crime?"

"I suppose as the police do. An ordinary case of murder with the object
of robbery."

"It is _not_ an ordinary case. If it were, I shouldn't know as much as I
do, little as that is; the ordinary cases are always difficult. The
assailant did not come to commit a burglary, although he was a skilled
burglar, or one of them was, if more than one were concerned. The affair
has, I think, nothing to do with the expected wedding, nor had Mr.
Campbell anything to do in it--at any rate, personally--nor the
gardener. The criminal (or one of them) was known personally to the dead
man, and was well-dressed: he (or again one of them, and I think there
were two) even had a chat with Mr. Kingscote before the murder took
place. He came to ask for something which Mr. Kingscote was unwilling to
part with,--perhaps hadn't got. It was not a bulky thing. Now you have
all my materials before you."

"But all this doesn't look like the result of the blind spite that would
ruin a man's work first and attack him bodily afterwards."

"Spite isn't always blind, and there are other blind things besides
spite; people with good eyes in their heads are blind sometimes, even
detectives."

"But where did you get all this information? What makes you suppose that
this was a burglar who didn't want to burgle, and a well-dressed man,
and so on?"

Hewitt chuckled and smiled again.

"I saw it--saw it, my boy, that's all," he said. "But here comes the
train."

On the way back to town, after I had rather minutely described
Kingscote's work on the boarding-house panels, Hewitt asked me for the
names and professions of such fellow lodgers in that house as I might
remember. "When did you leave yourself?" he ended.

"Three years ago, or rather more. I can remember Kingscote himself;
Turner, a medical student--James Turner, I think; Harvey Challitt,
diamond merchant's articled pupil--he was a bad egg entirely, he's doing
five years for forgery now; by the bye he had the room we are going to
see till he was marched off, and Kingscote took it--a year before I
left; there was Norton--don't know what he was; 'something in the City,'
I think; and Carter Paget, in the Admiralty Office. I don't remember any
more at this moment; there were pretty frequent changes. But you can get
it all from Mrs. Lamb, of course."

"Of course; and Mrs. Lamb's exact address is--what?"

I gave him the address, and the conversation became disjointed. At
Farringdon station, where we alighted, Hewitt called two hansoms.
Preparing to enter one, he motioned me to the other, saying, "You get
straight away to Mrs. Lamb's at once. She may be going to burn that
splintered wood, or to set things to rights, after the manner of her
kind, and you can stop her. I must make one or two small inquiries, but
I shall be there half an hour after you."

"Shall I tell her our object?"

"Only that I may be able to catch her mischievous lodgers--nothing else
yet." He jumped into the hansom and was gone.

I found Mrs. Lamb still in a state of indignant perturbation over the
trick served her four days before. Fortunately, she had left everything
in the panelled room exactly as she had found it, with an idea of the
being better able to demand or enforce reparation should her lodgers
return. "The room's theirs, you see, sir," she said, "till the end of
the week, since they paid in advance, and they may come back and offer
to make amends, although I doubt it. As pleasant-spoken a young chap as
you might wish, he seemed, him as come to take the rooms. 'My cousin,'
says he, 'is rather an invalid, havin' only just got over congestion of
the lungs, and he won't be in London till this evening late. He's comin'
up from Birmingham,' he ses, 'and I hope he won't catch a fresh cold on
the way, although of course we've got him muffled up plenty.' He took
the rooms, sir, like a gentleman, and mentioned several gentlemen's
names I knew well, as had lodged here before; and then he put down on
that there very table, sir."--Mrs. Lamb indicated the exact spot with
her hand, as though that made the whole thing much more wonderful--"he
put down on that very table a week's rent in advance, and ses, 'That's
always the best sort of reference, Mrs. Lamb, I think,' as kind-mannered
as anything--and never 'aggled about the amount nor nothing. He only had
a little black bag, but he said his cousin had all the luggage coming
in the train, and as there was so much p'r'aps they wouldn't get it here
till next day. Then he went out and came in with his cousin at eleven
that night--Sarah let 'em in her own self--and in the morning they was
gone--and this!" Poor Mrs. Lamb, plaintively indignant, stretched her
arm towards the wrecked panels.

"If the gentleman as you say is comin' on, sir," she pursued, "can do
anything to find 'em, I'll prosecute 'em, that I will, if it costs me
ten pound. I spoke to the constable on the beat, but he only looked like
a fool, and said if I knew where they were I might charge 'em with
wilful damage, or county court 'em. Of course I know I can do that if I
knew where they were, but how can I find 'em? Mr. Jones he said his name
was; but how many Joneses is there in London, sir?"

I couldn't imagine any answer to a question like this, but I condoled
with Mrs. Lamb as well as I could. She afterwards went on to express
herself much as her sister had done with regard to Kingscote's death,
only as the destruction of her panels loomed larger in her mind, she
dwelt primarily on that. "It might almost seem," she said, "that
somebody had a deadly spite on the pore young gentleman, and went
breakin' up his paintin' one night, and murderin' him the next!"

I examined the broken panels with some care, having half a notion to
attempt to deduce something from them myself, if possible. But I could
deduce nothing. The beading had been taken out, and the panels, which
were thick in the centre but bevelled at the edges, had been removed and
split up literally into thin firewood, which lay in a tumbled heap on
the hearth and about the floor. Every panel in the room had been treated
in the same way, and the result was a pretty large heap of sticks, with
nothing whatever about them to distinguish them from other sticks,
except the paint on one face, which I observed in many cases had been
scratched and scraped away. The rug was drawn half across the hearth,
and had evidently been used to deaden the sound of chopping. But
mischief--wanton and stupid mischief--was all I could deduce from it
all.

Mr. Jones's cousin, it seemed, only Sarah had seen, as she admitted him
in the evening, and then he was so heavily muffled that she could not
distinguish his features, and would never be able to identify him. But
as for the other one, Mrs. Lamb was ready to swear to him anywhere.

Hewitt was long in coming, and internal symptoms of the approach of
dinner-time (we had had no lunch) had made themselves felt before a
sharp ring at the door-bell foretold his arrival. "I have had to wait
for answers to a telegram," he said in explanation, "but at any rate I
have the information I wanted. And these are the mysterious panels, are
they?"

Mrs. Lamb's true opinion of Martin Hewitt's behaviour as it proceeded
would have been amusing to know. She watched in amazement the antics of
a man who purposed finding out who had been splitting sticks by dint of
picking up each separate stick and staring at it. In the end he
collected a small handful of sticks by themselves and handed them to me,
saying, "Just put these together on the table, Brett, and see what you
make of them."

I turned the pieces painted side up, and fitted them together into a
complete panel, joining up the painted design accurately. "It is an
entire panel," I said.

"Good. Now look at the sticks a little more closely, and tell me if you
notice anything peculiar about them--any particular in which they differ
from all the others."

I looked. "Two adjoining sticks," I said, "have each a small
semi-circular cavity stuffed with what seems to be putty. Put together
it would mean a small circular hole, perhaps a knot-hole, half an inch
or so in diameter, in the panel, filled in with putty, or whatever it
is."

"A _knot-hole_?" Hewitt asked, with particular emphasis.

"Well, no, not a knot-hole, of course, because that would go right
through, and this doesn't. It is probably less than half an inch deep
from the front surface."

"Anything else? Look at the whole appearance of the wood itself. Colour,
for instance."

"It is certainly darker than the rest."

"So it is." He took the two pieces carrying the puttied hole, threw the
rest on the heap, and addressed the landlady. "The Mr. Harvey Challitt
who occupied this room before Mr. Kingscote, and who got into trouble
for forgery, was the Mr. Harvey Challitt who was himself robbed of
diamonds a few months before on a staircase, wasn't he?"

"Yes, sir," Mrs. Lamb replied in some bewilderment. "He certainly was
that, on his own office stairs, chloroformed."

"Just so, and when they marched him away because of the forgery, Mr.
Kingscote changed into his rooms?"

"Yes, and very glad I was. It was bad enough to have the disgrace
brought into the house, without the trouble of trying to get people to
take his very rooms, and I thought----"

"Yes, yes, very awkward, very awkward!" Hewitt interrupted rather
impatiently. "The man who took the rooms on Monday, now--you'd never
seen him before, had you?"

"No, sir."

"Then is _that_ anything like him?" Hewitt held a cabinet photograph
before her.

"Why--why--law, yes, that's _him_!"

Hewitt dropped the photograph back into his breast pocket with a
contented "Um," and picked up his hat. "I think we may soon be able to
find that young gentleman for you, Mrs. Lamb. He is not a very
respectable young gentleman, and perhaps you are well rid of him, even
as it is. Come, Brett," he added, "the day hasn't been wasted, after
all."

We made towards the nearest telegraph office. On the way I said, "That
puttied-up hole in the piece of wood seems to have influenced you. Is it
an important link?"

"Well--yes," Hewitt answered, "it is. But all those other pieces are
important, too."

"But why?"

"Because there are no holes in them." He looked quizzically at my
wondering face, and laughed aloud. "Come," he said, "I won't puzzle you
much longer. Here is the post-office. I'll send my wire, and then we'll
go and dine at Luzatti's."

He sent his telegram, and we cabbed it to Luzatti's. Among actors,
journalists, and others who know town and like a good dinner, Luzatti's
is well known. We went upstairs for the sake of quietness, and took a
table standing alone in a recess just inside the door. We ordered our
dinner, and then Hewitt began:

"Now tell me what _your_ conclusion is in this matter of the Ivy Cottage
murder."

"Mine? I haven't one. I'm sorry I'm so very dull, but I really haven't."

"Come, I'll give you a point. Here is the newspaper account (torn
sacrilegiously from my scrap-book for your benefit) of the robbery
perpetrated on Harvey Challitt a few months before his forgery. Read
it."

"Oh, but I remember the circumstances very well. He was carrying two
packets of diamonds belonging to his firm downstairs to the office of
another firm of diamond merchants on the ground-floor. It was a quiet
time in the day, and half-way down he was seized on a dark landing, made
insensible by chloroform, and robbed of the diamonds--five or six
thousand pounds' worth altogether, of stones of various smallish
individual values up to thirty pounds or so. He lay unconscious on the
landing till one of the partners, noticing that he had been rather long
gone, followed and found him. That's all, I think."

"Yes, that's all. Well, what do you make of it?"

"I'm afraid I don't quite see the connection with this case."

"Well, then, I'll give you another point. The telegram I've just sent
releases information to the police, in consequence of which they will
probably apprehend Harvey Challitt and his confederate, Henry Gillard,
_alias_ Jones, for the murder of Gavin Kingscote. Now, then."

"Challitt! But he's in gaol already."

"Tut, tut, consider. Five years' penal was his dose, although for the
first offence, because the forgery was of an extremely dangerous sort.
You left Chelsea over three years ago yourself, and you told me that his
difficulty occurred a year before. That makes four years, at least. Good
conduct in prison brings a man out of a five years' sentence in that
time or a little less, and, as a matter of fact, Challitt was released
rather more than a week ago."

"Still, I'm afraid I don't see what you are driving at."

"Whose story is this about the diamond robbery from Harvey Challitt?"

"His own."

"Exactly. His own. Does his subsequent record make him look like a
person whose stories are to be accepted without doubt or question?"

"Why, no. I think I see--no, I don't. You mean he stole them himself?
I've a sort of dim perception of your drift now, but still I can't fix
it. The whole thing's too complicated."

"It is a little complicated for a first effort, I admit, so I will tell
you. This is the story. Harvey Challitt is an artful young man, and
decides on a theft of his firm's diamonds. He first prepares a
hiding-place somewhere near the stairs of his office, and when the
opportunity arrives he puts the stones away, spills his chloroform, and
makes a smell--possibly sniffs some, and actually goes off on the
stairs, and the whole thing's done. He is carried into the office--the
diamonds are gone. He tells of the attack on the stairs, as we have
heard, and he is believed. At a suitable opportunity he takes his
plunder from the hiding-place, and goes home to his lodgings. What is he
to do with those diamonds? He can't sell them yet, because the robbery
is publicly notorious, and all the regular jewel buyers know him.

"Being a criminal novice, he doesn't know any regular receiver of stolen
goods, and if he did would prefer to wait and get full value by an
ordinary sale. There will always be a danger of detection so long as the
stones are not securely hidden, so he proceeds to hide them. He knows
that if any suspicion were aroused his rooms would be searched in every
likely place, so he looks for an unlikely place. Of course, he thinks of
taking out a panel and hiding them behind that. But the idea is so
obvious that it won't do; the police would certainly take those panels
out to look behind them. Therefore he determines to hide them _in_ the
panels. See here--he took the two pieces of wood with the filled hole
from his tail pocket and opened his penknife--the putty near the surface
is softer than that near the bottom of the hole; two different lots of
putty, differently mixed, perhaps, have been used, therefore,
presumably, at different times."

"But to return to Challitt. He makes holes with a centre-bit in
different places on the panels, and in each hole he places a diamond,
embedding it carefully in putty. He smooths the surface carefully flush
with the wood, and then very carefully paints the place over, shading
off the paint at the edges so as to leave no signs of a patch. He
doesn't do the whole job at once, creating a noise and a smell of paint,
but keeps on steadily, a few holes at a time, till in a little while the
whole wainscoting is set with hidden diamonds, and every panel is
apparently sound and whole."

"But, then--there was only one such hole in the whole lot."

"Just so, and that very circumstance tells us the whole truth. Let me
tell the story first--I'll explain the clue after. The diamonds lie
hidden for a few months--he grows impatient. He wants the money, and he
can't see a way of getting it. At last he determines to make a bolt and
go abroad to sell his plunder. He knows he will want money for
expenses, and that he may not be able to get rid of his diamonds at
once. He also expects that his suddenly going abroad while the robbery
is still in people's minds will bring suspicion on him in any case, so,
in for a penny in for a pound, he commits a bold forgery, which, had it
been successful, would have put him in funds and enabled him to leave
the country with the stones. But the forgery is detected, and he is
haled to prison, leaving the diamonds in their wainscot setting.

"Now we come to Gavin Kingscote. He must have been a shrewd fellow--the
sort of man that good detectives are made of. Also he must have been
pretty unscrupulous. He had his suspicions about the genuineness of the
diamond robbery, and kept his eyes open. What indications he had to
guide him we don't know, but living in the same house a sharp fellow on
the look-out would probably see enough. At any rate, they led him to the
belief that the diamonds were in the thief's rooms, but not among his
movables, or they would have been found after the arrest. Here was his
chance. Challitt was out of the way for years, and there was plenty of
time to take the house to pieces if it were necessary. So he changed
into Challitt's rooms.

"How long it took him to find the stones we shall never know. He
probably tried many other places first, and, I expect, found the
diamonds at last by pricking over the panels with a needle. Then came
the problem of getting them out without attracting attention. He decided
not to trust to the needle, which might possibly leave a stone or two
undiscovered, but to split up each panel carefully into splinters so as
to leave no part unexamined. Therefore he took measurements, and had a
number of panels made by a joiner of the exact size and pattern of those
in the room, and announced to his landlady his intention of painting her
panels with a pretty design. This to account for the wet paint, and even
for the fact of a panel being out of the wall, should she chance to
bounce into the room at an awkward moment. All very clever, eh?"

"Very."

"Ah, he was a smart man, no doubt. Well, he went to work, taking out a
panel, substituting a new one, painting it over, and chopping up the old
one on the quiet, getting rid of the splinters out of doors when the
booty had been extracted. The decoration progressed and the little heap
of diamonds grew. Finally, he came to the last panel, but found that he
had used all his new panels and hadn't one left for a substitute. It
must have been at some time when it was difficult to get hold of the
joiner--Bank Holiday, perhaps, or Sunday, and he was impatient. So he
scraped the paint off, and went carefully over every part of the
surface--experience had taught him by this that all the holes were of
the same sort--and found one diamond. He took it out, refilled the hole
with putty, painted the old panel and put it back. _These_ are pieces of
that old panel--the only old one of the lot.

"Nine men out of ten would have got out of the house as soon as possible
after the thing was done, but he was a cool hand and stayed. That made
the whole thing look a deal more genuine than if he had unaccountably
cleared out as soon as he had got his room nicely decorated. I expect
the original capital for those Stock Exchange operations we heard of
came out of those diamonds. He stayed as long as suited him, and left
when he set up housekeeping with a view to his wedding. The rest of the
story is pretty plain. You guess it, of course?"

"Yes," I said, "I think I can guess the rest, in a general sort of
way--except as to one or two points."

"It's all plain--perfectly. See here! Challitt, in gaol, determines to
get those diamonds when he comes out. To do that without being suspected
it will be necessary to hire the room. But he knows that he won't be
able to do that himself, because the landlady, of course, knows him, and
won't have an ex-convict in the house. There is no help for it; he must
have a confederate, and share the spoil. So he makes the acquaintance
of another convict, who seems a likely man for the job, and whose
sentence expires about the same time as his own. When they come out, he
arranges the matter with this confederate, who is a well-mannered (and
pretty well-known) housebreaker, and the latter calls at Mrs. Lamb's
house to look for rooms. The very room itself happens to be to let, and
of course it is taken, and Challitt (who is the invalid cousin) comes in
at night muffled and unrecognisable.

"The decoration on the panel does not alarm them, because, of course,
they suppose it to have been done on the old panels and over the old
paint. Challitt tries the spots where diamonds were left--there are
none--there is no putty even. Perhaps, think they, the panels have been
shifted and interchanged in the painting, so they set to work and split
them all up as we have seen, getting more desperate as they go on.
Finally they realize that they are done, and clear out, leaving Mrs.
Lamb to mourn over their mischief.

"They know that Kingscote is the man who has forestalled them, because
Gillard (or Jones), in his chat with the landlady, has heard all about
him and his painting of the panels. So the next night they set off for
Finchley. They get into Kingscote's garden and watch him let Campbell
out. While he is gone, Challitt quietly steps through the French window
into the smoking-room, and waits for him, Gillard remaining outside.

"Kingscote returns, and Challitt accuses him of taking the stones.
Kingscote is contemptuous--doesn't care for Challitt, because he knows
he is powerless, being the original thief himself; besides, knows there
is no evidence, since the diamonds are sold and dispersed long ago.
Challitt offers to divide the plunder with him--Kingscote laughs and
tells him to go; probably threatens to throw him out, Challitt being the
smaller man. Gillard, at the open window, hears this, steps in behind,
and quietly knocks him on the head. The rest follows as a matter of
course. They fasten the window and shutters, to exclude observation;
turn over all the drawers, etc., in case the jewels are there; go to the
best bedroom and try there, and so on. Failing (and possibly being
disturbed after a few hours' search by the noise of the acquisitive
gardener), Gillard, with the instinct of an old thief, determines they
shan't go away with nothing, so empties Kingscote's pockets and takes
his watch and chain and so on. They go out by the front door and shut it
after them. _Voilà tout._"

I was filled with wonder at the prompt ingenuity of the man who in these
few hours of hurried inquiry could piece together so accurately all the
materials of an intricate and mysterious affair such as this; but more,
I wondered where and how he had collected those materials.

"There is no doubt, Hewitt," I said, "that the accurate and minute
application of what you are pleased to call your common sense has become
something very like an instinct with you. What did you deduce from? You
told me your conclusions from the examination of Ivy Cottage, but not
how you arrived at them."

"They didn't leave me much material downstairs, did they? But in the
bedroom, the two drawers which the thieves found locked were
ransacked--opened probably with keys taken from the dead man. On the
floor I saw a bent French nail; here it is. You see, it is twice bent at
right angles, near the head and near the point, and there is the faint
mark of the pliers that were used to bend it. It is a very usual
burglars' tool, and handy in experienced hands to open ordinary drawer
locks. Therefore, I knew that a professional burglar had been at work.
He had probably fiddled at the drawers with the nail first, and then had
thrown it down to try the dead man's keys.

"But I knew this professional burglar didn't come for a burglary, from
several indications. There was no attempt to take plate, the first thing
a burglar looks for. Valuable clocks were left on mantelpieces, and
other things that usually go in an ordinary burglary were not
disturbed. Notably, it was to be observed that no doors or windows were
broken, or had been forcibly opened; therefore, it was plain that the
thieves had come in by the French window of the smoking-room, the only
entrance left open at the last thing. _Therefore_, they came in, or one
did, knowing that Mr. Kingscote was up, and being quite
willing--presumably anxious--to see him. Ordinary burglars would have
waited till he had retired, and then could have got through the closed
French window as easily almost as if it were open, notwithstanding the
thin wooden shutters, which would never stop a burglar for more than
five minutes. Being anxious to see him, they--or again, _one_ of
them--presumably knew him. That they had come to _get_ something was
plain, from the ransacking. As, in the end, they _did_ steal his money,
and watch, but did _not_ take larger valuables, it was plain that they
had no bag with them--which proves not only that they had not come to
burgle, for every burglar takes his bag, but that the thing they came to
get was not bulky. Still, they could easily have removed plate or clocks
by rolling them up in a table-cover or other wrapper, but such a bundle,
carried by well-dressed men, would attract attention--therefore it was
probable that they were well dressed. Do I make it clear?"

"Quite--nothing seems simpler now it is explained--that's the way with
difficult puzzles."

"There was nothing more to be got at the house. I had already in my mind
the curious coincidence that the panels at Chelsea had been broken the
very night before that of the murder, and determined to look at them in
any case. I got from you the name of the man who had lived in the
panelled room before Kingscote, and at once remembered it (although I
said nothing about it) as that of the young man who had been
chloroformed for his employer's diamonds. I keep things of that sort in
my mind, you see--and, indeed, in my scrap-book. You told me yourself
about his imprisonment, and there I was with what seemed now a hopeful
case getting into a promising shape.

"You went on to prevent any setting to rights at Chelsea, and I made
enquiries as to Challitt. I found he had been released only a few days
before all this trouble arose, and I also found the name of another man
who was released from the same establishment only a few days earlier. I
knew this man (Gillard) well, and knew that nobody was a more likely
rascal for such a crime as that at Finchley. On my way to Chelsea I
called at my office, gave my clerk certain instructions, and looked up
my scrap-book. I found the newspaper account of the chloroform business,
and also a photograph of Gillard--I keep as many of these things as I
can collect. What I did at Chelsea you know. I saw that one panel was of
old wood and the rest new. I saw the hole in the old panel, and I asked
one or two questions. The case was complete."

We proceeded with our dinner. Presently I said: "It all rests with the
police now, of course?"

"Of course. I should think it very probable that Challitt and Gillard
will be caught. Gillard, at any rate, is pretty well known. It will be
rather hard on the surviving Kingscote, after engaging me, to have his
dead brother's diamond transactions publicly exposed as a result, won't
it? But it can't be helped. _Fiat justitia_, of course."

"How will the police feel over this?" I asked. "You've rather cut them
out, eh?"

"Oh, the police are all right. They had not the information I had, you
see; they knew nothing of the panel business. If Mrs. Lamb had gone to
Scotland Yard instead of to the policeman on the beat, perhaps I should
never have been sent for."

The same quality that caused Martin Hewitt to rank as mere
"common-sense" his extraordinary power of almost instinctive deduction,
kept his respect for the abilities of the police at perhaps a higher
level than some might have considered justified.

We sat some little while over our dessert, talking as we sat, when
there occurred one of those curious conjunctions of circumstances that
we notice again and again in ordinary life, and forget as often, unless
the importance of the occasion fixes the matter in the memory. A young
man had entered the dining-room, and had taken his seat at a corner
table near the back window. He had been sitting there for some little
time before I particularly observed him. At last he happened to turn his
thin, pale face in my direction, and our eyes met. It was Challitt--the
man we had been talking of!

I sprang to my feet in some excitement.

"That's the man!" I cried. "Challitt!"

Hewitt rose at my words, and at first attempted to pull me back.
Challitt, in guilty terror, saw that we were between him and the door,
and turning, leaped upon the sill of the open window, and dropped out.
There was a fearful crash of broken glass below, and everybody rushed to
the window.

Hewitt drew me through the door, and we ran downstairs. "Pity you let
out like that," he said, as he went. "If you'd kept quiet we could have
sent out for the police with no trouble. Never mind--can't help it."

Below, Challitt was lying in a broken heap in the midst of a crowd of
waiters. He had crashed through a thick glass skylight and fallen, back
downward, across the back of a lounge. He was taken away on a stretcher
unconscious, and, in fact, died in a week in hospital from injuries to
the spine.

During his periods of consciousness he made a detailed statement,
bearing out the conclusions of Martin Hewitt with the most surprising
exactness, down to the smallest particulars. He and Gillard had parted
immediately after the crime, judging it safer not to be seen together.
He had, he affirmed, endured agonies of fear and remorse in the few days
since the fatal night at Finchley, and had even once or twice thought of
giving himself up. When I so excitedly pointed him out, he knew at once
that the game was up, and took the one desperate chance of escape that
offered. But to the end he persistently denied that he had himself
committed the murder, or had even thought of it till he saw it
accomplished. That had been wholly the work of Gillard, who, listening
at the window and perceiving the drift of the conversation, suddenly
beat down Kingscote from behind with a life-preserver. And so Harvey
Challitt ended his life at the age of twenty-six.

Gillard was never taken. He doubtless left the country, and has probably
since that time become "known to the police" under another name abroad.
Perhaps he has even been hanged, and if he has been, there was no
miscarriage of justice, no matter what the charge against him may have
been.




THE _NICOBAR_ BULLION CASE.


I.

The whole voyage was an unpleasant one, and Captain Mackrie, of the
Anglo-Malay Company's steamship _Nicobar_, had at last some excuse for
the ill-temper that had made him notorious and unpopular in the
company's marine staff. Although the fourth and fifth mates in the
seclusion of their berth ventured deeper in their search for motives,
and opined that the "old man" had made a deal less out of this voyage
than usual, the company having lately taken to providing its own stores;
so that "makings" were gone clean and "cumshaw" (which means commission
in the trading lingo of the China seas) had shrunk small indeed. In
confirmation they adduced the uncommonly long face of the steward (the
only man in the ship satisfied with the skipper), whom the new
regulations hit with the same blow. But indeed the steward's dolor might
well be credited to the short passenger list, and the unpromising aspect
of the few passengers in the eyes of a man accustomed to gauge one's
tip-yielding capacity a month in advance. For the steward it was
altogether the wrong time of year, the wrong sort of voyage, and
certainly the wrong sort of passengers. So that doubtless the
confidential talk of the fourth and fifth officers was mere youthful
scandal. At any rate, the captain had prospect of a good deal in private
trade home, for he had been taking curiosities and Japanese oddments
aboard (plainly for sale in London) in a way that a third steward would
have been ashamed of, and which, for a captain, was a scandal and an
ignominy; and he had taken pains to insure well for the lot. These
things the fourth and fifth mates often spoke of, and more than once
made a winking allusion to, in the presence of the third mate and the
chief engineer, who laughed and winked too, and sometimes said as much
to the second mate, who winked without laughing; for of such is the
tittle-tattle of shipboard.

The _Nicobar_ was bound home with few passengers, as I have said, a
small general cargo, and gold bullion to the value of £200,000--the
bullion to be landed at Plymouth, as usual. The presence of this bullion
was a source of much conspicuous worry on the part of the second
officer, who had charge of the bullion-room. For this was his first
voyage on his promotion from third officer, and the charge of £200,000
worth of gold bars was a thing he had not been accustomed to. The placid
first officer pointed out to him that this wasn't the first shipment of
bullion the world had ever known, by a long way, nor the largest. Also
that every usual precaution was taken, and the keys were in the
captain's cabin; so that he might reasonably be as easy in his mind as
the few thousand other second officers who had had charge of hatches and
special cargo since the world began. But this did not comfort Brasyer.
He fidgeted about when off watch, considering and puzzling out the
various means by which the bullion-room might be got at, and fidgeted
more when on watch, lest somebody might be at that moment putting into
practice the ingenious dodges he had thought of. And he didn't keep his
fears and speculations to himself. He bothered the first officer with
them, and when the first officer escaped he explained the whole thing at
length to the third officer.

"Can't think what the company's about," he said on one such occasion to
the first mate, "calling a tin-pot bunker like that a bullion-room."

"Skittles!" responded the first mate, and went on smoking.

"Oh, that's all very well for you who aren't responsible," Brasyer went
on, "but I'm pretty sure something will happen some day; if not on this
voyage on some other. Talk about a strong room! Why, what's it made of?"

"Three-eighths boiler plate."

"Yes, three-eighths boiler plate--about as good as a sixpenny tin money
box. Why, I'd get through that with my grandmother's scissors!"

"All right; borrow 'em and get through. _I_ would if I had a
grandmother."

"There it is down below there out of sight and hearing, nice and handy
for anybody who likes to put in a quiet hour at plate cutting from the
coal bunker next door--always empty, because it's only a seven-ton
bunker, not worth trimming. And the other side's against the steward's
pantry. What's to prevent a man shipping as steward, getting quietly
through while he's supposed to be bucketing about among his slops and
his crockery, and strolling away with the plunder at the next port? And
then there's the carpenter. _He's_ always messing about somewhere below,
with a bag full of tools. Nothing easier than for him to make a job in a
quiet corner, and get through the plates."

"But then what's he to do with the stuff when he's got it? You can't
take gold ashore by the hundredweight in your boots."

"Do with it. Why, dump it, of course. Dump it overboard in a quiet port
and mark the spot. Come to that, he could desert clean at Port
Said--what easier place?--and take all he wanted. You know what Port
Said's like. Then there are the firemen--oh, _anybody_ can do it!" And
Brasyer moved off to take another peep under the hatchway.

The door of the bullion-room was fastened by one central patent lock and
two padlocks, one above and one below the other lock. A day or two after
the conversation recorded above, Brasyer was carefully examining and
trying the lower of the padlocks with a key, when a voice immediately
behind him asked sharply, "Well, sir, and what are you up to with that
padlock?"

Brasyer started violently and looked round. It was Captain Mackrie.

"There's--that is--I'm afraid these are the same sort of padlocks as
those in the carpenter's stores," the second mate replied, in a hurry of
explanation. "I--I was just trying, that's all; I'm afraid the keys
fit."

"Just you let the carpenter take care of his own stores, will you, Mr.
Brasyer? There's a Chubb's lock there as well as the padlocks, and the
key of that's in my cabin, and I'll take care doesn't go out of it
without my knowledge. So perhaps you'd best leave off experiments till
you're asked to make 'em, for your own sake. That's enough now," the
captain added, as Brasyer appeared to be ready to reply; and he turned
on his heel and made for the steward's quarters.

Brasyer stared after him ragefully. "Wonder what _you_ want down here,"
he muttered under his breath. "Seems to me one doesn't often see a
skipper as thick with the steward as that." And he turned off growling
towards the deck above.

"Hanged if I like that steward's pantry stuck against the side of the
bullion-room," he said later in the day to the first officer. "And what
does a steward want with a lot of boiler-maker's tools aboard? You know
he's got them."

"In the name of the prophet, rats!" answered the first mate, who was of
a less fussy disposition. "What a fatiguing creature you are, Brasyer!
Don't you know the man's a boiler-maker by regular trade, and has only
taken to stewardship for the last year or two? That sort of man doesn't
like parting with his tools, and as he's a widower, with no home ashore,
of course he has to carry all his traps aboard. Do shut up, and take
your proper rest like a Christian. Here, I'll give you a cigar; it's all
right--Burman; stick it in your mouth, and keep your jaw tight on it."

But there was no soothing the second officer. Still he prowled about the
after orlop deck, and talked at large of his anxiety for the contents of
the bullion-room. Once again, a few days later, as he approached the
iron door, he was startled by the appearance of the captain coming, this
time, _from_ the steward's pantry. He fancied he had heard tapping,
Brasyer explained, and had come to investigate. But the captain turned
him back with even less ceremony than before, swearing he would give
charge of the bullion-room to another officer if Brasyer persisted in
his eccentricities. On the first deck the second officer was met by the
carpenter, a quiet, sleek, soft-spoken man, who asked him for the
padlock and key he had borrowed from the stores during the week. But
Brasyer put him off, promising to send it back later. And the carpenter
trotted away to a job he happened to have, singularly enough, in the
hold, just under the after orlop deck, and below the floor of the
bullion-room.

As I have said, the voyage was in no way a pleasant one. Everywhere the
weather was at its worst, and scarce was Gibraltar passed before the
Lascars were shivering in their cotton trousers, and the Seedee boys
were buttoning tight such old tweed jackets as they might muster from
their scanty kits. It was January. In the Bay the weather was
tremendous, and the _Nicobar_ banged and shook and pitched distractedly
across in a howling world of thunderous green sea, washed within and
without, above and below. Then, in the Chops, as night fell, something
went, and there was no more steerage-way, nor, indeed, anything else but
an aimless wallowing. The screw had broken.

The high sea had abated in some degree, but it was still bad. Such sail
as the steamer carried, inadequate enough, was set, and shift was made
somehow to worry along to Plymouth--or to Falmouth if occasion better
served--by that means. And so the _Nicobar_ beat across the Channel on a
rather better, though anything but smooth, sea, in a black night, made
thicker by a storm of sleet, which turned gradually to snow as the hours
advanced.

The ship laboured slowly ahead, through a universal blackness that
seemed to stifle. Nothing but a black void above, below, and around, and
the sound of wind and sea; so that one coming before a deck-light was
startled by the quiet advent of the large snowflakes that came like
moths as it seemed from nowhere. At four bells--two in the morning--a
foggy light appeared away on the starboard bow--it was the Eddystone
light--and an hour or two later, the exact whereabouts of the ship being
a thing of much uncertainty, it was judged best to lay her to till
daylight. No order had yet been given, however, when suddenly there were
dim lights over the port quarter, with a more solid blackness beneath
them. Then a shout and a thunderous crash, and the whole ship shuddered,
and in ten seconds had belched up every living soul from below. The
_Nicobar's_ voyage was over--it was a collision.

The stranger backed off into the dark, and the two vessels drifted
apart, though not till some from the _Nicobar_ had jumped aboard the
other. Captain Mackrie's presence of mind was wonderful, and never for a
moment did he lose absolute command of every soul on board. The ship had
already begun to settle down by the stern and list to port. Life-belts
were served out promptly. Fortunately there were but two women among the
passengers, and no children. The boats were lowered without a mishap,
and presently two strange boats came as near as they dare from the ship
(a large coasting steamer, it afterwards appeared) that had cut into the
_Nicobar_. The last of the passengers were being got off safely, when
Brasyer, running anxiously to the captain, said:--

"Can't do anything with that bullion, can we, sir? Perhaps a box or
two----"

"Oh, damn the bullion!" shouted Captain Mackrie. "Look after the boat,
sir, and get the passengers off. The insurance companies can find the
bullion for themselves."

But Brasyer had vanished at the skipper's first sentence. The skipper
turned aside to the steward as the crew and engine-room staff made for
the remaining boats, and the two spoke quietly together. Presently the
steward turned away as if to execute an order, and the skipper continued
in a louder tone:--

"They're the likeliest stuff, and we can but drop 'em, at worst. But be
slippy--she won't last ten minutes."

She lasted nearly a quarter of an hour. By that time, however, everybody
was clear of her, and the captain in the last boat was only just near
enough to see the last of her lights as she went down.


II.

The day broke in a sulky grey, and there lay the _Nicobar_, in ten
fathoms, not a mile from the shore, her topmasts forlornly visible above
the boisterous water. The sea was rough all that day, but the snow had
ceased, and during the night the weather calmed considerably. Next day
Lloyd's agent was steaming about in a launch from Plymouth, and soon a
salvage company's tug came up and lay to by the emerging masts. There
was every chance of raising the ship as far as could be seen, and a
diver went down from the salvage tug to measure the breach made in the
_Nicobar's_ side, in order that the necessary oak planking or sheeting
might be got ready for covering the hole, preparatory to pumping and
raising. This was done in a very short time, and the necessary telegrams
having been sent, the tug remained in its place through the night, and
prepared for the sending down of several divers on the morrow to get
out the bullion as a commencement.

Just at this time Martin Hewitt happened to be engaged on a case of some
importance and delicacy on behalf of Lloyd's Committee, and was staying
for a few days at Plymouth. He heard the story of the wreck, of course,
and speaking casually with Lloyd's agent as to the salvage work just
beginning, he was told the name of the salvage company's representative
on the tug, Mr. Percy Merrick--a name he immediately recognised as that
of an old acquaintance of his own. So that on the day when the divers
were at work in the bullion-room of the sunken _Nicobar_, Hewitt gave
himself a holiday, and went aboard the tug about noon.

Here he found Merrick, a big, pleasant man of thirty-eight or so. He was
very glad to see Hewitt, but was a great deal puzzled as to the results
of the morning's work on the wreck. Two cases of gold bars were missing.

"There was £200,000 worth of bullion on board," he said, "that's plain
and certain. It was packed in forty cases, each of £5,000 value. But now
there are only thirty-eight cases! Two are gone clearly. I wonder what's
happened?"

"I suppose your men don't know anything about it?" asked Hewitt.

"No, they're all right. You see, it's impossible for them to bring
anything up without its being observed, especially as they have to be
unscrewed from their diving-dresses here on deck. Besides, bless you, I
was down with them."

"Oh! Do you dive yourself, then?"

"Well, I put the dress on sometimes, you know, for any such special
occasion as this. I went down this morning. There was no difficulty in
getting about on the vessel below, and I found the keys of the
bullion-room just where the captain said I would, in his cabin. But the
locks were useless, of course, after being a couple of days in salt
water. So we just burgled the door with crowbars, and then we saw that
we might have done it a bit more easily from outside. For that
coasting-steamer cut clean into the bunker next the bullion-room, and
ripped open the sheet of boiler-plate dividing them."

"The two missing cases couldn't have dropped out that way, of course?"

"Oh, no. We looked, of course, but it would have been impossible. The
vessel has a list the other way--to starboard--and the piled cases
didn't reach as high as the torn part. Well, as I said, we burgled the
door, and there they were, thirty-eight sealed bullion cases, neither
more nor less, and they're down below in the after-cabin at this moment.
Come and see."

Thirty-eight they were; pine cases bound with hoop-iron and sealed at
every joint, each case about eighteen inches by a foot, and six inches
deep. They were corded together, two and two, apparently for convenience
of transport.

"Did you cord them like this yourself?" asked Hewitt.

"No, that's how we found 'em. We just hooked 'em on a block and tackle,
the pair at a time, and they hauled 'em up here aboard the tug."

"What have you done about the missing two--anything?"

"Wired off to headquarters, of course, at once. And I've sent for
Captain Mackrie--he's still in the neighbourhood, I believe--and
Brasyer, the second officer, who had charge of the bullion-room. They
may possibly know something. Anyway, _one_ thing's plain. There were
forty cases at the beginning of the voyage, and now there are only
thirty-eight."

There was a pause; and then Merrick added, "By the bye, Hewitt, this is
rather your line, isn't it? You ought to look up these two cases."

Hewitt laughed. "All right," he said; "I'll begin this minute if you'll
commission me."

"Well," Merrick replied slowly, "of course I can't do that without
authority from headquarters. But if you've nothing to do for an hour or
so there is no harm in putting on your considering cap, is there?
Although, of course, there's nothing to go upon as yet. But you might
listen to what Mackrie and Brasyer have to say. Of course I don't know,
but as it's a £10,000 question probably it might pay you, and if you
_do_ see your way to anything I'd wire and get you commissioned at
once."

There was a tap at the door and Captain Mackrie entered. "Mr. Merrick?"
he said interrogatively, looking from one to another.

"That's myself, sir," answered Merrick.

"I'm Captain Mackrie, of the _Nicobar_. You sent for me, I believe.
Something wrong with the bullion I'm told, isn't it?"

Merrick explained matters fully. "I thought perhaps you might be able to
help us, Captain Mackrie. Perhaps I have been wrongly informed as to the
number of cases that should have been there?"

"No; there were forty right enough. I think though--perhaps I might be
able to give you a sort of hint."--and Captain Mackrie looked hard at
Hewitt.

"This is Mr. Hewitt, Captain Mackrie," Merrick interposed. "You may
speak as freely as you please before him. In fact, he's sort of working
on the business, so to speak."

"Well," Mackrie said, "if that's so, speaking between ourselves, I
should advise you to turn your attention to Brasyer. He was my second
officer, you know, and had charge of the stuff."

"Do you mean," Hewitt asked, "that Mr. Brasyer might give us some useful
information?"

Mackrie gave an ugly grin. "Very likely he might," he said, "if he were
fool enough. But I don't think you'd get much out of him direct. I meant
you might watch him."

"What, do you suppose he was concerned in any way with the disappearance
of this gold?"

"I should think--speaking, as I said before, in confidence and between
ourselves--that it's very likely indeed. I didn't like his manner all
through the voyage."

"Why?"

"Well, he was so eternally cracking on about his responsibility, and
pretending to suspect the stokers and the carpenter, and one person and
another, of trying to get at the bullion cases--that that alone was
almost enough to make one suspicious. He protested so much, you see. He
was so conscientious and diligent himself, and all the rest of it, and
everybody else was such a desperate thief, and he was so sure there
would be some of that bullion missing some day that--that--well, I don't
know if I express his manner clearly, but I tell you I didn't like it a
bit. But there was something more than that. He was eternally smelling
about the place, and peeping in at the steward's pantry--which adjoins
the bullion-room on one side, you know--and nosing about in the bunker
on the other side. And once I actually caught him fitting keys to the
padlocks--keys he'd borrowed from the carpenter's stores. And every time
his excuse was that he fancied he heard somebody else trying to get in
to the gold, or something of that sort; every time I caught him below on
the orlop deck that was his excuse--happened to have heard something or
suspected something or somebody every time. Whether or not I succeed in
conveying my impressions to you, gentlemen, I can assure you that I
regarded his whole manner and actions as very suspicious throughout the
voyage, and I made up my mind I wouldn't forget it if by chance anything
_did_ turn out wrong. Well, it has, and now I've told you what I've
observed. It's for you to see if it will lead you anywhere."

"Just so," Hewitt answered. "But let me fully understand, Captain
Mackrie. You say that Mr. Brasyer had charge of the bullion-room, but
that he was trying keys on it from the carpenter's stores. Where were
the legitimate keys then?"

"In my cabin. They were only handed out when I knew what they were
wanted for. There was a Chubb's lock between the two padlocks, but a
duplicate wouldn't have been hard for Brasyer to get. He could easily
have taken a wax impression of my key when he used it at the port where
we took the bullion aboard."

"Well, and suppose he had taken these boxes, where do you think he would
keep them?"

Mackrie shrugged his shoulders and smiled. "Impossible to say," he
replied. "He might have hidden 'em somewhere on board, though I don't
think that's likely. He'd have had a deuce of a job to land them at
Plymouth, and would have had to leave them somewhere while he came on to
London. Bullion is always landed at Plymouth, you know, and if any were
found to be missing, then the ship would be overhauled at once, every
inch of her; so that he'd have to get his plunder ashore somehow before
the rest of the gold was unloaded--almost impossible. Of course, if he's
done that it's somewhere below there now, but that isn't likely. He'd be
much more likely to have 'dumped' it--dropped it overboard at some
well-known spot in a foreign port, where he could go later on and get
it. So that you've a deal of scope for search, you see. Anywhere under
water from here to Yokohama;" and Captain Mackrie laughed.

Soon afterward he left, and as he was leaving a man knocked at the cabin
door and looked in to say that Mr. Brasyer was on board. "You'll be able
to have a go at him now," said the captain. "Good-day."

"There's the steward of the _Nicobar_ there too, sir," said the man
after the captain had gone, "and the carpenter."

"Very well, we'll see Mr. Brasyer first," said Merrick, and the man
vanished. "It seems to have got about a bit," Merrick went on to Hewitt.
"I only sent for Brasyer, but as these others have come, perhaps they've
got something to tell us."

Brasyer made his appearance, overflowing with information. He required
little assurance to encourage him to speak openly before Hewitt, and he
said again all he had so often said before on board the _Nicobar_. The
bullion-room was a mere tin box, the whole thing was as easy to get at
as anything could be, he didn't wonder in the least at the loss--he had
prophesied it all along.

The men whose movements should be carefully watched, he said, were the
captain and the steward. "Nobody ever heard of a captain and a steward
being so thick together before," he said. "The steward's pantry was next
against the bullion-room, you know, with nothing but that wretched bit
of three-eighths boiler plate between. You wouldn't often expect to find
the captain down in the steward's pantry, would you, thick as they might
be. Well, that's where I used to find him, time and again. And the
steward kept boiler-makers' tools there! That I can swear to. And he's
been a boiler-maker, so that, likely as not, he could open a joint
somewhere and patch it up again neatly so that it wouldn't be noticed.
He was always messing about down there in his pantry, and once I
distinctly heard knocking there, and when I went down to see, whom
should I meet? Why, the skipper, coming away from the place himself, and
he bullyragged me for being there and sent me on deck. But before that
he bullyragged me because I had found out that there were other keys
knocking about the place that fitted the padlocks on the bullion-room
door. Why should he slang and threaten me for looking after these things
and keeping my eye on the bullion-room, as was my duty? But that was the
very thing that he didn't like. It was enough for him to see me anxious
about the gold to make him furious. Of course his character for meanness
and greed is known all through the company's service--he'll do anything
to make a bit."

"But have you any positive idea as to what has become of the gold?"

"Well," Brasyer replied, with a rather knowing air, "I don't think
they've dumped it."

"Do you mean you think it's still in the vessel--hidden somewhere?"

"No, I don't. I believe the captain and the steward took it ashore, one
case each, when we came off in the boats."

"But wouldn't that be noticed?"

"It needn't be, on a black night like that. You see, the parcels are not
so big--look at them, a foot by a foot and a half by six inches or so,
roughly. Easily slipped under a big coat or covered up with anything. Of
course they're a bit heavy--eighty or ninety pounds apiece
altogether--but that's not much for a strong man to carry--especially in
such a handy parcel, on a black night, with no end of confusion on. Now
you just look here--I'll tell you something. The skipper went ashore
last in a boat that was sent out by the coasting steamer that ran into
us. That ship's put into dock for repairs and her crew are mostly having
an easy time ashore. Now I haven't been asleep this last day or two, and
I had a sort of notion there might be some game of this sort on, because
when I left the ship that night I thought we might save a little at
least of the stuff, but the skipper wouldn't let me go near the
bullion-room, and that seemed odd. So I got hold of one of the boat's
crew that fetched the skipper ashore, and questioned him quietly--pumped
him, you know--and he assures me that the skipper _did_ have a rather
small, heavy sort of parcel with him. What do you think of that? Of
course, in the circumstances, the man couldn't remember any very
distinct particulars, but he thought it was a sort of square wooden case
about the size I've mentioned. But there's something more." Brasyer
lifted his fore-finger and then brought it down on the table before
him--"something more. I've made inquiries at the railway station and I
find that two heavy parcels were sent off yesterday to London--deal
boxes wrapped in brown paper, of just about the right size. And the
paper got torn before the things were sent off, and the clerk could see
that the boxes inside were fastened with hoop-iron--like those!" and the
second officer pointed triumphantly to the boxes piled at one side of
the cabin.

"Well done!" said Hewitt. "You're quite a smart detective. Did you find
out who brought the parcels, and who they were addressed to?"

"No, I couldn't get quite as far as that. Of course the clerk didn't
know the names of the senders, and not knowing me, wouldn't tell me
exactly where the parcels were going. But I got quite chummy with him
after a bit, and I'm going to meet him presently--he has the afternoon
off, and we're going for a stroll. I'll find something more, I'll bet
you!"

"Certainly," replied Hewitt, "find all you can--it may be very
important. If you get any valuable information you'll let us know at
once, of course. Anything else, now?"

"No, I don't think so; but I think what I've told you is pretty well
enough for the present, eh? I'll let you know some more soon."

Brasyer went, and Norton, the steward of the old ship, was brought into
the cabin. He was a sharp-eyed, rather cadaverous-looking man, and he
spoke with sepulchral hollowness. He had heard, he said, that there was
something wrong with the chests of bullion, and came on board to give
any information he could. It wasn't much, he went on to say, but the
smallest thing might help. If he might speak strictly confidentially he
would suggest that observation be kept on Wickens, the carpenter. He
(Norton) didn't want to be uncharitable, but his pantry happened to be
next the bullion-room, and he had heard Wickens at work for a very long
time just below--on the under side of the floor of the bullion-room, it
seemed to him, although, of course, he _might_ have been mistaken.
Still, it was very odd that the carpenter always seemed to have a job
just at that spot. More, it had been said--and he (Norton) believed it
to be true--that Wickens, the carpenter, had in his possession, and kept
among his stores, keys that fitted the padlocks on the bullion-room
door. That, it seemed to him, was a very suspicious circumstance. He
didn't know anything more definite, but offered his ideas for what they
were worth, and if his suspicions proved unfounded nobody would be more
pleased than himself. But--but--and the steward shook his head
doubtfully.

"Thank you, Mr. Norton," said Merrick, with a twinkle in his eye; "we
won't forget what you say. Of course, if the stuff is found in
consequence of any of your information, you won't lose by it."

The steward said he hoped not, and he wouldn't fail to keep his eye on
the carpenter. He had noticed Wickens was in the tug, and he trusted
that if they were going to question him they would do it cautiously, so
as not to put him on his guard. Merrick promised they would.

"By the bye, Mr. Norton," asked Hewitt, "supposing your suspicions to be
justified, what do you suppose the carpenter would do with the bullion?"

"Well, sir," replied Norton, "I don't think he'd keep it on the ship.
He'd probably dump it somewhere."

The steward left, and Merrick lay back in his chair and guffawed aloud.
"This grows farcical," he said, "simply farcical. What a happy family
they must have been aboard the _Nicobar_! And now here's the captain
watching the second officer, and the second officer watching the captain
and the steward, and the steward watching the carpenter! It's immense.
And now we're going to see the carpenter. Wonder whom _he_ suspects?"

Hewitt said nothing, but his eyes twinkled with intense merriment, and
presently the carpenter was brought into the cabin.

"Good-day to you, gentlemen," said the carpenter in a soft and
deferential voice, looking from one to the other. "Might I 'ave the
honour of addressin' the salvage gentlemen?"

"That's right," Merrick answered, motioning him to a seat. "This is the
salvage shop, Mr. Wickens. What can we do for you?"

The carpenter coughed gently behind his hand. "I took the liberty of
comin', gentlemen, consekins o' 'earin' as there was some bullion
missin'. P'raps I'm wrong."

"Not at all. We haven't found as much as we expected, and I suppose by
this time nearly everybody knows it. There are two cases wanting. You
can't tell us where they are, I suppose?"

"Well, sir, as to that--no. I fear I can't exactly go as far as that.
But if I am able to give vallable information as may lead to recovery of
same, I presoom I may without offence look for some reasonable small
recognition of my services?"

"Oh, yes," answered Merrick, "that'll be all right, I promise you. The
company will do the handsome thing, of course, and no doubt so will the
underwriters."

"Presoomin' I may take that as a promise--among gentlemen"--this with an
emphasis--"I'm willing to tell something."

"It's a promise, at any rate as far as the company's concerned,"
returned Merrick. "I'll see it's made worth your while--of course,
providing it leads to anything."

"Purvidin' that, sir, o' course. Well, gentlemen, my story ain't a long
one. All I've to say was what I 'eard on board, just before she went
down. The passengers was off, and the crew was gettin' into the other
boats when the skipper turns to the steward an' speaks to him
quiet-like, not observin', gentlemen, as I was agin 'is elbow, so for to
say. ''Ere, Norton,' 'e sez, or words to that effeck, 'why shouldn't we
try gettin' them things ashore with us--you know, the cases--eh? I've a
notion we're pretty close inshore,' 'e sez, 'and there's nothink of a
sea now. You take one, anyway, and I'll try the other,' 'e says, 'but
don't make a flourish.' Then he sez, louder, 'cos o' the steward goin'
off, 'They're the likeliest stuff, and at worst we can but drop 'em. But
look sharp,' 'e says. So then I gets into the nearest boat, and that's
all I 'eard."

"That was all?" asked Hewitt, watching the man's face sharply.

"All?" the carpenter answered with some surprise. "Yes, that was all;
but I think it's pretty well enough, don't you? It's plain enough what
was meant--him and the steward was to take two cases, one apiece, on the
quiet, and they was the likeliest stuff aboard, as he said himself. And
now there's two cases o' bullion missin'. Ain't that enough?"

The carpenter was not satisfied till an exact note had been made of the
captain's words. Then after Merrick's promise on behalf of the company
had been renewed, Wickens took himself off.

"Well," said Merrick, grinning across the table at Hewitt, "this is a
queer go, isn't it? What that man says makes the skipper's case look
pretty fishy, doesn't it? What he says, and what Brasyer says, taken
together, makes a pretty strong case--I should say makes the thing a
certainty. But what a business! It's likely to be a bit serious for some
one, but it's a rare joke in a way. Wonder if Brasyer will find out
anything more? Pity the skipper and steward didn't agree as to whom they
should pretend to suspect. _That's_ a mistake on their part."

"Not at all," Hewitt replied. "_If_ they are conspiring, and know what
they're about, they will avoid seeming to be both in a tale. The bullion
is in bars, I understand?"

"Yes, five bars in each case; weight, I believe, sixteen pounds to a
bar."

"Let me see," Hewitt went on, as he looked at his watch; "it is now
nearly two o'clock. I must think over these things if I am to do
anything in the case. In the meantime, if it could be managed, I should
like enormously to have a turn under water in a diving-dress. I have
always had a curiosity to see under the sea. Could it be managed now?"

"Well," Merrick responded, "there's not much fun in it, I can assure
you; and it's none the pleasanter in this weather. You'd better have a
try later in the year if you really want to--unless you think you can
learn anything about this business by smelling about on the _Nicobar_
down below?"

Hewitt raised his eyebrows and pursed his lips.

"I _might_ spot something," he said; "one never knows. And if I do
anything in a case I always make it a rule to see and hear everything
that can possibly be seen or heard, important or not. Clues lie where
least expected. But beyond that, probably I may never have another
chance of a little experience in a diving-dress. So if it can be managed
I'd be glad."

"Very well, you shall go, if you say so. And since it's your first
venture, I'll come down with you myself. The men are all ashore, I
think, or most of them. Come along."

Hewitt was put in woollens and then in india-rubbers. A leaden-soled
boot of twenty pounds' weight was strapped on each foot, and weights
were hung on his back and chest.

"That's the dress that Gullen usually has," Merrick remarked. "He's a
very smart fellow; we usually send him first to make measurements and
so on. An excellent man, but a bit too fond of the diver's lotion."

"What's that?" asked Hewitt.

"Oh, you shall try some if you like, afterwards. It's a bit too heavy
for me; rum and gin mixed, I think."

A red nightcap was placed on Martin Hewitt's head, and after that a
copper helmet, secured by a short turn in the segmental screw joint at
the neck. In the end he felt a vast difficulty in moving at all. Merrick
had been meantime invested with a similar rig-out, and then each was
provided with a communication cord and an incandescent electric lamp.
Finally, the front window was screwed on each helmet, and all was ready.

Merrick went first over the ladder at the side, and Hewitt with much
difficulty followed. As the water closed over his head, his sensations
altered considerably. There was less weight to carry; his arms in
particular felt light, though slow in motion. Down, down they went
slowly, and all round about it was fairly light, but once on the sunken
vessel and among the lower decks, the electric lamps were necessary
enough. Once or twice Merrick spoke, laying his helmet against Hewitt's
for the purpose, and instructing him to keep his air-pipe, life-line,
and lamp connection from fouling something at every step. Here and
there shadowy swimming shapes came out of the gloom, attracted by their
lamps, to dart into obscurity again with a twist of the tail. The fishes
were exploring the _Nicobar_. The hatchway of the lower deck was open,
and down this they passed to the orlop deck. A little way along this
they came to a door standing open, with a broken lock hanging to it. It
was the door of the bullion-room, which had been forced by the divers in
the morning.

Merrick indicated by signs how the cases had been found piled on the
floor. One of the sides of the room of thin steel was torn and thrust in
the length of its whole upper half, and when they backed out of the room
and passed the open door they stood in the great breach made by the bow
of the strange coasting vessel. Steel, iron, wood, and everything stood
in rents and splinters, and through the great gap they looked out into
the immeasurable ocean. Hewitt put up his hand and felt the edge of the
bullion-room partition where it had been torn. It was just such a tear
as might have been made in cardboard.

They regained the upper deck, and Hewitt, placing his helmet against his
companion's, told him that he meant to have a short walk on the ocean
bed. He took to the ladder again, where it lay over the side, and
Merrick followed him.

The bottom was of that tough, slimy sort of clay-rock that is found in
many places about our coasts, and was dotted here and there with lumps
of harder rock and clumps of curious weed. The two divers turned at the
bottom of the ladder, walked a few steps, and looked up at the great
hole in the _Nicobar's_ side. Seen from here it was a fearful chasm,
laying open hold, orlop, and lower deck.

Hewitt turned away, and began walking about. Once or twice he stood and
looked thoughtfully at the ground he stood on, which was fairly flat. He
turned over with his foot a whitish, clean-looking stone about as large
as a loaf. Then he wandered on slowly, once or twice stopping to examine
the rock beneath him, and presently stooped to look at another stone
nearly as large as the other, weedy on one side only, standing on the
edge of a cavity in the claystone. He pushed the stone into the hole,
which it filled, and then he stood up.

Merrick put his helmet against Hewitt's, and shouted--

"Satisfied now? Seen enough of the bottom?"

"In a moment!" Hewitt shouted back; and he straightway began striding
out in the direction of the ship. Arrived at the bows, he turned back to
the point he started from, striding off again from there to the white
stone he had kicked over, and from there to the vessel's side again.
Merrick watched him in intense amazement, and hurried, as well as he
might, after the light of Hewitt's lamp. Arrived for the second time at
the bows of the ship, Hewitt turned and made his way along the side to
the ladder, and forthwith ascended, followed by Merrick. There was no
halt at the deck this time, and the two made there way up and up into
the lighter water above, and so to the world of air.

On the tug, as the men were unscrewing them from there waterproof
prisons, Merrick asked Hewitt--

"Will you try the 'lotion' now?"

"No," Hewitt replied, "I won't go quite so far as that. But I _will_
have a little whisky, if you've any in the cabin. And give me a pencil
and a piece of paper."

These things were brought, and on the paper Martin Hewitt immediately
wrote a few figures and kept it in his hand.

"I might easily forget those figures," he observed.

Merrick wondered, but said nothing.

Once more comfortably in the cabin, and clad in his usual garments,
Hewitt asked if Merrick could produce a chart of the parts thereabout.

"Here you are," was the reply, "coast and all. Big enough, isn't it?
I've already marked the position of the wreck on it in pencil. She lies
pointing north by east as nearly exact as anything."

"As you've begun it," said Hewitt, "I shall take the liberty of making a
few more pencil marks on this." And with that he spread out the crumpled
note of figures, and began much ciphering and measuring. Presently he
marked certain points on a spare piece of paper, and drew through them
two lines forming an angle. This angle he transferred to the chart, and,
placing a ruler over one leg of the angle, lengthened it out till it met
the coast-line.

"There we are," he said musingly. "And the nearest village to that is
Lostella--indeed, the only coast village in that neighbourhood." He
rose. "Bring me the sharpest-eyed person on board," he said; "that is,
if he were here all day yesterday."

"But what's up? What's all this mathematical business over? Going to
find that bullion by rule of three?"

Hewitt laughed. "Yes, perhaps," he said, "but where's your sharp
look-out? I want somebody who can tell me everything that was visible
from the deck of this tug all day yesterday."

"Well, really I believe the very sharpest chap is the boy. He's most
annoyingly observant sometimes. I'll send for him."

He came--a bright, snub-nosed, impudent-looking young ruffian.

"See here, my boy," said Merrick, "polish up your wits and tell this
gentleman what he asks."

"Yesterday," said Hewitt, "no doubt you saw various pieces of wreckage
floating about?"

"Yessir."

"What were they?"

"Hatch-gratings mostly--nothin' much else. There's some knockin' about
now."

"I saw them. Now, remember. Did you see a hatch-grating floating
yesterday that was different from the others? A painted one, for
instance--those out there now are not painted, you know."

"Yessir, I see a little white 'un painted, bobbin' about away beyond the
foremast of the _Nicobar_."

"You're sure of that?"

"Certain sure, sir--it was the only painted thing floatin'. And to-day
it's washed away somewheres."

"So I noticed. You're a smart lad. Here's a shilling for you--keep your
eyes open and perhaps you'll find a good many more shillings before
you're an old man. That's all."

The boy disappeared, and Hewitt turned to Merrick and said, "I think you
may as well send that wire you spoke of. If I get the commission I think
I may recover that bullion. It may take some little time, or, on the
other hand, it may not. If you'll write the telegram at once, I'll go in
the same boat as the messenger. I'm going to take a walk down to
Lostella now--it's only two or three miles along the coast, but it will
soon be getting dark."

"But what sort of a clue have you got? I didn't----"

"Never mind," replied Hewitt, with a chuckle. "Officially, you know,
I've no right to a clue just yet--I'm not commissioned. When I am I'll
tell you everything."

Hewitt was scarcely ashore when he was seized by the excited Brasyer.
"Here you are," he said. "I was coming aboard the tug again. I've got
more news. You remember I said I was going out with that railway clerk
this afternoon, and meant pumping him? Well, I've done it and rushed
away--don't know what he'll think's up. As we were going along we saw
Norton, the steward, on the other side of the way, and the clerk
recognised him as one of the men who brought the cases to be sent off;
the other was the skipper, I've no doubt, from his description. I played
him artfully, you know, and then he let out that both the cases were
addressed to Mackrie at his address in London! He looked up the entry,
he said, after I left when I first questioned him, feeling curious.
That's about enough, I think, eh? I'm off to London now--I believe
Mackrie's going to-night. I'll have him! Keep it dark!" And the zealous
second officer dashed off without waiting for a reply. Hewitt looked
after him with an amused smile, and turned off towards Lostella.


III.

It was about eleven the next morning when Merrick received the following
note, brought by a boatman:--

    "DEAR MERRICK,--Am I commissioned? If not, don't trouble, but if
    I am, be just outside Lostella, at the turning before you come to
    the Smack Inn, at two o'clock. Bring with you a light cart, a
    policeman--or two perhaps will be better--and a man with a spade.
    There will probably be a little cabbage-digging. Are you fond of
    the sport?--Yours, MARTIN HEWITT.

    "P.S.--_Keep all your men aboard_; bring the spade artist from the
    town."

Merrick was off in a boat at once. His principals had replied to his
telegram after Hewitt's departure the day before, giving him a free hand
to do whatever seemed best. With some little difficulty he got the
policemen, and with none at all he got a light cart and a jobbing man
with a spade. Together they drove off to the meeting-place.

It was before the time, but Martin Hewitt was there, waiting. "You're
quick," he said, "but the sooner the better. I gave you the earliest
appointment I thought you could keep, considering what you had to do."

"Have you got the stuff, then?" Merrick asked anxiously.

"No, not exactly yet. But I've got this," and Hewitt held up the point
of his walking-stick. Protruding half an inch or so from it was the
sharp end of a small gimlet, and in the groove thereof was a little
white wood, such as commonly remains after a gimlet has been used.

"Why, what's that?"

"Never mind. Let us move along--I'll walk. I think we're about at the
end of the job--it's been a fairly lucky one, and quite simple. But I'll
explain after."

Just beyond the Smack Inn, Hewitt halted the cart, and all got down.
They looped the horse's reins round a hedge-stake and proceeded the
small remaining distance on foot, with the policemen behind, to avoid a
premature scare. They turned up a lane behind a few small and rather
dirty cottages facing the sea, each with its patch of kitchen garden
behind. Hewitt led the way to the second garden, pushed open the small
wicket gate and walked boldly in, followed by the others.

Cabbages covered most of the patch, and seemed pretty healthy in their
situation, with the exception of half a dozen--singularly enough, all
together in a group. These were drooping, yellow, and wilted, and
towards these Hewitt straightway walked. "Dig up those wilted cabbages,"
he said to the jobbing man. "They're really useless now. You'll probably
find something else six inches down or so."

The man struck his spade into the soft earth, wherein it stopped
suddenly with a thud. But at this moment a gaunt, slatternly woman, with
a black eye, a handkerchief over her head, and her skirt pinned up in
front, observing the invasion from the back door of the cottage, rushed
out like a maniac and attacked the party valiantly with a broom. She
upset the jobbing man over his spade, knocked off one policeman's
helmet, lunged into the other's face with her broom, and was making her
second attempt to hit Hewitt (who had dodged), when Merrick caught her
firmly by the elbows from behind, pressed them together, and held her.
She screamed, and people came from other cottages and looked on. "Peter!
Peter!" the woman screamed, "come 'ee, come'ee here! Davey! They're
come!"

A grimy child came to the cottage door, and seeing the woman thus held,
and strangers in the garden, set up a piteous howl. Meantime the digger
had uncovered two wooden boxes, each eighteen inches long or so, bound
with hoop-iron and sealed. One had been torn partly open at the top, and
the broken wood roughly replaced. When this was lifted, bars of yellow
metal were visible within.

The woman still screamed vehemently, and struggled. The grimy child
retreated, and then there appeared at the door, staggering hazily and
rubbing his eyes, a shaggy, unkempt man, in shirt and trousers. He
looked stupidly at the scene before him, and his jaw dropped.

"Take that man," cried Hewitt. "He's one!" And the policeman promptly
took him, so that he had handcuffs on his wrists before he had collected
his faculties sufficiently to begin swearing.

Hewitt and the other policeman entered the cottage. In the lower two
rooms there was nobody. They climbed the few narrow stairs, and in the
front room above they found another man, younger, and fast asleep. "He's
the other," said Hewitt. "Take _him_." And this one was handcuffed
before he woke.

Then the recovered gold was put into the cart, and with the help of the
village constable, who brought his own handcuffs for the benefit and
adornment of the lady with the broom, such a procession marched out of
Lostella as had never been dreamed of by the oldest inhabitant in his
worst nightmare, nor recorded in the whole history of Cornwall.

"Now," said Hewitt, turning to Merrick, "we must have that fellow of
yours--what's his name--Gullen, isn't it? The one that went down to
measure the hole in the ship. You've kept him aboard, of course?"

"What, Gullen?" exclaimed Merrick. "Gullen? Well, as a matter of fact he
went ashore last night and hasn't come back. But you don't mean to
say----"

"I _do_," replied Hewitt. "And now you've lost him."


IV.

"But tell me all about it now we've a little time to ourselves," asked
Merrick an hour or two later, as they sat and smoked in the after-cabin
of the salvage tug. "We've got the stuff, thanks to you, but I don't in
the least see how _they_ got it, nor how you found it out."

"Well, there didn't seem to be a great deal either way in the tales told
by the men from the _Nicobar_. They cancelled one another out, so to
speak, though it seemed likely that there might be something in them in
one or two respects. Brasyer, I could see, tried to prove too much. If
the captain and the steward were conspiring to rob the bullion-room, why
should the steward trouble to cut through the boiler-plate walls when
the captain kept the keys in his cabin? And if the captain had been
stealing the bullion, why should he stop at two cases when he had all
the voyage to operate in and forty cases to help himself to? Of course
the evidence of the carpenter gave some colour to the theory, but I
think I can imagine a very reasonable explanation of that.

"You told me, of course, that you were down with the men yourself when
they opened the bullion-room door and got out the cases, so that there
could be no suspicion of _them_. But at the same time you told me that
the breach in the _Nicobar's_ side had laid open the bullion-room
partition, and that you might more easily have got the cases out that
way. You told me, of course, that the cases couldn't have _fallen_ out
that way because of the list of the vessel, the position of the rent in
the boiler-plate, and so on. But I reflected that the day before a diver
had been down alone--in fact, that his business had been with the very
hole that extended partly to the bullion-room: he had to measure it.
That diver might easily have got at the cases through the breach. But
then, as you told me, a diver can't bring things up from below
unobserved. This diver would know this, and might therefore hide the
booty below. So that I made up my mind to have a look under water before
I jumped to any conclusion.

"I didn't think it likely that he had hidden the cases, mind you.
Because he would have had to dive again to get them, and would have
been just as awkwardly placed in fetching them to the light of day then
as ever. Besides, he couldn't come diving here again in the company's
dress without some explanation. So what more likely than that he would
make some ingenious arrangement with an accomplice, whereby he might
make the gold in some way accessible to him?

"We went under water. I kept my eyes open, and observed, among other
things, that the vessel was one of those well-kept 'swell' ones on which
all the hatch gratings and so on are in plain oak or teak, kept
holystoned. This (with the other things) I put by in my mind in case it
should be useful. When we went over the side and looked at the great
gap, I saw that it would have been quite easy to get at the broken
bullion-room partition from outside."

"Yes," remarked Merrick, "it would be no trouble at all. The ladder goes
down just by the side of the breach, and any one descending by that
might just step off at one side on to the jagged plating at the level of
the after orlop, and reach over into the bullion safe."

"Just so. Well, next I turned my attention to the sea-bed, which I was
extremely pleased to see was of soft, slimy claystone. I walked about a
little, getting farther and farther away from the vessel as I went,
till I came across that clean stone which I turned over with my foot. Do
you remember?"

"Yes."

"Well, that was noticeable. It was the only clean, bare stone to be
seen. Every other was covered with a green growth, and to most clumps of
weed clung. The obvious explanation of this was that the stone was a
new-comer--lately brought from dry land--from the shingle on the
sea-shore, probably, since it was washed so clean. Such a stone could
not have come a mile out to sea by itself. Somebody had brought it in a
boat and thrown it over, and whoever did it didn't take all that trouble
for nothing. Then its shape told a tale; it was something of the form,
rather exaggerated, of a loaf--the sort that is called a 'cottage'--the
most convenient possible shape for attaching to a line and lowering. But
the line had gone, so somebody must have been down there to detach it.
Also it wasn't unreasonable to suppose that there might have been a hook
on the end of that line. This, then, was a theory. Your man had gone
down alone to take his measurement, had stepped into the broken side, as
you have explained he could, reached into the bullion-room, and lifted
the two cases. Probably he unfastened the cord, and brought them out one
at a time for convenience in carrying. Then he carried the cases, one
at a time, as I have said, over to that white stone which lay there sunk
with the hook and line attached by previous arrangement with some
confederate. He detached the rope from the stone--it was probably fixed
by an attached piece of cord, tightened round the stone with what you
call a timber-hitch, easily loosened--replaced the cord round the two
cases, passed the hook under the cord, and left it to be pulled up from
above. But then it could not have been pulled up there in broad
daylight, under your very noses. The confederates would wait till night.
That meant that the other end of the rope was attached to some floating
object, so that it might be readily recovered. The whole arrangement was
set one night to be carried away the next."

"But why didn't Gullen take more than two cases?"

"He couldn't afford to waste the time, in the first place. Each case
removed meant another journey to and from the vessel, and you were
waiting above for his measurements. Then he was probably doubtful as to
weight. Too much at once wouldn't easily be drawn up, and might upset a
small boat.

"Well, so much for the white stone. But there was more; close by the
stone I noticed (although I think you didn't) a mark in the claystone.
It was a triangular depression or pit, sharp at the bottom--just the
hole that would be made by the sharp impact of the square corner of a
heavy box, if shod with iron, as the bullion cases are. This was one
important thing. It seemed to indicate that the boxes had not been
lifted directly up from the sea-bed, but had been dragged sideways--at
all events at first--so that a sharp corner had turned over and dug into
the claystone! I walked a little farther and found more
indications--slight scratches, small stones displaced, and so on, that
convinced me of this, and also pointed out the direction in which the
cases had been dragged. I followed the direction, and presently arrived
at another stone, rather smaller than the clean one. The cases had
evidently caught against this, and it had been displaced by their
momentum, and perhaps by a possible wrench from above. The green growth
covered the part which had been exposed to the water, and the rest of
the stone fitted the hole beside it, from which it had been pulled.
Clearly these things were done recently, or the sea would have wiped out
all the traces in the soft claystone. The rest of what I did under water
of course you understood."

"I suppose so: you took the bearings of the two stones in relation to
the ship by pacing the distances."

"That is so. I kept the figures in my head till I could make a note of
them, as you saw, on paper. The rest was mere calculation. What I judged
had happened was this. Gullen had arranged with somebody, identity
unknown, but certainly somebody with a boat at his disposal, to lay the
line, and take it up the following night. Now anything larger than a
rowing boat could not have got up quite so close to you in the night
(although your tug was at the other end of the wreck) without a risk of
being seen. _But_ no rowing boat could have _dragged_ those cases
forcibly along the bottom; they would act as an anchor to it. Therefore
this was what had happened. The thieves had come in a large boat--a
fishing smack, lugger, or something of that sort--with a small boat in
tow. The sailing boat had lain to at a convenient distance, _in the
direction in which it was afterwards to go_, so as to save time if
observed, and a man had put off quietly in the small boat to pick up the
float, whatever it was. There must have been a lot of slack line on this
for the purpose, as also for the purpose of allowing the float to drift
about fairly freely, and not attract attention by remaining in one
place. The man pulled off to the sailing boat, and took the float and
line aboard. Then the sailing boat swung off in the direction of home,
and the line was hauled in with the plunder at the end of it."

"One would think you had seen it all--or done it," Merrick remarked,
with a laugh.

"Nothing else could have happened, you see. That chain of events is the
only one that will explain the circumstances. A rapid grasp of the whole
circumstances and a perfect appreciation of each is more than half the
battle in such work as this. Well, you know I got the exact bearings of
the wreck on the chart, worked out from that the lay of the two stones
with the scratch marks between, and then it was obvious that a straight
line drawn through these and carried ahead would indicate,
approximately, at any rate, the direction the thieves' vessel had taken.
The line fell on the coast close by the village of Lostella--indeed that
was the only village for some few miles either way. The indication was
not certain, but it was likely, and the only one available, therefore it
must be followed up."

"And what about the painted hatch? How did you guess that?"

"Well, I saw there were hatch-gratings belonging to the _Nicobar_
floating about, and it seemed probable that the thieves would use for a
float something similar to the other wreckage in the vicinity, so as not
to attract attention. Nothing would be more likely than a hatch-grating.
But then, in small vessels, such as fishing-luggers and so on, fittings
are almost always painted--they can't afford to be such holystoning
swells as those on the _Nicobar_. So I judged the grating might be
painted, and this would possibly have been noticed by some sharp person.
I made the shot, and hit. The boy remembered the white grating, which
had gone--'washed away,' as he thought. That was useful to me, as you
shall see.

"I made off toward Lostella. The tide was low and it was getting dusk
when I arrived. A number of boats and smacks were lying anchored on the
beach, but there were few people to be seen. I began looking out for
smacks with white-painted fittings in them. There are not so many of
these among fishing vessels--brown or red is more likely, or sheer
colourless dirt over paint unrecognisable. There were only two that I
saw last night. The first _might_ have been the one I wanted, but there
was nothing to show it. The second _was_ the one. She was half-decked
and had a small white-painted hatch. I shifted the hatch and found a
long line, attached to the grating at one end and carrying a hook at the
other! They had neglected to unfasten their apparatus--perhaps had an
idea that there might be a chance of using it again in a few days. I
went to the transom and read the inscription, '_Rebecca_. Peter and
David Garthew, Lostella.' Then my business was to find the Garthews.

"I wandered about the village for some little time, and presently got
hold of a boy. I made a simple excuse for asking about the
Garthews--wanted to go for a sail to-morrow. The boy, with many grins,
confided to me that both of the Garthews were 'on the booze.' I should
find them at the Smack Inn, where they had been all day, drunk as
fiddlers. This seemed a likely sort of thing after the haul they had
made. I went to the Smack Inn, determined to claim old friendship with
the Garthews, although I didn't know Peter from David. There they
were--one sleepy drunk, and the other loving and crying drunk. I got as
friendly as possible with them under the circumstances, and at closing
time stood another gallon of beer and carried it home for them, while
they carried each other. I took care to have a good look round in the
cottage. I even helped Peter's 'old woman'--the lady with the broom--to
carry them up to bed. But nowhere could I see anything that looked like
a bullion-case or a hiding-place for one. So I came away, determined to
renew my acquaintance in the morning, and to carry it on as long as
might be necessary; also to look at the garden in the daylight for signs
of burying. With that view I fixed that little gimlet in my
walking-stick, as you saw.

"This morning I was at Lostella before ten, and took a look at the
Garthews' cabbages. It seemed odd that half a dozen, all in a clump
together, looked withered and limp, as though they had been dug up
hastily, the roots broken, perhaps, and then replanted. And altogether
these particular cabbages had a dissipated, leaning-different-ways look,
as though _they_ had been on the loose with the Garthews. So, seeing a
grubby child near the back door of the cottage, I went towards him,
walking rather unsteadily, so as, if I were observed, to favour the
delusion that I was not yet quite got over last night's diversions.
'Hullo, my b-boy,' I said, 'hullo, li'l b-boy, look here,' and I plunged
my hand into my trousers' pocket and brought it out full of small
change. Then, making a great business of selecting him a penny, I
managed to spill it all over the dissipated cabbages. It was easy then,
in stooping to pick up the change, to lean heavily on my stick and drive
it through the loose earth. As I had expected, there was a box below. So
I gouged away with my walking-stick while I collected my coppers, and
finally swaggered off, after a few civil words with the 'old woman,'
carrying with me evident proof that it was white wood recently buried
there. The rest you saw for yourself. I think you and I may congratulate
each other on having dodged that broom. It hit all the others."

"What I'm wild about," said Merrick, "is having let that scoundrel
Gullen get off. He's an artful chap, without a doubt. He saw us go over
the side, you know, and after you had gone he came into the cabin for
some instructions. Your pencil notes and the chart were on the table,
and no doubt he put two and two together (which was more than I could,
not knowing what had happened), and concluded to make himself safe for a
bit. He had no leave that night--he just pulled away on the quiet. Why
didn't you give me the tip to keep him?"

"That wouldn't have done. In the first place, there was no legal
evidence to warrant his arrest, and ordering him to keep aboard would
have aroused his suspicions. I didn't know at the time how many days, or
weeks, it would take me to find the bullion, if I ever found it, and in
that time Gullen might have communicated in some way with his
accomplices, and so spoilt the whole thing. Yes, certainly he seems to
have been fairly smart in his way. He knew he would probably be sent
down first, as usual, alone to make measurements, and conceived his plan
and made his arrangements forthwith."

"But now what I want to know is what about all those _Nicobar_ people
watching and suspecting one another? More especially what about the
cases the captain and the steward are said to have fetched ashore?"

Hewitt laughed. "Well," he said, "as to that, the presence of the
bullion seems to have bred all sorts of mutual suspicion on board the
ship. Brasyer was over-fussy, and his continual chatter started it
probably, so that it spread like an infection. As to the captain and the
steward, of course I don't know anything but that their rescued cases
were not bullion cases. Probably they were doing a little private
trading--it's generally the case when captain and steward seem unduly
friendly for their relative positions--and perhaps the cases contained
something specially valuable: vases or bronzes from Japan, for instance;
possibly the most valuable things of the size they had aboard. Then, if
they had insured their things, Captain Mackrie (who has the reputation
of a sharp and not very scrupulous man) might possibly think it rather a
stroke of business to get the goods and the insurance money too, which
would lead him to keep his parcels as quiet as possible. But that's as
it may be."

The case was much as Hewitt had surmised. The zealous Brasyer, posting
to London in hot haste after Mackrie, spent some days in watching him.
At last the captain and the steward with their two boxes took a cab and
went to Bond Street, with Brasyer in another cab behind them. The two
entered a shop, the window of which was set out with rare curiosities
and much old silver and gold. Brasyer could restrain himself no longer.
He grabbed a passing policeman, and rushed with him into the shop.
There they found the captain and the steward with two small packing
cases opened before them, trying to sell--a couple of very
ancient-looking Japanese bronze figures, of that curious old workmanship
and varied colour of metal that in genuine examples mean nowadays high
money value.

Brasyer vanished: there was too much chaff for him to live through in
the British mercantile marine after this adventure. The fact was, the
steward had come across the bargain, but had not sufficient spare cash
to buy, so he called in the aid of the captain, and they speculated in
the bronzes as partners. There was much anxious inspection of the prizes
on the way home, and much discussion as to the proper price to ask.
Finally, it was said, they got three hundred pounds for the pair.

Now and again Hewitt meets Merrick still. Sometimes Merrick says, "Now,
I wonder after all whether or not some of those _Nicobar_ men who were
continually dodging suspiciously about that bullion-room _did_ mean
having a dash at the gold if there were a chance?" And Hewitt replies,
"I wonder."




THE HOLFORD WILL CASE.


At one time, in common, perhaps, with most people, I took a sort of
languid, amateur interest in questions of psychology, and was impelled
there-by to plunge into the pages of the many curious and rather
abstruse books which attempt to deal with phenomena of mind, soul and
sense. Three things of the real nature of which, I am convinced, no man
will ever learn more than we know at present--which is nothing.

From these I strayed into the many volumes of _Transactions_ of the
Psychical Research Society, with an occasional by-excursion into mental
telepathy and theosophy; the last, a thing whereof my Philistine
intelligence obstinately refused to make head or tail.

It was while these things were occupying part of my attention that I
chanced to ask Hewitt whether, in the course of his divers odd and
out-of-the-way experiences, he had met with any such weird adventures as
were detailed in such profusion in the books of "authenticated" spooks,
doppelgangers, poltergeists, clairvoyance, and so forth.

"Well," Hewitt answered, with reflection, "I haven't been such a
wallower in the uncanny as some of the worthy people who talk at large
in those books of yours, and, as a matter of fact, my little adventures,
curious as some of them may seem, have been on the whole of the most
solid and matter-of-fact description. One or two things have happened
that perhaps your 'psychical' people might be interested in, but they've
mostly been found to be capable of a disappointingly simple explanation.
One case of some genuine psychological interest, however, I have had;
although there's nothing even in that which isn't a matter of well-known
scientific possibility." And he proceeded to tell me the story that I
have set down here, as well as I can, from recollection.

I think I have already said, in another place, that Hewitt's
professional start as a private investigator dated from his connection
with the famous will case of Bartley _v._ Bartley and others, in which
his then principals, Messrs. Crellan, Hunt & Crellan, chiefly through
his exertions established their extremely high reputation as solicitors.
It was ten years or so after this case that Mr. Crellan senior--the head
of the firm--retired into private life, and by an odd chance Hewitt's
first meeting with him after that event was occasioned by another will
difficulty.

These were the terms of the telegram that brought Hewitt again into
personal relations with his old principal:--

"_Can you run down at once on a matter of private business? I will be at
Guildford to meet eleven thirty-five from Waterloo. If later or
prevented please wire. Crellan._"

The day and the state of Hewitt's engagements suited, and there was full
half an hour to catch the train. Taking, therefore, the small
travelling-bag that always stood ready packed in case of any sudden
excursion that presented the possibility of a night from home, he got
early to Waterloo, and by half-past twelve was alighting at Guildford
Station. Mr. Crellan, a hale, white-haired old gentleman, wearing
gold-rimmed spectacles, was waiting with a covered carriage.

"How d'ye do, Mr. Hewitt, how d'ye do?" the old gentleman exclaimed as
soon as they met, grasping Hewitt's hand, and hurrying him toward the
carriage. "I'm glad you've come, very glad. It isn't raining, and you
might have preferred something more open, but I brought the brougham
because I want to talk privately. I've been vegetating to such an extent
for the last few years down here that any little occurrence out of the
ordinary excites me, and I'm sure I couldn't have kept quiet till we had
got indoors. It's been bad enough, keeping the thing to myself,
already."

The door shut, and the brougham started. Mr. Crellan laid his hand on
Hewitt's knee, "I hope," he said, "I haven't dragged you away from any
important business?"

"No," Hewitt replied, "you have chosen a most excellent time. Indeed, I
did think of making a small holiday to-day, but your telegram----"

"Yes, yes. Do you know, I was almost ashamed of having sent it after it
had gone. Because, after all, the matter is, probably, really a very
simple sort of affair that you can't possibly help me in. A few years
ago I should have thought nothing of it, nothing at all. But as I have
told you, I've got into such a dull, vegetable state of mind since I
retired and have nothing to do that a little thing upsets me, and I
haven't mental energy enough to make up my mind to go to dinner
sometimes. But you're an old friend, and I'm sure you'll forgive my
dragging you all down here on a matter that will, perhaps, seem
ridiculously simple to you, a man in the thick of active business. If I
hadn't known you so well I wouldn't have had the impudence to bother
you. But never mind all that. I'll tell you.

"Do you ever remember my speaking of an intimate friend, a Mr. Holford?
No. Well, it's a long time ago, and perhaps I never happened to mention
him. He was a most excellent man--old fellow, like me, you know; two or
three years older, as a matter of fact. We were chums many years ago; in
fact, we lodged in the same house when I was an articled clerk and he
was a student at Guy's. He retired from the medical profession early,
having come into a fortune, and came down here to live at the house
we're going to; as a matter of fact, Wedbury Hall.

"When I retired I came down and took up my quarters not far off, and we
were a very excellent pair of old chums till last Monday--the day before
yesterday--when my poor old friend died. He was pretty well in
years--seventy-three--and a man can't live for ever. But I assure you it
has upset me terribly, made a greater fool of me than ever, in fact,
just when I ought to have my wits about me.

"The reason I particularly want my wits just now, and the reason I have
requisitioned yours, is this: that I can't find poor old Holford's will.
I drew it up for him years ago, and by it I was appointed his sole
executor. I am perfectly convinced that he cannot have destroyed it,
because he told me everything concerning his affairs. I have always been
his only adviser, in fact, and I'm sure he would have consulted me as
to any change in his testamentary intentions before he made it.
Moreover, there are reasons why I know he could not have wished to die
intestate."

"Which are----?" queried Hewitt as Mr. Crellan paused in his statement.

"Which are these: Holford was a widower, with no children of his own.
His wife, who has been dead nearly fifteen years now, was a most
excellent woman, a model wife, and would have been a model mother if she
had been one at all. As it was she adopted a little girl, a poor little
soul who was left an orphan at two years of age. The child's father, an
unsuccessful man of business of the name of Garth, maddened by a sudden
and ruinous loss, committed suicide, and his wife died of the shock
occasioned by the calamity.

"The child, as I have said, was taken by Mrs. Holford and made a
daughter of, and my old friend's daughter she has been ever since,
practically speaking. The poor old fellow couldn't possibly have been
more attached to a daughter of his own, and on her part she couldn't
possibly have been a better daughter than she was. She stuck by him
night and day during his last illness, until she became rather ill
herself, although of course there was a regular nurse always in
attendance.

"Now, in his will, Mr. Holford bequeathed rather more than half of his
very large property to this Miss Garth; that is to say, as residuary
legatee, her interest in the will came to about that. The rest was
distributed in various ways. Holford had largely spent the leisure of
his retirement in scientific pursuits. So there were a few legacies to
learned societies; all his servants were remembered; he left me a
certain number of his books; and there was a very fair sum of money for
his nephew, Mr. Cranley Mellis, the only near relation of Mr. Holford's
still living. So that you see what the loss of this will may mean. Miss
Garth, who was to have taken the greater part of her adoptive father's
property, will not have one shilling's worth of claim on the estate and
will be turned out into the world without a cent. One or two very old
servants will be very awkwardly placed, too, with nothing to live on,
and very little prospect of doing more work."

"Everything will go to this nephew," said Hewitt, "of course?"

"Of course. That is unless I attempt to prove a rough copy of the will
which I may possibly have by me. But even if I have such a thing and
find it, long and costly litigation would be called for, and the result
would probably be all against us."

"You say you feel sure Mr. Holford did not destroy the will himself?"

"I am quite sure he would never have done so without telling me of it;
indeed, I am sure he would have consulted me first. Moreover, it can
never have been his intention to leave Miss Garth utterly unprovided
for; it would be the same thing as disinheriting his only daughter."

"Did you see him frequently?"

"There's scarcely been a day when I haven't seen him since I have lived
down here. During his illness--it lasted a month--I saw him every day."

"And he said nothing of destroying his will?"

"Nothing at all. On the contrary, soon after his first seizure--indeed,
on the first visit at which I found him in bed--he said, after telling
me how he felt, 'Everything's as I want it, you know, in case I go
under.' That seemed to me to mean his will was still as he desired it to
be."

"Well, yes, it would seem so. But counsel on the other side (supposing
there were another side) might quite as plausibly argue that he meant to
die intestate, and had destroyed his will so that everything should be
as he wanted it, in that sense. But what do you want me to do--find the
will?"

"Certainly, if you can. It seemed to me that you, with your clever head,
might be able to form a better judgment than I as to what has happened
and who is responsible for it. Because if the will _has_ been taken
away, some one has taken it."

"It seems probable. Have you told any one of your difficulty?"

"Not a soul. I came over as soon as I could after Mr. Holford's death,
and Miss Garth gave me all the keys, because, as executor, the case
being a peculiar one, I wished to see that all was in order, and, as you
know, the estate is legally vested in the executor from the death of the
testator, so that I was responsible for everything; although, of course,
if there is no will I'm not executor. But I thought it best to keep the
difficulty to myself till I saw you."

"Quite right. Is this Wedbury Hall?"

The brougham had passed a lodge gate, and approached, by a wide drive, a
fine old red brick mansion carrying the heavy stone dressings and
copings distinctive of early eighteenth century domestic architecture.

"Yes," said Mr. Crellan, "this is the place. We will go straight to the
study, I think, and then I can explain details."

The study told the tale of the late Mr. Holford's habits and interests.
It was half a library, half a scientific laboratory--pathological
curiosities in spirits, a retort or two, test tubes on the
writing-table, and a fossilized lizard mounted in a case, balanced the
many shelves and cases of books disposed about the walls. In a recess
between two book-cases stood a heavy, old-fashioned mahogany bureau.

"Now it was in that bureau," Mr. Crellan explained, indicating it with
his finger, "that Mr. Holford kept every document that was in the
smallest degree important or valuable. I have seen him at it a hundred
times, and he always maintained it was as secure as any iron safe. That
may not have been altogether the fact, but the bureau is certainly a
tremendously heavy and strong one. Feel it."

Hewitt took down the front and pulled out a drawer that Mr. Crellan
unlocked for the purpose.

"Solid Spanish mahogany an inch thick," was his verdict, "heavy, hard,
and seasoned; not the sort of thing you can buy nowadays. Locks, Chubb's
patent, early pattern, but not easily to be picked by anything short of
a blast of gunpowder. If there are no marks on this bureau it hasn't
been tampered with."

"Well," Mr. Crellan pursued, "as I say, _that_ was where Mr. Holford
kept his will. I have often seen it when we have been here together, and
this was the drawer, the top on the right, that he kept it in. The will
was a mere single sheet of foolscap, and was kept, folded of course, in
a blue envelope."

"When did you yourself last actually see the will?"

"I saw it in my friend's hand two days before he took to his bed. He
merely lifted it in his hand to get at something else in the drawer,
replaced it, and locked the drawer again."

"Of course there are other drawers, bureaux, and so on, about the place.
You have examined them carefully, I take it?"

"I've turned out ever possible receptacle for that will in the house, I
positively assure you, and there isn't a trace of it."

"You've thought of secret drawers, I suppose?"

"Yes. There are two in the bureau which I always knew of. Here they
are." Mr. Crellan pressed his thumb against a partition of the
pigeon-holes at the back of the bureau and a strip of mahogany flew out
from below, revealing two shallow drawers with small ivory catches in
lieu of knobs. "Nothing there at all. And this other, as I have said,
was the drawer where the will was kept. The other papers kept in the
same drawer are here as usual."

"Did anybody else know where Mr. Holford kept his will?"

"Everybody in the house, I should think. He was a frank, above-board
sort of man. His adopted daughter knew, and the butler knew, and there
was absolutely no reason why all the other servants shouldn't know;
probably they did."

"First," said Hewitt, "we will make quite sure there are no more secret
drawers about this bureau. Lock the door in case anybody comes."

Hewitt took out every drawer of the bureau, and examined every part of
each before he laid it aside. Then he produced a small pair of silver
callipers and an ivory pocket-rule and went over every inch of the heavy
framework, measuring, comparing, tapping, adding, and subtracting
dimensions. In the end he rose to his feet satisfied. "There is most
certainly nothing concealed there," he said.

The drawers were put back, and Mr. Crellan suggested lunch. At Hewitt's
suggestion it was brought to the study.

"So far," Hewitt said, "we arrive at this: either Mr. Holford has
destroyed his will, or he has most effectually concealed it, or somebody
has stolen it. The first of these possibilities you don't favour."

"I don't believe it is a possibility for a moment. I have told you why;
and I knew Holford so well, you know. For the same reasons I am sure he
never concealed it."

"Very well, then. Somebody has stolen it. The question is, who?"

"That is so."

"It seems to me that every one in this house had a direct and personal
interest in preserving that will. The servants have all something left
them, you say, and without the will that goes, of course. Miss Garth
has the greatest possible interest in the will. The only person I have
heard of as yet who would benefit by its loss or destruction would be
the nephew, Mr. Mellis. There are no other relatives, you say, who would
benefit by intestacy?"

"Not one."

"Well, what do you think yourself, now? Have you any suspicions?"

Mr. Crellan shrugged his shoulders. "I've no more right to suspicions
than you have, I suppose," he said. "Of course, if there are to be
suspicions they can only point one way. Mr. Mellis is the only person
who can gain by the disappearance of this will."

"Just so, Now, what do you know of him?"

"I don't know much of the young man," Mr. Crellan said slowly. "I must
say I never particularly took to him. He is rather a clever fellow, I
believe. He was called to the bar some time ago, and afterwards studied
medicine, I believe, with the idea of priming himself for a practice in
medical jurisprudence. He took a good deal of interest in my old
friend's researches, I am told--at any rate he _said_ he did; he may
have been thinking of his uncle's fortune. But they had a small tiff on
some medical question. I don't know exactly what it was, but Mr. Holford
objected to something--a method of research or something of that
kind--as being dangerous and unprofessional. There was no actual
rupture between them, you understand, but Mellis's visits slacked off,
and there was a coolness."

"Where is Mr. Mellis now?"

"In London, I believe."

"Has he been in this house between the day you last saw the will in that
drawer and yesterday, when you failed to find it?"

"Only once. He came to see his uncle two days before his death--last
Saturday, in fact. He didn't stay long."

"Did you see him?"

"Yes."

"What did he do?"

"Merely came into the room for a few minutes--visitors weren't allowed
to stay long--spoke a little to his uncle, and went back to town."

"Did he do nothing else, or see anybody else?"

"Miss Garth went out of the room with him as he left, and I should think
they talked for a little before he went away, to judge by the time she
was gone; but I don't know."

"You are sure he went then?"

"I saw him in the drive as I looked from the window."

"Miss Garth, you say, has kept all the keys since the beginning of Mr.
Holford's illness?"

"Yes, until she gave them up to me yesterday. Indeed, the nurse, who is
rather a peppery customer, and was jealous of Miss Garth's presence in
the sick room all along, made several difficulties about having to go to
her for everything."

"And there is no doubt of the bureau having been kept locked all the
time?"

"None at all. I have asked Miss Garth that--and, indeed, a good many
other things--without saying why I wanted the information."

"How are Mr. Mellis and Miss Garth affected toward one another--are they
friendly?"

"Oh, yes. Indeed, some while ago I rather fancied that Mellis was
disposed to pay serious addresses in that quarter. He may have had a
fancy that way, or he may have been attracted by the young lady's
expectations. At any rate, nothing definite seems to have come of it as
yet. But I must say--between ourselves, of course--I have more than once
noticed a decided air of agitation, shyness perhaps, in Miss Garth when
Mr. Mellis has been present. But, at any rate, that scarcely matters.
She is twenty-four years of age now, and can do as she likes. Although,
if I had anything to say in the matter--well, never mind."

"You, I take it, have known Miss Garth a long time?"

"Bless you, yes. Danced her on my knee twenty years ago. I've been her
'Uncle Leonard' all her life."

"Well, I think we must at least let Miss Garth know of the loss of the
will. Perhaps, when they have cleared away these plates, she will come
here for a few minutes."

"I'll go and ask her," Mr. Crellan answered, and having rung the bell,
proceeded to find Miss Garth.

Presently he returned with the lady. She was a slight, very pale young
woman; no doubt rather pretty in ordinary, but now not looking her best.
She was evidently worn and nervous from anxiety and want of sleep, and
her eyes were sadly inflamed. As the wind slammed a loose casement
behind her she started nervously, and placed her hand to her head.

"Sit down at once, my dear," Mr. Crellan said; "sit down. This is Mr.
Martin Hewitt, whom I have taken the liberty of inviting down here to
help me in a very important matter. The fact is, my dear," Mr. Crellan
added gravely, "I can't find your poor father's will."

Miss Garth was not surprised. "I thought so," she said mildly, "when you
asked me about the bureau yesterday."

"Of course I need not say, my dear, what a serious thing it may be for
you if that will cannot be found. So I hope you'll try and tell Mr.
Hewitt here anything he wants to know as well as you can, without
forgetting a single thing. I'm pretty sure that he will find it for us
if it is to be found."

"I understand, Miss Garth," Hewitt asked, "that the keys of that bureau
never left your possession during the whole time of Mr. Holford's last
illness, and that the bureau was kept locked?"

"Yes, that is so."

"Did you ever have occasion to go to the bureau yourself?"

"No, I have not touched it."

"Then you can answer for it, I presume, that the bureau was never
unlocked by _any one_ from the time Mr. Holford placed the keys in your
hands till you gave them to Mr. Crellan?"

"Yes, I am sure of that."

"Very good. Now is there any place on the whole premises that you can
suggest where this will may possibly be hidden?"

"There is no place that Mr. Crellan doesn't know of, I'm sure."

"It is an old house, I observe," Hewitt pursued. "Do you know of any
place of concealment in the structure--any secret doors, I mean, you
know, or sliding panels, or hollow door frames, and so forth?"

Miss Garth shook her head. "There is not a single place of the sort you
speak of in the whole building, so far as I know," she said, "and I
have lived here almost all my life."

"You knew the purport of Mr. Holford's will, I take it, and understand
what its loss may mean to yourself?"

"Perfectly."

"Now I must ask you to consider carefully. Take your mind back to two or
three days before Mr. Holford's illness began, and tell me if you can
remember any single fact, occurrence, word, or hint from that day to
this in any way bearing on the will or anything connected with it?"

Miss Garth shook her head thoughtfully. "I can't remember the thing
being mentioned by anybody, except perhaps by the nurse, who is rather a
touchy sort of woman, and once or twice took it upon herself to hint
that my recent anxiety was chiefly about my poor father's money. And
that once, when I had done some small thing for him, my father--I have
always called him father, you know--said that he wouldn't forget it, or
that I should be rewarded, or something of that sort. Nothing else that
I can remember in the remotest degree concerned the will."

"Mr. Mellis said nothing about it, then?"

Miss Garth changed colour slightly, but answered, "No, I only saw him to
the door."

"Thank you, Miss Garth, I won't trouble you any further just now. But
if you _can_ remember anything more in the course of the next few hours
it may turn out to be of great service."

Miss Garth bowed and withdrew. Mr. Crellan shut the door behind her and
returned to Hewitt. "_That_ doesn't carry us much further," he said.
"The more certain it seems that the will cannot have been got at, the
more difficult our position is from a legal point of view. What shall we
do now?"

"Is the nurse still about the place?"

"Yes, I believe so."

"Then I'll speak to her."

The nurse came in response to Mr. Crellan's summons: a sharp-featured,
pragmatical woman of forty-five. She took the seat offered her, and
waited for Hewitt's questions.

"You were in attendance on Mr. Holford, I believe, Mrs. Turton, since
the beginning of his last illness?"

"Since October 24th."

"Were you present when Mr. Mellis came to see his uncle last Saturday?"

"Yes."

"Can you tell me what took place?"

"As to what the gentleman said to Mr. Holford," the nurse replied,
bridling slightly, "of course I don't know anything, it not being my
business and not intended for my ears. Mr. Crellan was there, and knows
as much as I do, and so does Miss Garth. I only know that Mr. Mellis
stayed for a few minutes and then went out of the room with Miss Garth."

"How long was Miss Garth gone?"

"I don't know, ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, perhaps."

"Now Mrs. Turton, I want you to tell me in confidence--it is very
important--whether you, at any time, heard Mr. Holford during his
illness say anything of his wishes as to how his property was to be left
in case of his death?"

The nurse started and looked keenly from Hewitt to Mr. Crellan and back
again.

"Is it the will you mean?" she asked sharply.

"Yes. Did he mention it?"

"You mean you can't find the will, isn't that it?"

"Well, suppose it is, what then?"

"Suppose won't do," the nurse answered shortly; "I _do_ know something
about the will, and I believe you can't find it."

"I'm sure, Mrs. Turton, that if you know anything about the will you
will tell Mr. Crellan in the interests of right and justice."

"And who's to protect me against the spite of those I shall offend if I
tell you?"

Mr. Crellan interposed.

"Whatever you tell us, Mrs. Turton," he said, "will be held in the
strictest confidence, and the source of our information shall not be
divulged. For that I give you my word of honour. And, I need scarcely
add, I will see that you come to no harm by anything you may say."

"Then the will _is_ lost. I may understand that?"

Hewitt's features were impassive and impenetrable. But in Mr. Crellan's
disturbed face the nurse saw a plain answer in the affirmative.

"Yes," she said, "I see that's the trouble. Well, I know who took it."

"Then who was it?"

"_Miss Garth!_"

"Miss Garth! Nonsense!" cried Mr. Crellan, starting upright. "Nonsense!"

"It may be nonsense," the nurse replied slowly, with a monotonous
emphasis on each word. "It may be nonsense, but it's a fact. I saw her
take it."

Mr. Crellan simply gasped. Hewitt drew his chair a little nearer.

"If you saw her take it," he said gently, closely watching the woman's
face the while, "then, of course, there's no doubt."

"I tell you I saw her take it," the nurse repeated. "What was in it,
and what her game was in taking it, I don't know. But it was in that
bureau, wasn't it?"

"Yes--probably."

"In the right hand top drawer?"

"Yes."

"A white paper in a blue envelope?"

"Yes."

"Then I saw her take it, as I said before. She unlocked that drawer
before my eyes, took it out, and locked the drawer again."

Mr. Crellan turned blankly to Hewitt, but Hewitt kept his eyes on the
nurse's face.

"When did this occur?" he asked, "and how?"

"It was on Saturday night, rather late. Everybody was in bed but Miss
Garth and myself, and she had been down to the dining-room for
something. Mr. Holford was asleep, so as I wanted to re-fill the
water-bottle, I took it up and went. As I was passing the door of this
room that we are in now, I heard a noise, and looked in at the door,
which was open. There was a candle on the table which had been left
there earlier in the evening. Miss Garth was opening the top right hand
drawer of _that_ bureau"--Mrs. Turton stabbed her finger spitefully
toward the piece of furniture, as though she owed it a personal
grudge--"and I saw her take out a blue foolscap envelope, and as the
flap was open, I could see the enclosed paper was white. She shut the
drawer, locked it, and came out of the room with the envelope in her
hand."

"And what did you do?"

"I hurried on, and she came away without seeing me, and went in the
opposite direction--toward the small staircase."

"Perhaps," Mr. Crellan ventured at a blurt, "perhaps she was walking in
her sleep?"

"That she wasn't!" the nurse replied, "for she came back to Mr.
Holford's room almost as soon as I returned there, and asked some
questions about the medicine--which was nothing new, for I must say she
was very fond of interfering in things that were part of my business."

"That is quite certain, I suppose," Hewitt remarked--"that she could not
have been asleep?"

"Quite certain. She talked for about a quarter of an hour, and wanted to
kiss Mr. Holford, which might have wakened him, before she went to bed.
In fact, I may say we had a disagreement."

Hewitt did not take his steady gaze from the nurse's face for some
seconds after she had finished speaking. Then he only said, "Thank you,
Mrs. Turton. I need scarcely assure you, after what Mr. Crellan has
said, that your confidence shall not be betrayed. I think that is all,
unless you have more to tell us."

Mrs. Turton bowed and rose. "There is nothing more," she said, and left
the room.

As soon as she had gone, "Is Mrs. Turton at all interested in the will,"
Hewitt asked.

"No, there is nothing for her. She is a new-comer, you see. Perhaps,"
Mr. Crellan went on, struck by an idea, "she may be jealous, or
something. She seems a spiteful woman--and really, I can't believe her
story for a moment."

"Why?"

"Well, you see, it's absurd. Why should Miss Garth go to all this secret
trouble to do herself an injury--to make a beggar of herself? And
besides, she's not in the habit of telling barefaced lies. She
distinctly assured us, you remember, that she had never been to the
bureau for any purpose whatever."

"But the nurse has an honest character, hasn't she?"

"Yes, her character is excellent. Indeed, from all accounts, she is a
very excellent woman, except for a desire to govern everybody, and a
habit of spite if she is thwarted. But, of course, that sort of thing
sometimes leads people rather far."

"So it does," Hewitt replied. "But consider now. Is it not possible that
Miss Garth, completely infatuated with Mr. Mellis, thinks she is doing
a noble thing for him by destroying the will and giving up her whole
claim to his uncle's property? Devoted women do just such things, you
know."

Mr. Crellan stared, bent his head to his hand, and considered. "So they
do, so they do," he said. "Insane foolery. Really, it's the sort of
thing I can imagine her doing--she's honour and generosity itself. But
then those lies," he resumed, sitting up and slapping his leg; "I can't
believe she'd tell such tremendous lies as that for anybody. And with
such a calm face, too--I'm sure she couldn't."

"Well, that's as it may be. You can scarcely set a limit to the lengths
a woman will go on behalf of a man she loves. I suppose, by the bye,
Miss Garth is not exactly what you would call a 'strong-minded' woman?"

"No, she's not that. She'd never get on in the world by herself. She's a
good little soul, but nervous--very; and her month of anxiety, grief,
and want of sleep seems to have broken her up."

"Mr. Mellis knows of the death, I suppose?"

"I telegraphed to him at his chambers in London the first thing
yesterday--Tuesday--morning, as soon as the telegraph office was open.
He came here (as I've forgotten to tell you as yet) the first thing
this morning--before I was over here myself, in fact. He had been
staying not far off--at Ockham, I think--and the telegram had been sent
on. He saw Miss Garth, but couldn't stay, having to get back to London.
I met him going away as I came, about eleven o'clock. Of course I said
nothing about the fact that I couldn't find the will, but he will
probably be down again soon, and may ask questions."

"Yes," Hewitt replied. "And speaking of that matter, you can no doubt
talk with Miss Garth on very intimate and familiar terms?"

"Oh yes--yes; I've told you what old friends we are."

"I wish you could manage, at some favourable opportunity to-day, to
speak to her alone, and without referring to the will in any way, get to
know, as circumspectly and delicately as you can, how she stands in
regard to Mr. Mellis. Whether he is an accepted lover, or likely to be
one, you know. Whatever answer you may get, you may judge, I expect, by
her manner how things really are."

"Very good--I'll seize the first chance. Meanwhile what to do?"

"Nothing, I'm afraid, except perhaps to examine other pieces of
furniture as closely as we have examined this bureau."

Other bureaux, desks, tables, and chests were examined fruitlessly. It
was not until after dinner that Mr. Crellan saw a favourable opportunity
of sounding Miss Garth as he had promised. Half an hour later he came to
Hewitt in the study, more puzzled than ever.

"There's no engagement between them," he reported, "secret or open, nor
ever has been. It seems, from what I can make out, going to work as
diplomatically as possible, that Mellis _did_ propose to her, or
something very near it, a time ago, and was point-blank refused.
Altogether, Miss Garth's sentiment for him appears to be rather dislike
than otherwise."

"That rather knocks a hole in the theory of self-sacrifice, doesn't it?"
Hewitt remarked. "I shall have to think over this, and sleep on it. It's
possible that it may be necessary to-morrow for you to tax Miss Garth,
point-blank, with having taken away the will. Still, I hope not."

"I hope not, too," Mr. Crellan said, rather dubious as to the result of
such an experiment. "She has been quite upset enough already. And, by
the bye, she didn't seem any the better or more composed after Mellis'
visit this morning."

"Still, _then_ the will was gone."

"Yes."

And so Hewitt and Mr. Crellan talked on late into the evening, turning
over every apparent possibility and finding reason in none. The
household went to bed at ten, and, soon after, Miss Garth came to bid
Mr. Crellan good-night. It had been settled that both Martin Hewitt and
Mr. Crellan should stay the night at Wedbury Hall.

Soon all was still, and the ticking of the tall clock in the hall below
could be heard as distinctly as though it were in the study, while the
rain without dropped from eaves and sills in regular splashes. Twelve
o'clock struck, and Mr. Crellan was about to suggest retirement, when
the sound of a light footstep startled Hewitt's alert ear. He raised his
hand to enjoin silence, and stepped to the door of the room, Mr. Crellan
following him.

There was a light over the staircase, seven or eight yards away, and
down the stairs came Miss Garth in dressing gown and slippers; she
turned at the landing and vanished in a passage leading to the right.

"Where does that lead to?" Hewitt whispered hurriedly.

"Toward the small staircase--other end of house," Mr. Crellan replied in
the same tones.

"Come quietly," said Hewitt, and stepped lightly after Miss Garth, Mr.
Crellan at his heels.

She was nearing the opposite end of the passage, walking at a fair pace
and looking neither to right nor left. There was another light over the
smaller staircase at the end. Without hesitation Miss Garth turned down
the stairs till about half down the flight, and then stopped and pressed
her hand against the oak wainscot.

Immediately the vertical piece of framing against which she had placed
her hand turned on central pivots top and bottom, revealing a small
recess, three feet high and little more than six inches wide. Miss Garth
stooped and felt about at the bottom of this recess for several seconds.
Then with every sign of extreme agitation and horror she withdrew her
hand empty, and sank on the stairs. Her head rolled from side to side on
her shoulders, and beads of perspiration stood on her forehead. Hewitt
with difficulty restrained Mr. Crellan from going to her assistance.

Presently, with a sort of shuddering sigh, Miss Garth rose, and after
standing irresolute for a moment, descended the flight of stairs to the
bottom. There she stopped again, and pressing her hand to her forehead,
turned and began to re-ascend the stairs.

Hewitt touched his companion's arm, and the two hastily but noiselessly
made their way back along the passage to the study. Miss Garth left the
open framing as it was, reached the top of the landing, and without
stopping proceeded along the passage and turned up the main staircase,
while Hewitt and Mr. Crellan still watched her from the study door.

At the top of the flight she turned to the right, and up three or four
more steps toward her own room. There she stopped, and leaned
thoughtfully on the handrail.

"Go up," whispered Hewitt to Mr. Crellan, "as though you were going to
bed. Appear surprised to see her; ask if she isn't well, and, if you
can, manage to repeat that question of mine about secret hiding-places
in the house."

Mr. Crellan nodded and started quickly up the stairs. Half-way up he
turned his head, and, as he went on, "Why, Nelly, my dear," he said,
"what's the matter? Aren't you well?"

Mr. Crellan acted his part well, and waiting below, Hewitt heard this
dialogue:

"No, uncle, I don't feel very well, but it's nothing. I think my room
seems close. I can scarcely breathe."

"Oh, it isn't close to-night. You'll be catching cold, my dear. Go and
have a good sleep; you mustn't worry that wise little head of yours, you
know. Mr. Hewitt and I have been making quite a night of it, but I'm off
to bed now."

"I hope they've made you both quite comfortable, uncle?"

"Oh, yes; capital, capital. We've been talking over business, and, no
doubt, we shall put that matter all in order soon. By the bye, I suppose
since you saw Mr. Hewitt you haven't happened to remember anything more
to tell him?"

"No."

"You still can't remember any hiding-places or panels, or that sort of
thing in the wainscot or anywhere?"

"No, I'm sure I don't know of any, and I don't believe for a moment that
any exist."

"Quite sure of that, I suppose?"

"Oh yes."

"All right. Now go to bed. You'll catch _such_ a cold in these draughty
landings. Come, I won't move a step till I see your door shut behind
you. Good-night."

"Good-night, uncle."

Mr. Crellan came downstairs again with a face of blank puzzlement.

"I wouldn't have believed it," he assured Martin Hewitt; "positively I
wouldn't have believed she'd have told such a lie, and with such
confidence, too. There's something deep and horrible here, I'm afraid.
What does it mean?"

"We'll talk of that afterwards," Hewitt replied. "Come now and take a
look at that recess."

They went, quietly still, to the small staircase, and there, with a
candle, closely examined the recess. It was a mere box, three feet high,
a foot or a little more deep, and six or seven inches wide. The piece of
oak framing, pivoted to the stair at the bottom and to a horizontal
piece of framing at the top, stood edge forward, dividing the opening
down the centre. There was nothing whatever in the recess.

Hewitt ascertained that there was no catch, the plank simply remaining
shut by virtue of fitting tightly, so that nothing but pressure on the
proper part was requisite to open it. He had closed the plank and turned
to speak to Mr. Crellan, when another interruption occurred.

On each floor the two staircases were joined by passages, and the
ground-floor passage, from the foot of the flight they were on, led to
the entrance hall. Distinct amid the loud clicking of the hall clock,
Hewitt now heard a sound, as of a person's foot shifting on a stone
step.

Mr. Crellan heard it too, and each glanced at the other. Then Hewitt,
shading the candle with his hand, led the way to the hall. There they
listened for several seconds--almost an hour--it seemed--and then the
noise was repeated. There was no doubt of it. It was at the other side
of the front door.

In answer to Hewitt's hurried whispers, Mr. Crellan assured him that
there was no window from which, in the dark, a view could be got of a
person standing outside the door. Also that any other way out would be
equally noisy, and would entail the circuit of the house. The front door
was fastened by three heavy bolts, an immense old-fashioned lock, and a
bar. It would take nearly a minute to open at least, even if everything
went easily. But, as there was no other way, Hewitt determined to try
it. Handing the candle to his companion, he first lifted the bar,
conceiving that it might be done with the least noise. It went easily,
and, handling it carefully, Hewitt let it hang from its rivet without a
sound. Just then, glancing at Mr. Crellan, he saw that he was forgetting
to shade the candle, whose rays extended through the fanlight above the
door, and probably through the wide crack under it. But it was too late.
At the same moment the light was evidently perceived from outside; there
was a hurried jump from the steps, and for an instant a sound of running
on gravel. Hewitt tore back the bolts, flung the door open, and dashed
out into the darkness, leaving Mr. Crellan on the doorstep with the
candle.

Hewitt was gone, perhaps, five or ten minutes, although to Mr.
Crellan--standing there at the open door in a state of high nervous
tension, and with no notion of what was happening or what it all
meant--the time seemed an eternity. When at last Hewitt reached the door
again, "What was it?" asked Mr. Crellan, much agitated. "Did you see?
Have you caught them?"

Hewitt shook his head.

"I hadn't a chance," he said. "The wall is low over there, and there's a
plantation of trees at the other side. But I think--yes, I begin to
think--that I may possibly be able to see my way through this business
in a little while. See this?"

On the top step in the sheltered porch there remained the wet prints of
two feet. Hewitt took a letter from his pocket, opened it out, spread it
carefully over the more perfect of the two marks, pressed it lightly and
lifted it. Then, when the door was shut, he produced his pocket
scissors, and with great care cut away the paper round the wet part,
leaving a piece, of course, the shape of a boot sole.

"Come," said Hewitt, "we may get at something after all. Don't ask me to
tell you anything now; I don't know anything, as a matter of fact. I
hope this is the end of the night's entertainment, but I'm afraid the
case is rather an unpleasant business. There is nothing for us to do now
but to go to bed, I think. I suppose there's a handy man kept about the
place?"

"Yes, he's gardener and carpenter and carpet-beater, and so on."

"Good! Where's his sanctum? Where does he keep his shovels and carpet
sticks?"

"In the shed by the coach house, I believe. I think it's generally
unlocked."

"Very good. We've earned a night's rest, and now we'll have it."

The next morning, after breakfast, Hewitt took Mr. Crellan into the
study.

"Can you manage," he said, "to send Miss Garth out for a walk this
morning--with somebody?"

"I can send her out for a ride with the groom--unless she thinks it
wouldn't be the thing to go riding so soon after her bereavement."

"Never mind, that will do. Send her at once, and see that she goes. Call
it doctor's orders; say she must go for her health's sake--anything."

Mr. Crellan departed, used his influence, and in half an hour Miss Garth
had gone.

"I was up pretty early this morning," Hewitt remarked on Mr. Crellan's
return to the study, "and, among other things, I sent a telegram to
London. Unless my eyes deceive me, a boy with a peaked cap--a telegraph
boy, in fact--is coming up the drive this moment. Yes, he is. It is
probably my answer."

In a few minutes a telegram was brought in. Hewitt read it and then
asked,--

"Your friend Mr. Mellis, I understand, was going straight to town
yesterday morning?"

"Yes."

"Read that, then."

Mr. Crellan took the telegram and read:

"_Mellis did not sleep at chambers last night. Been out of town for some
days past. Kerrett._"

Mr. Crellan looked up.

"Who's Kerrett?" he asked.

"Lad in my office; sharp fellow. You see, Mellis didn't go to town after
all. As a matter of fact, I believe he was nearer this place than we
thought. You said he had a disagreement with his uncle because of
scientific practices which the old gentleman considered 'dangerous and
unprofessional,' I think?"

"Yes, that was the case."

"Ah, then the key to all the mystery of the will is in this room."

"Where?"

"There." Hewitt pointed to the book-cases. "Read Bernheim's _Suggestive
Therapeutics_, and one or two books of Heidenhain's and Björnström's and
you'll see the thing more clearly than you can without them; but that
would be rather a long sort of job, so----but why, who's this? Somebody
coming up the drive in a fly, isn't it?"

"Yes," Mr. Crellan replied, looking out of the window. Presently he
added, "It's Cranley Mellis."

"Ah," said Hewitt, "he won't trouble us for a little. I'll bet you a
penny cake he goes first by himself to the small staircase and tries
that secret recess. If you get a little way along the passage you will
be able to see him; but that will scarcely matter--I can see you don't
guess now what I am driving at."

"I don't in the least."

"I told you the names of the books in which you could read the matter
up; but that would be too long for the present purpose. The thing is
fairly well summarised, I see, in that encyclopædia there in the corner.
I have put a marker in volume seven. Do you mind opening it at that
place and seeing for yourself?"

Mr. Crellan, doubtful and bewildered, reached the volume. It opened
readily, and in the place where it opened lay a blue foolscap envelope.
The old gentleman took the envelope, drew from it a white paper, stared
first at the paper, then at Hewitt, then at the paper again, let the
volume slide from his lap, and gasped,--

"Why--why--it's the will!"

"Ah, so I thought," said Hewitt, catching the book as it fell. "But
don't lose this place in the encyclopædia. Read the name of the article.
What is it?"

Mr. Crellan looked absent-mindedly at the title, holding the will before
him all the time. Then, mechanically, he read aloud the word,
"_Hypnotism_."

"Hypnotism it is," Hewitt answered. "A dangerous and terrible power in
the hands of an unscrupulous man."

"But--but how? I don't understand it. This--this is the real will, I
suppose?"

"Look at it; you know best."

Mr. Crellan looked.

"Yes," he said, "this certainly is the will. But where did it come from?
It hasn't been in this book all the time, has it?"

"No. Didn't I tell you I put it there myself as a marker? But come,
you'll understand my explanation better if I first read you a few lines
from this article. See here now:--

'Although hypnotism has power for good when properly used by medical
men, it is an exceedingly dangerous weapon in the hands of the unskilful
or unscrupulous. Crimes have been committed by persons who have been
hypnotised. Just as a person when hypnotised is rendered extremely
impressionable, and therefore capable of receiving beneficial
suggestions, so he is nearly as liable to receive suggestions for evil;
and it is quite possible for an hypnotic subject, while under hypnotic
influence, to be impressed with the belief that he is to commit some act
after the influence is removed, and that act he is safe to commit,
acting at the time as an automaton. Suggestions may be thus made of
which the subject, in his subsequent uninfluenced moments, has no idea,
but which he will proceed to carry out automatically at the time
appointed. In the case of a complete state of hypnotism the subject has
subsequently no recollection whatever of what has happened. Persons
whose will or nerve power has been weakened by fear or other similar
causes can be hypnotised without consent on their part.'"

"There now, what do you make of that?"

"Why, do you mean that Miss Garth has been hypnotised by--by--Cranley
Mellis?"

"I think that is the case; indeed, I am pretty sure of it. Notice, on
the occasion of each of his last two visits, he was alone with Miss
Garth for some little time. On the evening following each of those
visits she does something which she afterwards knows nothing
about--something connected with the disappearance of this will, the only
thing standing between Mr. Mellis and the whole of his uncle's property.
Who could have been in a weaker nervous state than Miss Garth has been
lately? Remember, too, on the visit of last Saturday, while Miss Garth
says she only showed Mellis to the door, both you and the nurse speak of
their being gone some little time. Miss Garth must have forgotten what
took place then, when Mellis hypnotised her, and impressed on her the
suggestion that she should take Mr. Holford's will that night, long
after he--Mellis--had gone, and when he could not be suspected of
knowing anything of it. Further, that she should, at that time when her
movements would be less likely to be observed, secrete that will in a
place of hiding known only to himself."

"Dear, dear, what a rascal! Do you really think he did that?"

"Not only that, but I believe he came here yesterday morning while you
were out to get the will from the recess. The recess, by the bye, I
expect he discovered by accident on one of his visits (he has been here
pretty often, I suppose, altogether), and kept the secret in case it
might be useful. Yesterday, not finding the will there, he hypnotised
Miss Garth once again, and conveyed the suggestion that, at midnight
last night, she should take the will from wherever she had put it and
pass it to him under the front door."

"What, do you mean it was he you chased across the grounds last night?"

"That is a thing I am pretty certain of. If we had Mr. Mellis's boot
here we could make sure by comparing it with the piece of paper I cut
out, as you will remember, in the entrance hall. As we have the will,
though, that will scarcely be necessary. What he will do now, I expect,
will be to go to the recess again on the vague chance of the will being
there now, after all, assuming that his second dose of mesmerism has
somehow miscarried. If Miss Garth were here he might try his tricks
again, and that is why I got you to send her out."

"And where did you find the will?"

"Now you come to practical details. You will remember that I asked about
the handyman's tool-house? Well, I paid it a visit at six o'clock this
morning, and found therein some very excellent carpenter's tools in a
chest. I took a selection of them to the small staircase, and took out
the tread of a stair--the one that the pivoted framing-plank rested on."

"And you found the will there?"

"The will, as I rather expected when I examined the recess last night,
had slipped down a rather wide crack at the end of the stair timber,
which, you know, formed, so to speak, the floor of the recess. The fact
was, the stair-tread didn't quite reach as far as the back of the
recess. The opening wasn't very distinct to see, but I soon felt it with
my fingers. When Miss Garth, in her hypnotic condition on Saturday
night, dropped the will into the recess, it shot straight to the back
corner and fell down the slit. That was why Mellis found it empty, and
why Miss Garth also found it empty on returning there last night under
hypnotic influence. You observed her terrible state of nervous agitation
when she failed to carry out the command that haunted her. It was
frightful. Something like what happens to a suddenly awakened
somnambulist, perhaps. Anyway, that is all over. I found the will under
the end of the stair-tread, and here it is. If you will come to the
small staircase now you shall see where the paper slipped out of sight.
Perhaps we shall meet Mr. Mellis."

"He's a scoundrel," said Mr. Crellan. "It's a pity we can't punish him."

"That's impossible, of course. Where's your proof? And if you had any
I'm not sure that a hypnotist is responsible at law for what his subject
does. Even if he were, moving a will from one part of the house to
another is scarcely a legal crime. The explanation I have given you
accounts entirely for the disturbed manner of Miss Garth in the presence
of Mellis. She merely felt an indefinite sense of his power over her.
Indeed, there is all the possibility that, finding her an easy subject,
he had already practised his influence by way of experiment. A
hypnotist, as you will see in the books, has always an easier task with
a person he has hypnotised before."

As Hewitt had guessed, in the corridor they met Mr. Mellis. He was a
thin, dark man of about thirty-five, with large, bony features, and a
slight stoop. Mr. Crellan glared at him ferociously.

"Well, sir, and what do you want?" he asked.

Mr. Mellis looked surprised. "Really, that's a very extraordinary
remark, Mr. Crellan," he said. "This is my late uncle's house. I might,
with at least as much reason, ask you what you want."

"I'm here, sir, as Mr. Holford's executor."

"Appointed by will?"

"Yes."

"And is the will in existence?"

"Well--the fact is--we couldn't find it----"

"Then, what do you mean, sir, by calling yourself an executor with no
will to warrant you?" interrupted Mellis. "Get out of this house. If
there's no will, I administrate."

"But there _is_ a will," roared Mr. Crellan, shaking it in his face.
"There is a will. I didn't say we hadn't found it yet, did I? There _is_
a will, and here it is in spite of all your diabolical tricks, with your
scoundrelly hypnotism and secret holes, and the rest of it! Get out of
this place, sir, or I'll have you thrown out of the window!"

Mr. Mellis shrugged his shoulders with an appearance of perfect
indifference. "If you've a will appointing you executor it's all right,
I suppose, although I shall take care to hold you responsible for any
irregularities. As I don't in the least understand your conduct, unless
it is due to drink, I'll leave you." And with that he went.

Mr. Crellan boiled with indignation for a minute, and then turning to
Hewitt, "I say, I hope it's all right," he said, "connecting him with
all this queer business?"

"We shall soon see," replied Hewitt, "if you'll come and look at the
pivoted plank."

They went to the small staircase, and Hewitt once again opened the
recess. Within lay a blue foolscap envelope, which Hewitt picked up.
"See," he said, "it is torn at the corner. He has been here and opened
it. It's a fresh envelope, and I left it for him this morning, with the
corner gummed down a little so that he would have to tear it in opening.
This is what was inside," Hewitt added, and laughed aloud as he drew
forth a rather crumpled piece of white paper. "It was only a childish
trick after all," he concluded, "but I always liked a small practical
joke on occasion." He held out the crumpled paper, on which was
inscribed in large capital letters the single word--"SOLD."




THE CASE OF THE MISSING HAND.


I think I have recorded in another place Hewitt's frequent aphorism that
"there is nothing in this world that is at all possible that has not
happened or is not happening in London." But there are many strange
happenings in this matter-of-fact country and in these matter-of-fact
times that occur far enough from London. Fantastic crimes, savage
revenges, mediæval superstitions, horrible cruelty, though less in
sight, have been no more extinguished by the advent of the nineteenth
century than have the ancient races who practised them in the dark ages.
Some of the races have become civilized, and some of the savageries are
heard of no more. But there are survivals in both cases. I say these
things having in my mind a particular case that came under the personal
notice of both Hewitt and myself--an affair that brought one up standing
with a gasp and a doubt of one's era.

My good uncle, the Colonel, was not in the habit of gathering large
house parties at his place at Ratherby, partly because the place was
not a great one, and partly because the Colonel's gout was. But there
was an excellent bit of shooting for two or three guns, and even when he
was unable to leave the house himself, my uncle was always pleased if
some good friend were enjoying a good day's sport in his territory. As
to myself, the good old soul was in a perpetual state of offence because
I visited him so seldom, though whenever my scant holidays fell in a
convenient time of the year I was never insensible to the attractions of
the Ratherby stubble. More than once had I sat by the old gentleman when
his foot was exceptionally troublesome, amusing him with accounts of
some of the doings of Martin Hewitt, and more than once had my uncle
expressed his desire to meet Hewitt himself, and commissioned me with an
invitation to be presented to Hewitt at the first likely opportunity,
for a joint excursion to Ratherby. At length I persuaded Hewitt to take
a fortnight's rest, coincident with a little vacation of my own, and we
got down to Ratherby within a few days past September the 1st, and
before a gun had been fired at the Colonel's bit of shooting. The
Colonel himself we found confined to the house with his foot on the
familiar rest, and though ourselves were the only guests, we managed to
do pretty well together. It was during this short holiday that the case
I have mentioned arose.

When first I began to record some of the more interesting of Hewitt's
operations, I think I explained that such cases as I myself had not
witnessed I should set down in impersonal narrative form, without
intruding myself. The present case, so far as Hewitt's work was
concerned, I saw, but there were circumstances which led up to it that
we only fully learned afterwards. These circumstances, however, I shall
put in their proper place--at the beginning.

The Fosters were a fairly old Ratherby family, of whom Mr. John Foster
had died by an accident at the age of about forty, leaving a wife twelve
years younger than himself and three children, two boys and one girl,
who was the youngest. The boys grew up strong, healthy, out-of-door
young ruffians, with all the tastes of sportsmen, and all the qualities,
good and bad, natural to lads of fairly well-disposed character allowed
a great deal too much of their own way from the beginning.

Their only real bad quality was an unfortunate knack of bearing malice,
and a certain savage vindictiveness towards such persons as they chose
to consider their enemies. With the louts of the village they were at
unceasing war, and, indeed, once got into serious trouble for peppering
the butcher's son (who certainly was a great blackguard) with
sparrow-shot. At the usual time they went to Oxford together, and were
fraternally sent down together in their second year, after enjoying a
spell of rustication in their first. The offence was never specifically
mentioned about Ratherby, but was rumoured of as something particularly
outrageous.

It was at this time, sixteen years or thereabout after the death of
their father, that Henry and Robert Foster first saw and disliked Mr.
Jonas Sneathy, a director of penny banks and small insurance offices. He
visited Ranworth (the Fosters' home) a great deal more than the brothers
thought necessary, and, indeed, it was not for lack of rudeness on their
part that Mr. Sneathy failed to understand, as far as they were
concerned, his room was preferred to his company.

But their mother welcomed him, and in the end it was announced that Mrs.
Foster was to marry again, and that after that her name would be Mrs.
Sneathy.

Hereupon there were violent scenes at Ranworth. Henry and Robert Foster
denounced their prospective father-in-law as a fortune-hunter, a
snuffler, a hypocrite. They did not stop at broad hints as to the
honesty of his penny banks and insurance offices, and the house
straightway became a house of bitter strife. The marriage took place,
and it was not long before Mr. Sneathy's real character became generally
obvious. For months he was a model, if somewhat sanctimonious husband,
and his influence over his wife was complete. Then he discovered that
her property had been strictly secured by her first husband's will, and
that, willing as she might be, she was unable to raise money for her new
husband's benefit, and was quite powerless to pass to him any of her
property by deed of gift. Hereupon the man's nature showed itself.
Foolish woman as Mrs. Sneathy might be, she was a loving, indeed, an
infatuated wife; but Sneathy repaid her devotion by vulgar derision,
never hesitating to state plainly that he had married her for his own
profit, and that he considered himself swindled in the result. More, he
even proceeded to blows and other practical brutality of a sort only
devisable by a mean and ugly nature. This treatment, at first secret,
became open, and in the midst of it Mr. Sneathy's penny banks and
insurance offices came to a grievous smash all at once, and everybody
wondered how Mr. Sneathy kept out of gaol.

Keep out of gaol he did, however, for he had taken care to remain on the
safe side of the law, though some of his co-directors learnt the taste
of penal servitude. But he was beggared, and lived, as it were, a mere
pensioner in his wife's house. Here his brutality increased to a
frightful extent, till his wife, already broken in health in
consequence, went in constant fear of her life, and Miss Foster passed
a life of weeping misery. All her friends' entreaties, however, could
not persuade Mrs. Sneathy to obtain a legal separation from her husband.
She clung to him with the excuse--for it was no more--that she hoped to
win him to kindness by submission, and with a pathetic infatuation that
seemed to increase as her bodily strength diminished.

Henry and Robert, as may be supposed, were anything but silent in these
circumstances. Indeed, they broke out violently again and again, and
more than once went near permanently injuring their worthy
father-in-law. Once especially, when Sneathy, absolutely without
provocation, made a motion to strike his wife in their presence, there
was a fearful scene. The two sprang at him like wild beasts, knocked him
down and dragged him to the balcony with the intention of throwing him
out of the window. But Mrs. Sneathy impeded them, hysterically imploring
them to desist.

"If you lift your hand to my mother," roared Henry, gripping Sneathy by
the throat till his fat face turned blue, and banging his head against
the wall, "if you lift your hand to my mother again I'll chop it off--I
will! I'll chop it off and drive it down your throat!"

"We'll do worse," said Robert, white and frantic with passion, "we'll
hang you--hang you to the door! You're a proved liar and thief, and
you're worse than a common murderer. I'd hang you to the front door for
twopence!"

For a few days Sneathy was comparatively quiet, cowed by their violence.
Then he took to venting redoubled spite on his unfortunate wife, always
in the absence of her sons, well aware that she would never inform them.
On their part, finding him apparently better behaved in consequence of
their attack, they thought to maintain his wholesome terror, and
scarcely passed him without a menace, taking a fiendish delight in
repeating the threats they had used during the scene, by way of keeping
it present to his mind.

"Take care of your hands, sir," they would say. "Keep them to yourself,
or, by George, we'll take 'em off with a billhook!"

But his revenge for all this Sneathy took unobserved on their mother.
Truly a miserable household.

Soon, however, the brothers left home, and went to London by way of
looking for a profession. Henry began a belated study of medicine, and
Robert made a pretence of reading for the bar. Indeed, their departure
was as much as anything a consequence of the earnest entreaty of their
sister, who saw that their presence at home was an exasperation to
Sneathy, and aggravated her mother's secret sufferings. They went,
therefore; but at Ranworth things became worse.

Little was allowed to be known outside the house, but it was broadly
said that Mr. Sneathy's behaviour had now become outrageous beyond
description. Servants left faster than new ones could be found, and gave
their late employer the character of a raving maniac. Once, indeed, he
committed himself in the village, attacking with his walking-stick an
inoffensive tradesman who had accidentally brushed against him, and
immediately running home. This assault had to be compounded for by a
payment of fifty pounds. And then Henry and Robert Foster received a
most urgent letter from their sister requesting their immediate presence
at home.

They went at once, of course, and the servants' account of what occurred
was this. When the brothers arrived Mr. Sneathy had just left the house.
The brothers were shut up with their mother and sister for about a
quarter of an hour, and then left them and came out to the stable yard
together. The coachman (he was a new man, who had only arrived the day
before) overheard a little of their talk as they stood by the door.

Mr. Henry said that "the thing must be done, and at once. There are two
of us, so that it ought to be easy enough." And afterwards Mr. Robert
said, "You'll know best how to go about it, as a doctor." After which
Mr. Henry came towards the coachman and asked in what direction Mr.
Sneathy had gone. The coachman replied that it was in the direction of
Ratherby Wood, by the winding footpath that led through it. But as he
spoke he distinctly with the corner of his eye saw the other brother
take a halter from a hook by the stable door and put it into his coat
pocket.

So far for the earlier events, whereof I learned later bit by bit. It
was on the day of the arrival of the brothers Foster at their old home,
and, indeed, little more than two hours after the incident last set
down, that news of Mr. Sneathy came to Colonel Brett's place, where
Hewitt and I were sitting and chatting with the Colonel. The news was
that Mr. Sneathy had committed suicide--had been found hanging, in fact,
to a tree in Ratherby Wood, just by the side of the footpath.

Hewitt and I had of course at this time never heard of Sneathy, and the
Colonel told us what little he knew. He had never spoken to the man, he
said--indeed, nobody in the place outside Ranworth would have anything
to do with him. "He's certainly been an unholy scoundrel over those poor
people's banks," said my uncle, "and if what they say's true, he's been
about as bad as possible to his wretched wife. He must have been pretty
miserable, too, with all his scoundrelism, for he was a completely
ruined man, without a chance of retrieving his position, and detested by
everybody. Indeed, some of his recent doings, if what I have heard is to
be relied on, have been very much those of a madman. So that, on the
whole, I'm not much surprised. Suicide's about the only crime, I
suppose, that he has never experimented with till now, and, indeed, it's
rather a service to the world at large--his only service, I expect."

The Colonel sent a man to make further inquiries, and presently this man
returned with the news that now it was said that Mr. Sneathy had not
committed suicide, but had been murdered. And hard on the man's heels
came Mr. Hardwick, a neighbour of my uncle's and a fellow J. P. He had
had the case reported to him, it seemed, as soon as the body had been
found, and had at once gone to the spot. He had found the body
hanging--_and with the right hand cut off_.

"It's a murder, Brett," he said, "without doubt--a most horrible case of
murder and mutilation. The hand is cut off and taken away, but whether
the atrocity was committed before or after the hanging of course I can't
say. But the missing hand makes it plainly a case of murder, and not
suicide. I've come to consult you about issuing a warrant, for I think
there's no doubt as to the identity of the murderers."

"That's a good job," said the Colonel, "else we should have had some
work for Mr. Martin Hewitt here, which wouldn't be fair, as he's taking
a rest. Whom do you think of having arrested?"

"The two young Fosters. It's plain as it can be--and a most revolting
crime too, bad as Sneathy may have been. They came down from London
to-day and went out deliberately to it, it's clear. They were heard
talking of it, asked as to the direction in which he had gone, and
followed him--and with a rope."

"Isn't that rather an unusual form of murder--hanging?" Hewitt remarked.

"Perhaps it is," Mr. Hardwick replied; "but it's the case here plain
enough. It seems, in fact, that they had a way of threatening to hang
him and even to cut off his hand if he used it to strike their mother.
So that they appear to have carried out what might have seemed mere idle
threats in a diabolically savage way. Of course they _may_ have
strangled him first and hanged him after, by way of carrying out their
threat and venting their spite on the mutilated body. But that they did
it is plain enough for me. I've spent an hour or two over it, and feel I
am certainly more than justified in ordering their apprehension. Indeed,
they were with him at the time, as I have found by their tracks on the
footpath through the wood."

The Colonel turned to Martin Hewitt. "Mr. Hardwick, you must know," he
said, "is by way of being an amateur in your particular line--and a very
good amateur, too, I should say, judging by a case or two I have known
in this county."

Hewitt bowed, and laughingly expressed a fear lest Mr. Hardwick should
come to London and supplant him altogether. "This seems a curious case,"
he added. "If you don't mind, I think I should like to take a glance at
the tracks and whatever other traces there may be, just by way of
keeping my hand in."

"Certainly," Mr. Hardwick replied, brightening. "I should of all things
like to have Mr. Hewitt's opinions on the observations I have made--just
for my own gratification. As to his opinion--there can be no room for
doubt; the thing is plain."

With many promises not to be late for dinner, we left my uncle and
walked with Mr. Hardwick in the direction of Ratherby Wood. It was an
unfrequented part, he told us, and by particular care he had managed, he
hoped, to prevent the rumour spreading to the village yet, so that we
might hope to find the trails not yet overlaid. It was a man of his own,
he said, who, making a short cut through the wood, had come upon the
body hanging, and had run immediately to inform him. With this man he
had gone back, cut down the body, and made his observations. He had
followed the trail backward to Ranworth, and there had found the new
coachman, who had once been in his own service. From him he had learned
the doings of the brothers Foster as they left the place, and from him
he had ascertained that they had not then returned. Then, leaving his
man by the body, he had come straight to my uncle's.

Presently we came on the footpath leading from Ranworth across the field
to Ratherby Wood. It was a mere trail of bare earth worn by successive
feet amid the grass. It was damp, and we all stooped and examined the
footmarks that were to be seen on it. They all pointed one way--towards
the wood in the distance.

"Fortunately it's not a greatly frequented path," Mr. Hardwick said.
"You see, there are the marks of three pairs of feet only, and as first
Sneathy and then both of the brothers came this way, these footmarks
must be theirs. Which are Sneathy's is plain--they are these large flat
ones. If you notice, they are all distinctly visible in the centre of
the track, showing plainly that they belong to the man who walked alone,
which was Sneathy. Of the others, the marks of the _outside_ feet--the
left on the left side and the right on the right--are often not
visible. Clearly they belong to two men walking side by side, and more
often than not treading, with their outer feet, on the grass at the
side. And where these happen to drop on the same spot as the marks in
the middle they cover them. Plainly they are the footmarks of Henry and
Robert Foster, made as they followed Sneathy. Don't you agree with me
Mr. Hewitt?"

"Oh yes, that's very plain. You have a better pair of eyes than most
people, Mr. Hardwick, and a good idea of using them, too. We will go
into the wood now. As a matter of fact I can pretty clearly distinguish
most of the other footmarks--those on the grass; but that's a matter of
much training."

We followed the footpath, keeping on the grass at its side, in case it
should be desirable to refer again to the foot-tracks. For some little
distance into the wood the tracks continued as before, those of the
brothers overlaying those of Sneathy. Then there was a difference. The
path here was broader and muddy, because of the proximity of trees, and
suddenly the outer footprints separated, and no more overlay the larger
ones in the centre, but proceeded at an equal distance on either side of
them.

"See there," cried Mr. Hardwick, pointing triumphantly to the spot,
"this is where they overtook him, and walked on either side. The body
was found only a little farther on--you could see the place now if the
path didn't zigzag about so."

Hewitt said nothing, but stooped and examined the tracks at the sides
with great care and evident thought, spanning the distances between them
comparatively with his arms. Then he rose and stepped lightly from one
mark to another, taking care not to tread on the mark itself. "Very
good," he said shortly on finishing his examination. "We'll go on."

We went on, and presently came to the place where the body lay. Here
the ground sloped from the left down towards the right, and a tiny
streamlet, a mere trickle of a foot or two wide, ran across the path.
In rainy seasons it was probably wider, for all the earth and clay had
been washed away for some feet on each side, leaving flat, bare and very
coarse gravel, on which the trail was lost. Just beyond this, and to the
left, the body lay on a grassy knoll under the limb of a tree, from
which still depended a part of the cut rope. It was not a pleasant
sight. The man was a soft, fleshy creature, probably rather under than
over the medium height, and he lay there, with his stretched neck and
protruding tongue, a revolting object. His right arm lay by his side,
and the stump of the wrist was clotted with black blood. Mr. Hardwick's
man was still in charge, seemingly little pleased with his job, and a
few yards off stood a couple of countrymen looking on.

Hewitt asked from which direction these men had come, and having
ascertained and noticed their footmarks, he asked them to stay exactly
where they were, to avoid confusing such other tracks as might be seen.
Then he addressed himself to his examination. "_First_," he said,
glancing up at the branch, that was scarce a yard above his head, "this
rope has been here for some time."

"Yes," Mr. Hardwick replied, "it's an old swing rope. Some children used
it in the summer, but it got partly cut away, and the odd couple of
yards has been hanging since."

"Ah," said Hewitt, "then if the Fosters did this they were saved some
trouble by the chance, and were able to take their halter back with
them--and so avoid _one_ chance of detection." He very closely
scrutinised the top of a tree stump, probably the relic of a tree that
had been cut down long before, and then addressed himself to the body.

"When you cut it down," he said, "did it fall in a heap?"

"No, my man eased it down to some extent."

"Not on to its face?"

"Oh no. On to its back, just as it is now." Mr. Hardwick saw that Hewitt
was looking at muddy marks on each of the corpse's knees, to one of
which a small leaf clung, and at one or two other marks of the same
sort on the fore part of the dress. "That seems to show pretty plainly,"
he said, "that he must have struggled with them and was thrown forward,
doesn't it?"

Hewitt did not reply, but gingerly lifted the right arm by its sleeve.
"Is either of the brothers Foster left-handed?" he asked.

"No, I think not. Here, Bennett, you have seen plenty of their
doings--cricket, shooting, and so on--do you remember if either is
left-handed?"

"Nayther, sir," Mr. Hardwick's man answered. "Both on 'em's
right-handed."

Hewitt lifted the lapel of the coat and attentively regarded a small
rent in it. The dead man's hat lay near, and after a few glances at
that, Hewitt dropped it and turned his attention to the hair. This was
coarse and dark and long, and brushed straight back with no parting.

"This doesn't look very symmetrical, does it?" Hewitt remarked, pointing
to the locks over the right ear. They were shorter just there than on
the other side, and apparently very clumsily cut, whereas in every other
part the hair appeared to be rather well and carefully trimmed. Mr.
Hardwick said nothing, but fidgeted a little, as though he considered
that valuable time was being wasted over irrelevant trivialities.

Presently, however, he spoke. "There's very little to be learned from
the body, is there?" he said. "I think I'm quite justified in ordering
their arrest, eh?--indeed, I've wasted too much time already."

Hewitt was groping about among some bushes behind the tree from which
the corpse had been taken. When he answered, he said, "I don't think I
should do anything of the sort just now, Mr. Hardwick. As a matter of
fact, I _fancy_"--this word with an emphasis--"that the brothers Foster
may not have seen this man Sneathy at all to-day."

"Not seen him? Why, my dear sir, there's no question of it. It's
certain, absolutely. The evidence is positive. The fact of the threats
and of the body being found treated so is pretty well enough, I should
think. But that's nothing--look at those footmarks. They've walked along
with him, one each side, without a possible doubt; plainly they were the
last people with him, in any case. And you don't mean to ask anybody to
believe that the dead man, even if he hanged himself, cut off his own
hand first. Even if you do, where's the hand? And even putting aside all
these considerations, each a complete case in itself, the Fosters _must_
at least have seen the body as they came past, and yet nothing has been
heard of them yet. Why didn't they spread the alarm? They went straight
away in the opposite direction from home--there are their footmarks,
which you've not seen yet, beyond the gravel."

Hewitt stepped over to where the patch of clean gravel ceased, at the
opposite side to that from which we had approached the brook, and there,
sure enough, were the now familiar footmarks of the brothers leading
away from the scene of Sneathy's end. "Yes," Hewitt said, "I see them.
Of course, Mr. Hardwick, you'll do what seems right in your own eyes,
and in any case not much harm will be done by the arrest beyond a
terrible fright for that unfortunate family. Nevertheless, if you care
for my impression, it is, as I have said, that the Fosters have not seen
Sneathy to-day."

"But what about the hand?"

"As to that I have a conjecture, but as yet it is only a conjecture, and
if I told it you would probably call it absurd--certainly you'd
disregard it, and perhaps quite excusably. The case is a complicated
one, and, if there is anything at all in my conjecture, one of the most
remarkable I have ever had to do with. It interests me intensely, and I
shall devote a little time now to following up the theory I have formed.
You have, I suppose, already communicated with the police?"

"I wired to Shopperton at once, as soon as I heard of the matter. It's a
twelve miles drive, but I wonder the police have not arrived yet. They
can't be long; I don't know where the village constable has got to, but
in any case _he_ wouldn't be much good. But as to your idea that the
Fosters can't be suspected--well, nobody could respect your opinion, Mr.
Hewitt, more than myself, but really, just think. The notion's
impossible--fiftyfold impossible. As soon as the police arrive I shall
have that trail followed and the Fosters apprehended. I should be a fool
if I didn't."

"Very well, Mr. Hardwick," Hewitt replied; "you'll do what you consider
your duty, of course, and quite properly, though I _would_ recommend you
to take another glance at those three trails in the path. I shall take a
look in this direction." And he turned up by the side of the streamlet,
keeping on the gravel at its side.

I followed. We climbed the rising ground, and presently, among the
trees, came to the place where the little rill emerged from the broken
ground in the highest part of the wood. Here the clean ground ceased,
and there was a large patch of wet clayey earth. Several marks left by
the feet of cattle were there, and one or two human footmarks. Two of
these (a pair), the newest and the most distinct, Hewitt studied
carefully, and measured each direction.

"Notice these marks," he said. "They may be of importance or they may
not--that we shall see. Fortunately they are very distinctive--the right
boot is a badly worn one, and a small tag of leather, where the soul is
damaged, is doubled over and trodden into the soft earth. Nothing could
be luckier. Clearly they are the most recent footsteps in this
direction--from the main road, which lies right ahead, through the rest
of the wood."

"Then you think somebody else has been on the scene of the tragedy,
beside the victim and the brothers?" I said.

"Yes, I do. But hark; there is a vehicle in the road. Can you see
between the trees? Yes, it is the police cart. We shall be able to
report its arrival to Mr. Hardwick as we go down."

We turned and walked rapidly down the incline to where we had come from.
Mr. Hardwick and his man were still there, and another rustic had
arrived to gape. We told Mr. Hardwick that he might expect the police
presently, and proceeded along the gravel skirting the stream, toward
the lower part of the wood.

Here Hewitt proceeded very cautiously, keeping a sharp look-out on
either side for footprints on the neighbouring soft ground. There were
none, however, for the gravel margin of the stream made a sort of
footpath of itself, and the trees and undergrowth were close and thick
on each side. At the bottom we emerged from the wood on a small piece
of open ground skirting a lane, and here, just by the side of the lane,
where the stream fell into a trench, Hewitt suddenly pounced on another
footmark. He was unusually excited.

"See," he said, "here it is--the right foot with its broken leather, and
the corresponding left foot on the damp edge of the lane itself. He--the
man with the broken shoe--has walked on the hard gravel all the way down
from the source of the stream, and his is the only trail unaccounted for
near the body. Come, Brett, we've an adventure on foot. Do you care to
let your uncle's dinner go by the board, and follow?"

"Can't we go back and tell him?"

"No--there's no time to lose; we must follow up this man--or at least I
must. You go or stay, of course, as you think best."

I hesitated a moment, picturing to myself the excellent Colonel as he
would appear after waiting dinner an hour or two for us, but decided to
go. "At any rate," I said, "if the way lies along the roads we shall
probably meet somebody going in the direction of Ratherby who will take
a message. But what is your theory? I don't understand at all. I must
say everything Hardwick said seemed to me to be beyond question. There
were the tracks to prove that the three had walked together to the
spot, and that the brothers had gone on alone; and every other
circumstance pointed the same way. Then, what possible motive could
anybody else about here have for such a crime? Unless, indeed, it were
one of the people defrauded by Sneathy's late companies."

"The motive," said Hewitt, "is, I fancy, a most extraordinary--indeed, a
weird one. A thing as of centuries ago. Ask me no questions--I think you
will be a little surprised before very long. But come, we must move."
And we mended our pace along the lane.

The lane, by the bye, was hard and firm, with scarcely a spot where a
track might be left, except in places at the sides; and at these places
Hewitt never gave a glance. At the end the lane turned into a by-road,
and at the turning Hewitt stopped and scrutinised the ground closely.
There was nothing like a recognisable footmark to be seen; but almost
immediately Hewitt turned off to the right, and we continued our brisk
march without a glance at the road.

"How did you judge which way to turn then?" I asked.

"Didn't you see?" replied Hewitt; "I'll show you at the next turning."

Half a mile farther on the road forked, and here Hewitt stooped and
pointed silently to a couple of small twigs, placed crosswise, with the
longer twig of the two pointing down the branch of the road to the left.
We took the branch to the left, and went on.

"Our man's making a mistake," Hewitt observed. "He leaves his friends'
messages lying about for his enemies to read."

We hurried forward with scarcely a word. I was almost too bewildered by
what Hewitt had said and done to formulate anything like a reasonable
guess as to what our expedition tended, or even to make an effective
inquiry--though, after what Hewitt had said, I knew that would be
useless. Who was this mysterious man with the broken shoe? what had he
to do with the murder of Sneathy? what did the mutilation mean? and who
were his friends who left him signs and messages by means of crossed
twigs?

We met a man, by whom I sent a short note to my uncle, and soon after we
turned into a main road. Here again, at the corner, was the curious
message of twigs. A cart-wheel had passed over and crushed them, but it
had not so far displaced them as to cause any doubt that the direction
to take was to the right. At an inn a little farther along we entered,
and Hewitt bought a pint of Irish whisky and a flat bottle to hold it
in, as well as a loaf of bread and some cheese, which we carried away
wrapped in paper.

"This will have to do for our dinner," Hewitt said as we emerged.

"But we're not going to drink a pint of common whisky between us?" I
asked in some astonishment.

"Never mind," Hewitt answered with a smile. "Perhaps we'll find somebody
to help us--somebody not so fastidious as yourself as to quality."

Now we hurried--hurried more than ever, for it was beginning to get
dusk, and Hewitt feared a difficulty in finding and reading the twig
signs in the dark. Two more turnings we made, each with its silent
direction--the crossed twigs. To me there was something almost weird and
creepy in this curious hunt for the invisible and incomprehensible,
guided faithfully and persistently at every turn by this now
unmistakable signal. After the second turning we broke into a trot along
a long, winding lane, but presently Hewitt's hand fell on my shoulder,
and we stopped. He pointed ahead, where some large object, round a bend
of the hedge was illuminated as though by a light from below.

"We will walk now," Hewitt said. "Remember that we are on a walking
tour, and have come along here entirely by accident."

We proceeded at a swinging walk, Hewitt whistling gaily. Soon we turned
the bend, and saw that the large object was a travelling van drawn up
with two others on a space of grass by the side of the lane. It was a
gipsy encampment, the caravan having apparently only lately stopped, for
a man was still engaged in tugging at the rope of a tent that stood near
the vans. Two or three sullen-looking ruffians lay about a fire which
burned in the space left in the middle of the encampment. A woman stood
at the door of one van with a large kettle in her hand, and at the foot
of the steps below her a more pleasant-looking old man sat on an
inverted pail. Hewitt swung towards the fire from the road, and with an
indescribable mixture of slouch, bow, and smile addressed the company
generally with "_Kooshto bock, pals!_"[1]

  [1] "Good luck, brothers!"

The men on the ground took no notice, but continued to stare doggedly
before them. The man working at the tent looked round quickly for a
moment, and the old man on the bucket looked up and nodded.

Quick to see the most likely friend, Hewitt at once went up to the old
man, extending his hand, "_Sarshin, daddo?_" he said; "_Dell mandy
tooty's varst._"[2]

  [2] "How do you do, father? Give me your hand."

The old man smiled and shook hands, though without speaking. Then
Hewitt proceeded, producing the flat bottle of whisky, "_Tatty for
pawny, chals. Dell mandy the pawny, and lell posh the tatty._"[3]

  [3] "Spirits for water, lads. Give me the water and take your share of
  the spirits."

The whisky did it. We were Romany ryes in twenty minutes or less, and
had already been taking tea with the gipsies for half the time. The two
or three we had found about the fire were still reserved, but these, I
found, were only half-gipsies, and understood very little Romany. One or
two others, however, including the old man, were of purer breed, and
talked freely, as did one of the women. They were Lees, they said, and
expected to be on Wirksby racecourse in three days' time. We, too, were
_pirimengroes_, or travellers, Hewitt explained, and might look to see
them on the course.

Then he fell to telling gipsy stories, and they to telling others back,
to my intense mystification. Hewitt explained afterwards that they were
mostly stories of poaching, with now and again a horse-coping anecdote
thrown in. Since then I have learned enough of Romany to take my part in
such a conversation, but at the time a word or two here and there was
all I could understand. In all this talk the man we had first noticed
stretching the tent-rope took very little interest, but lay, with his
head away from the fire, smoking his pipe. He was a much darker man
than any other present--had, in fact, the appearance of a man of even a
swarthier race than that of the others about us.

Presently, in the middle of a long and, of course, to me unintelligible
story by the old man, I caught Hewitt's eye. He lifted one eyebrow
almost imperceptibly, and glanced for a single moment at his
walking-stick. Then I saw that it was pointed toward the feet of the
very dark man, who had not yet spoken. One leg was thrown over the
others as he lay, with the soles of his shoes presented toward the fire,
and in its glare I saw--that the right sole was worn and broken, and
that a small triangular tag of leather was doubled over beneath in just
the place we knew of from the prints in Ratherby Wood.

I could not take my eyes off that man with his broken shoe. There lay
the secret, the whole mystery of the fantastic crime in Ratherby Wood
centred in that shabby ruffian. What was it?

But Hewitt went on, talking and joking furiously. The men who were not
speaking mostly smoked gloomily, but whenever one spoke, he became
animated and lively. I had attempted once or twice to join in, though my
efforts were not particularly successful, except in inducing one man to
offer me tobacco from his box--tobacco that almost made me giddy in the
smell. He tried some of mine in exchange, and though he praised it with
native politeness, and smoked the pipe through, I could see that my
Hignett mixture was poor stuff in his estimation, compared with the
awful tobacco in his own box.

Presently the man with the broken shoe got up, slouched over to his
tent, and disappeared. Then said Hewitt (I translate):

"You're not all Lees here, I see?"

"Yes, _pal_, all Lees."

"But _he's_ not a Lee?" and Hewitt jerked his head towards the tent.

"Why not a Lee, _pal_? We be Lees, and he is with us. Thus he is a Lee."

"Oh yes, of course. But I know he is from over the _pawny_. Come, I'll
guess the _tem_[4] he comes from--it's from Roumania, eh? Perhaps the
Wallachian part?"

  [4] Country.

The men looked at one another, and then the old Lee said:

"You're right, pal. You're cleverer than we took you for. That is what
they calls his _tem_. He is a petulengro,[5]and he comes with us to shoe
the _gries_[6] and mend the _vardoes_.[7] But he is with us, and so he
is a Lee."

  [5] Smith.

  [6] Horses.

  [7] Vans.

The talk and the smoke went on, and presently the man with the broken
shoe returned, and lay down again. Then, when the whisky had all gone,
and Hewitt, with some excuse that I did not understand, had begged a
piece of cord from one of the men, we left in a chorus of _kooshto
rardies_.[8]

  [8] Good-night.

By this time it was nearly ten o'clock. We walked briskly till we came
back again to the inn where we had bought the whisky. Here Hewitt, after
some little trouble, succeeded in hiring a village cart, and while the
driver was harnessing the horse, cut a couple of short sticks from the
hedge. These, being each divided into two, made four short, stout pieces
of something less than six inches long apiece. Then Hewitt joined them
together in pairs, each pair being connected from centre to centre by
about nine or ten inches of the cord he had brought from the gipsies'
camp. These done, he handed one pair to me. "Handcuffs," he explained,
"and no bad ones either. See--you use them so." And he passed the cord
round my wrist, gripping the two handles, and giving them a slight twist
that sufficiently convinced me of the excruciating pain that might be
inflicted by a vigorous turn, and the utter helplessness of a prisoner
thus secured in the hands of captors prepared to use their instruments.

"Whom are these for?" I asked. "The man with the broken shoe?"

Hewitt nodded.

"Yes," he said. "I expect we shall find him out alone about midnight.
You know how to use these now."

It was fully eleven before the cart was ready and we started. A quarter
of a mile or so from the gipsy encampment Hewitt stopped the cart and
gave the driver instructions to wait. We got through the hedge, and made
our way on the soft ground behind it in the direction of the vans and
the tent.

"Roll up your handkerchief," Hewitt whispered, "into a tight pad. The
moment I grab him, ram it into his mouth--_well_ in, mind, so that it
doesn't easily fall out. Probably he will be stooping--that will make it
easier; we can pull him suddenly backward. Now be quiet."

We kept on till nothing but the hedge divided us from the space whereon
stood the encampment. It was now nearer twelve o'clock than eleven, but
the time we waited seemed endless. But time is not eternity after all,
and at last we heard a move in the tent. A minute after, the man we
sought was standing before us. He made straight for a gap in the hedge
which we had passed on our way, and we crouched low and waited. He
emerged on our side of the hedge with his back towards us, and began
walking, as we had walked, behind the hedge, but in the opposite
direction. We followed.

He carried something in his hand that looked like a large bundle of
sticks and twigs, and he appeared to be as anxious to be secret as we
ourselves. From time to time he stopped and listened; fortunately there
was no moon, or in turning about, as he did once or twice, he would
probably have observed us. The field sloped downward just before us, and
there was another hedge at right angles, leading down to a slight
hollow. To this hollow the man made his way, and in the shade of the new
hedge we followed. Presently he stopped suddenly, stooped, and deposited
his bundle on the ground before him. Crouching before it, he produced
matches from his pocket, struck one, and in a moment had a fire of twigs
and small branches, that sent up a heavy white smoke. What all this
portended I could not imagine, but a sense of the weirdness of the whole
adventure came upon me unchecked. The horrible corpse in the wood, with
its severed wrist, Hewitt's enigmatical forebodings, the mysterious
tracking of the man with the broken shoe, the scene round the gipsies'
fire, and now the strange behaviour of this man, whose connection with
the tragedy was so intimate and yet so inexplicable--all these things
contributed to make up a tale of but a few hours' duration, but of an
inscrutable impressiveness that I began to feel in my nerves.

The man bent a thin stick double, and using it as a pair of tongs, held
some indistinguishable object over the flames before him. Excited as I
was, I could not help noticing that he bent and held the stick with his
left hand. We crept stealthily nearer, and as I stood scarcely three
yards behind him and looked over his shoulder, the form of the object
stood out clear and black against the dull red of the flame. It was a
_human hand_.

I suppose I may have somehow betrayed my amazement and horror to my
companion's sharp eyes, for suddenly I felt his hand tightly grip my arm
just above the elbow. I turned, and found his face close by mine and his
finger raised warningly. Then I saw him produce his wrist-grip and make
a motion with his palm toward his mouth, which I understood to be
intended to remind me of the gag. We stepped forward.

The man turned his horrible cookery over and over above the crackling
sticks, as though to smoke and dry it in every part. I saw Hewitt's hand
reach out toward him, and in a flash we had pulled him back over his
heels and I had driven the gag between his teeth as he opened his mouth.
We seized his wrists in the cords at once, and I shall never forget the
man's look of ghastly, frantic terror as he lay on the ground. When I
knew more I understood the reason of this.

Hewitt took both wristholds in one hand and drove the gag entirely into
the man's mouth, so that he almost choked. A piece of sacking lay near
the fire, and by Hewitt's request I dropped that awful hand from the
wooden twigs upon it and rolled it up in a parcel--it was, no doubt,
what the sacking had been brought for. Then we lifted the man to his
feet and hurried him in the direction of the cart. The whole capture
could not have occupied thirty seconds, and as I stumbled over the rough
field at the man's left elbow I could only think of the thing as one
thinks of a dream that one knows all the time _is_ a dream.

But presently the man, who had been walking quietly, though gasping,
sniffing and choking because of the tightly rolled handkerchief in his
mouth--presently he made a sudden dive, thinking doubtless to get his
wrists free by surprise. But Hewitt was alert, and gave them a twist
that made him roll his head with a dismal, stifled yell, and with the
opening of his mouth, by some chance the gag fell away. Immediately the
man roared aloud for help.

"Quick," said Hewitt, "drag him along--they'll hear in the vans. Bring
the hand!"

I seized the fallen handkerchief and crammed it over the man's mouth as
well as I might, and together we made as much of a trot as we could,
dragging the man between us, while Hewitt checked any reluctance on his
part by a timely wrench of the wristholds. It was a hard two hundred and
fifty yards to the lane even for us--for the gipsy it must have been a
bad minute and a half indeed. Once more as we went over the uneven
ground he managed to get out a shout, and we thought we heard a distinct
reply from somewhere in the direction of the encampment.

We pulled him over a stile in a tangle; and dragged and pushed him
through a small hedge-gap all in a heap. Here we were but a short
distance from the cart, and into that we flung him without wasting time
or tenderness, to the intense consternation of the driver, who, I
believe, very nearly set up a cry for help on his own account. Once in
the cart, however, I seized the reins and the whip myself and, leaving
Hewitt to take care of the prisoner, put the turn-out along toward
Ratherby at as near ten miles an hour as it could go.

We made first for Mr. Hardwick's, but he, we found, was with my uncle,
so we followed him. The arrest of the Fosters had been effected, we
learned, not very long after we had left the wood, as they returned by
another route to Ranworth. We brought our prisoner into the Colonel's
library, where he and Mr. Hardwick were sitting.

"I'm not quite sure what we can charge him with unless it's anatomical
robbery," Hewitt remarked, "but here's the criminal."

The man only looked down, with a sulkily impenetrable countenance.
Hewitt spoke to him once or twice, and at last he said, in a strange
accent, something that sounded like "_kekin jin-navvy._"

"_Keck jin?_"[9] asked Hewitt, in the loud, clear tone one instinctively
adopts in talking to a foreigner, "_Keckeno jinny?_"

  [9] "Not understand?"

The man understood and shook his head, but not another word would he say
or another question answer.

"He's a foreign gipsy," Hewitt explained, "just as I thought--a
Wallachian, in fact. Theirs is an older and purer dialect than that of
the English gipsies, and only some of the root-words are alike. But I
think we can make him explain to-morrow that the Fosters at least had
nothing to do with, at any rate, cutting off Sneathy's hand. Here it is,
I think." And he gingerly lifted the folds of sacking from the ghastly
object as it lay on the table, and then covered it up again.

"But what--what does it all mean?" Mr. Hardwick said in bewildered
astonishment. "Do you mean this man was an accomplice?"

"Not at all--the case was one of suicide, as I think you'll agree, when
I've explained. This man simply found the body hanging and stole the
hand."

"But what in the world for?"

"For the HAND OF GLORY. Eh?" He turned to the gipsy and pointed to the
hand on the table: "_Yag-varst_,[10] eh?"

  [10] Fire-hand.

There was a quick gleam of intelligence in the man's eye, but he said
nothing. As for myself I was more than astounded. Could it be possible
that the old superstition of the Hand of Glory remained alive in a
practical shape at this day?

"You know the superstition, of course," Hewitt said. "It did exist in
this country in the last century, when there were plenty of dead men
hanging at cross-roads, and so on. On the Continent, in some places, it
has survived later. Among the Wallachian gipsies it has always been a
great article of belief, and the superstition is quite active still. The
belief is that the right hand of a hanged man, cut off and dried over
the smoke of certain wood and herbs, and then provided with wicks at
each finger made of the dead man's hair, becomes, when lighted at each
wick (the wicks are greased, of course), a charm, whereby a thief may
walk without hinderance where he pleases in a strange house, push open
all doors and take what he likes. Nobody can stop him, for everybody the
Hand of Glory approaches is made helpless, and can neither move nor
speak. You may remember there was some talk of 'thieves' candles' in
connection with the horrible series of Whitechapel murders not long ago.
That is only one form of the cult of the Hand of Glory."

"Yes," my uncle said, "I remember reading so. There is a story about it
in the Ingoldsby Legends, too, I believe."

"There is--it is called 'The Hand of Glory,' in fact. You remember the
spell, 'Open lock to the dead man's knock,' and so on. But I think you'd
better have the constable up and get this man into safe quarters for the
night. He should be searched, of course. I expect they will find on him
the hair I noticed to have been cut from Sneathy's head."

The village constable arrived with his iron handcuffs in substitution
for those of cord which had so sorely vexed the wrists of our prisoner,
and marched him away to the little lock-up on the green.

Then my uncle and Mr. Hardwick turned on Martin Hewitt with doubts and
many questions:

"Why do you call it suicide?" Mr. Hardwick asked. "It is plain the
Fosters were with him at the time from the tracks. Do you mean to say
that they stood there and watched Sneathy hang himself without
interfering?"

"No, I don't," Hewitt replied, lighting a cigar. "I think I told you
that they never saw Sneathy."

"Yes, you did, and of course that's what they said themselves when they
were arrested. But the thing's impossible. Look at the tracks!"

"The tracks are exactly what revealed to me that it was _not_
impossible," Hewitt returned. "I'll tell you how the case unfolded
itself to me from the beginning. As to the information you gathered from
the Ranworth coachman, to begin with. The conversation between the
Fosters which he overheard might well mean something less serious than
murder. What did they say? They had been sent for in a hurry and had
just had a short consultation with their mother and sister. Henry said
that 'the thing must be done at once'; also that as there were two of
them it should be easy. Robert said that Henry, as a doctor, would know
best what to do.

"Now you, Colonel Brett, had been saying--before we learned these things
from Mr. Hardwick--that Sneathy's behaviour of late had become so bad as
to seem that of a madman. Then there was the story of his sudden attack
on a tradesman in the village, and equally sudden running away--exactly
the sort of impulsive, wild thing that madmen do. Why then might it not
be reasonable to suppose that Sneathy _had_ become mad--more especially
considering all the circumstances of the case, his commercial ruin and
disgrace and his horrible life with his wife and her family?--had become
suddenly much worse and quite uncontrollable, so that the two wretched
women left alone with him were driven to send in haste for Henry and
Robert to help them? That would account for all.

"The brothers arrive just after Sneathy had gone out. They are told in a
hurried interview how affairs stand, and it is decided that Sneathy must
be at once secured and confined in an asylum before something serious
happens. He has just gone out--something terrible may be happening at
this moment. The brothers determine to follow at once and secure him
wherever he may be. Then the meaning of their conversation is plain. The
thing that 'must be done, and at once,' is the capture of Sneathy and
his confinement in an asylum. Henry, as a doctor, would 'know what to
do' in regard to the necessary formalities. And they took a halter in
case a struggle should ensue and it were found necessary to bind him.
Very likely, wasn't it?"

"Well, yes," Mr. Hardwick replied, "it certainly is. It never struck me
in that light at all."

"That was because you believed, to begin with, that a murder had been
committed, and looked at the preliminary circumstances which you learned
after in the light of your conviction. But now, to come to my actual
observations. I saw the footmarks across the fields, and agreed with you
(it was indeed obvious) that Sneathy had gone that way first, and that
the brothers had followed, walking over his tracks. This state of the
tracks continued until well into the wood, when suddenly the tracks of
the brothers opened out and proceeded on each side of Sneathy's. The
simple inference would seem to be, of course, the one you made--that the
Fosters had here overtaken Sneathy, and walked one at each side of him.

"But of this I felt by no means certain. Another very simple explanation
was available, which might chance to be the true one. It was just at the
spot where the brothers' tracks separated that the path became suddenly
much muddier, because of the closer overhanging of the trees at the
spot. The path was, as was to be expected, wettest in the middle. It
would be the most natural thing in the world for two well-dressed young
men, on arriving here, to separate so as to walk one on each side of the
mud in the middle.

"On the other hand, a man in Sneathy's state (assuming him, for the
moment, to be mad and contemplating suicide) would walk straight along
the centre of the path, taking no note of mud or anything else. I
examined all the tracks very carefully, and my theory was confirmed. The
feet of the brothers had everywhere alighted in the driest spots, and
the steps were of irregular lengths--which meant, of course, that they
were picking their way; while Sneathy's footmarks had never turned aside
even for the dirtiest puddle. Here, then, were the rudiments of a
theory.

"At the watercourse, of course, the footmarks ceased, because of the
hard gravel. The body lay on a knoll at the left--a knoll covered with
grass. On this the signs of footmarks were almost undiscoverable,
although I am often able to discover tracks in grass that are invisible
to others. Here, however, it was almost useless to spend much time in
examination, for you and your man had been there, and what slight marks
there might be would be indistinguishable one from another.

"Under the branch from which the man had hung there was an old tree
stump, with a flat top, where the tree had been sawn off. I examined
this, and it became fairly apparent that Sneathy had stood on it when
the rope was about his neck--his muddy footprint was plain to see; the
mud was not smeared about, you see, as it probably would have been if
he had been stood there forcibly and pushed off. It was a simple, clear
footprint--another hint at suicide.

"But then arose the objection that you mentioned yourself. Plainly the
brothers Foster were following Sneathy, and came this way. Therefore, if
he hanged himself before they arrived, it would seem that they must have
come across the body. But now I examined the body itself. There was mud
on the knees, and clinging to one knee was a small leaf. It was a leaf
corresponding to those on the bush behind the tree, and it was not a
dead leaf, so must have been just detached.

"After my examination of the body I went to the bush, and there, in the
thick of it, were, for me, sufficiently distinct knee-marks, in one of
which the knee had crushed a spray of the bush against the ground, and
from that spray a leaf was missing. Behind the knee-marks were the
indentations of boot-toes in the soft, bare earth under the bush, and
thus the thing was plain. The poor lunatic had come in sight of the
dangling rope, and the temptation to suicide was irresistible. To people
in a deranged state of mind the mere sight of the means of
self-destruction is often a temptation impossible to withstand. But at
that moment he must have heard the steps--probably the voices--of the
brothers behind him on the winding path. He immediately hid in the bush
till they had passed. It is probable that seeing who the men were, and
conjecturing that they were following him--thinking also, perhaps, of
things that had occurred between them and himself--his inclination to
self-destruction became completely ungovernable, with the result that
you saw.

"But before I inspected the bush I noticed one or two more things about
the body. You remember I inquired if either of the brothers Foster was
left-handed, and was assured that neither was. But clearly the hand had
been cut off by a left-handed man, with a large, sharply pointed knife.
For well away to the _right_ of where the wrist had hung the knife-point
had made a tiny triangular rent in the coat, so that the hand must have
been held in the mutilator's right hand, while he used the knife with
his left--clearly a left-handed man.

"But most important of all about the body was the jagged hair over the
right ear. Everywhere else the hair was well cut and orderly--here it
seemed as though a good piece had been, so to speak, _sawn_ off. What
could anybody want with a dead man's right hand and certain locks of his
hair? Then it struck me suddenly--the man was hanged; it was the Hand of
Glory!

"Then you will remember I went, at your request, to see the footprints
of the Fosters on the part of the path _past_ the watercourse. Here
again it was muddy in the middle, and the two brothers had walked as far
apart as before, although nobody had walked between them. A final proof,
if one were needed, of my theory as to the three lines of footprints.

"Now I was to consider how to get at the man who had taken his hand. He
should be punished for the mutilation, but beyond that he would be
required as a witness. Now all the foot-tracks in the vicinity had been
accounted for. There were those of the brothers and of Sneathy, which we
have been speaking of; those of the rustics looking on, which, however,
stopped a little way off, and did not interfere with our sphere of
observation; those of your man, who had cut straight through the wood
when he first saw the body, and had come back the same way with you; and
our own, which we had been careful to keep away from the others.
Consequently there was _no_ track of the man who had cut off the hand;
therefore it was certain that he must have come along the hard gravel by
the watercourse, for that was the only possible path which would not
tell the tale. Indeed, it seemed quite a likely path through the wood
for a passenger to take, coming from the high ground by the Shopperton
road.

"Brett and I left you and traversed the watercourse, both up and down.
We found a footprint at the top, left lately by a man with a broken
shoe. Right down to the bottom of the watercourse where it emerged from
the wood there was no sign on either side of this man having left the
gravel. (Where the body was, as you will remember, he would simply have
stepped off the gravel on to the grass, which I thought it useless to
examine, as I have explained.) But at the bottom, by the lane, the
footprint appeared again.

"This then was the direction in which I was to search for a left-handed
man with a broken-soled shoe, probably a gipsy--and most probably a
foreign gipsy--because a foreign gipsy would be the most likely still to
hold the belief in the Hand of Glory. I conjectured the man to be a
straggler from a band of gipsies--one who probably had got behind the
caravan and had made a short cut across the wood after it; so at the end
of the lane I looked for a _patrin_. This is a sign that gipsies leave
to guide stragglers following up. Sometimes it is a heap of dead leaves,
sometimes a few stones, sometimes a mark on the ground, but more usually
a couple of twigs crossed, with the longer twig pointing the road.

"Guided by these _patrins_ we came in the end on the gipsy camp just as
it was settling down for the night. We made ourselves agreeable (as
Brett will probably describe to you better than I can), we left them,
and after they had got to sleep we came back and watched for the
gentleman who is now in the lock-up. He would, of course, seize the
first opportunity of treating his ghastly trophy in the prescribed way,
and I guessed he would choose midnight, for that is the time the
superstition teaches that the hand should be prepared. We made a few
small preparations, collared him, and now you've got him. And I should
think the sooner you let the brothers Foster go the better."

"But why didn't you tell me all the conclusions you had arrived at at
the time?" asked Mr. Hardwick.

"Well, really," Hewitt replied, with a quiet smile, "you were so
positive, and some of the traces I relied on were so small, that it
would probably have meant a long argument and a loss of time. But more
than that, confess, if I had told you bluntly that Sneathy's hand had
been taken away to make a mediæval charm to enable a thief to pass
through a locked door and steal plate calmly under the owner's nose,
what _would_ you have said?"

"Well, well, perhaps I _should_ have been a little sceptical.
Appearances combined so completely to point to the Fosters as murderers
that any other explanation almost would have seemed unlikely to me, and
_that_--well no, I confess, I shouldn't have believed in it. But it is a
startling thing to find such superstitions alive now-a-days."

"Yes, perhaps it is. Yet we find survivals of the sort very frequently.
The Wallachians, however, are horribly superstitious still--the gipsies
among them are, of course, worse. Don't you remember the case reported a
few months ago, in which a child was drowned as a sacrifice in Wallachia
in order to bring rain? And that was not done by gipsies either. Even in
England, as late as 1865, a poor paralysed Frenchman was killed by being
'swum' for witchcraft--that was in Essex. And less atrocious cases of
belief in wizardry occur again and again even now."

Then Mr. Hardwick and my uncle fell into a discussion as to how the
gipsy in the lock-up could be legally punished. Mr. Hardwick thought it
should be treated as a theft of a portion of a dead body, but my uncle
fancied there was a penalty for mutilation of a dead body _per se_,
though he could not point to the statute. As it happened, however, they
were saved the trouble of arriving at a decision, for in the morning he
was discovered to have escaped. He had been left, of course, with free
hands, and had occupied the night in wrenching out the bars at the top
of the back wall of the little prison-shed (it had stood on the green
for a hundred and fifty years) and climbing out. He was not found again,
and a month or two later the Foster family left the district entirely.




THE CASE OF LAKER, ABSCONDED.


There were several of the larger London banks and insurance offices from
which Hewitt held a sort of general retainer as detective adviser, in
fulfilment of which he was regularly consulted as to the measures to be
taken in different cases of fraud, forgery, theft, and so forth, which
it might be the misfortune of the particular firms to encounter. The
more important and intricate of these cases were placed in his hands
entirely, with separate commissions, in the usual way. One of the most
important companies of the sort was the General Guarantee Society, an
insurance corporation which, among other risks, took those of the
integrity of secretaries, clerks, and cashiers. In the case of a
cash-box elopement on the part of any person guaranteed by the society,
the directors were naturally anxious for a speedy capture of the
culprit, and more especially of the booty, before too much of it was
spent, in order to lighten the claim upon their funds, and in work of
this sort Hewitt was at times engaged, either in general advice and
direction, or in the actual pursuit of the plunder and the plunderer.

Arriving at his office a little later than usual one morning, Hewitt
found an urgent message awaiting him from the General Guarantee Society,
requesting his attention to a robbery which had taken place on the
previous day. He had gleaned some hint of the case from the morning
paper, wherein appeared a short paragraph, which ran thus:--

    SERIOUS BANK ROBBERY.--In the course of yesterday a clerk employed
    by Messrs. Liddle, Neal & Liddle, the well-known bankers,
    disappeared, having in his possession a large sum of money, the
    property of his employers--a sum reported to be rather over
    £15,000. It would seem that he had been entrusted to collect the
    money in his capacity of "walk-clerk" from various other banks and
    trading concerns during the morning, but failed to return at the
    usual time. A large number of the notes which he received had been
    cashed at the Bank of England before suspicion was aroused. We
    understand that Detective-Inspector Plummer, of Scotland Yard,
    has the case in hand.

The clerk, whose name was Charles William Laker, had, it appeared from
the message, been guaranteed in the usual way by the General Guarantee
Society, and Hewitt's presence at the office was at once desired, in
order that steps might quickly be taken for the man's apprehension, and
in the recovery, at any rate, of as much of the booty as possible.

A smart hansom brought Hewitt to Threadneedle Street in a bare quarter
of an hour, and there a few minutes' talk with the manager, Mr. Lyster,
put him in possession of the main facts of the case, which appeared to
be simple. Charles William Laker was twenty-five years of age, and had
been in the employ of Messrs. Liddle, Neal & Liddle for something more
than seven years--since he left school, in fact--and until the previous
day there had been nothing in his conduct to complain of. His duties as
walk-clerk consisted in making a certain round, beginning at about
half-past ten each morning. There were a certain number of the more
important banks between which and Messrs. Liddle, Neal & Liddle there
were daily transactions, and a few smaller semi-private banks and
merchant firms acting as financial agents, with whom there was business
intercourse of less importance and regularity; and each of these, as
necessary, he visited in turn, collecting cash due on bills and other
instruments of a like nature. He carried a wallet, fastened securely to
his person by a chain, and this wallet contained the bills and the cash.
Usually at the end of his round, when all his bills had been converted
into cash, the wallet held very large sums. His work and
responsibilities, in fine, were those common to walk-clerks in all
banks.

On the day of the robbery he had started out as usual--possibly a little
earlier than was customary--and the bills and other securities in his
possession represented considerably more than £15,000. It had been
ascertained that he had called in the usual way at each establishment on
the round, and had transacted his business at the last place by about a
quarter-past one, being then, without doubt, in possession of cash to
the full value of the bills negotiated. After that, Mr. Lyster said,
yesterday's report was that nothing more had been heard of him. But this
morning there had been a message to the effect that he had been traced
out of the country--to Calais, at least, it was thought. The directors
of the society wished Hewitt to take the case in hand personally and at
once, with a view of recovering what was possible from the plunder by
way of salvage; also, of course, of finding Laker, for it is an
important moral gain to guarantee societies, as an example, if a thief
is caught and punished. Therefore Hewitt and Mr. Lyster, as soon as
might be, made for Messrs. Liddle, Neal & Liddle's, that the
investigation might be begun.

The bank premises were quite near--in Leadenhall Street. Having arrived
there, Hewitt and Mr. Lyster made their way to the firm's private
rooms. As they were passing an outer waiting-room, Hewitt noticed two
women. One, the elder, in widow's weeds, was sitting with her head bowed
in her hand over a small writing-table. Her face was not visible, but
her whole attitude was that of a person overcome with unbearable grief;
and she sobbed quietly. The other was a young woman of twenty-two or
twenty-three. Her thick black veil revealed no more than that her
features were small and regular, and that her face was pale and drawn.
She stood with a hand on the elder woman's shoulder, and she quickly
turned her head away as the two men entered.

Mr. Neal, one of the partners, received them in his own room.
"Good-morning, Mr. Hewitt," he said, when Mr. Lyster had introduced the
detective. "This is a serious business--very. I think I am sorrier for
Laker himself than for anybody else, ourselves included--or, at any
rate, I am sorrier for his mother. She is waiting now to see Mr. Liddle,
as soon as he arrives--Mr. Liddle has known the family for a long time.
Miss Shaw is with her, too, poor girl. She is a governess, or something
of that sort, and I believe she and Laker were engaged to be married.
It's all very sad."

"Inspector Plummer, I understand," Hewitt remarked, "has the affair in
hand, on behalf of the police?"

"Yes," Mr. Neal replied; "in fact, he's here now, going through the
contents of Laker's desk, and so forth; he thinks it possible Laker may
have had accomplices. Will you see him?"

"Presently. Inspector Plummer and I are old friends. We met last, I
think, in the case of the Stanway cameo, some months ago. But, first,
will you tell me how long Laker has been a walk-clerk?"

"Barely four months, although he has been with us altogether seven
years. He was promoted to the walk soon after the beginning of the
year."

"Do you know anything of his habits--what he used to do in his spare
time, and so forth?"

"Not a great deal. He went in for boating, I believe, though I have
heard it whispered that he had one or two more expensive
tastes--expensive, that is, for a young man in his position," Mr. Neal
explained, with a dignified wave of the hand that he peculiarly
affected. He was a stout old gentleman, and the gesture suited him.

"You have had no reason to suspect him of dishonesty before, I take it?"

"Oh, no. He made a wrong return once, I believe, that went for some time
undetected, but it turned out, after all, to be a clerical error--a mere
clerical error."

"Do you know anything of his associates out of the office?"

"No, how should I? I believe Inspector Plummer has been making inquiries
as to that, however, of the other clerks. Here he is, by the bye, I
expect. Come in!"

It was Plummer who had knocked, and he came in at Mr. Neal's call. He
was a middle-sized, small-eyed, impenetrable-looking man, as yet of no
great reputation in the force. Some of my readers may remember his
connection with that case, so long a public mystery, that I have
elsewhere fully set forth and explained under the title of "The Stanway
Cameo Mystery." Plummer carried his billy-cock hat in one hand and a few
papers in the other. He gave Hewitt good-morning, placed his hat on a
chair, and spread the papers on the table.

"There's not a great deal here," he said, "but one thing's plain--Laker
had been betting. See here, and here, and here"--he took a few letters
from the bundle in his hand--"two letters from a bookmaker about
settling--wonder he trusted a clerk--several telegrams from tipsters,
and a letter from some friend--only signed by initials--asking Laker to
put a sovereign on a horse for the friend 'with his own.' I'll keep
these, I think. It may be worth while to see that friend, if we can find
him. Ah, we often find it's betting, don't we, Mr. Hewitt? Meanwhile,
there's no news from France yet."

"You are sure that is where he is gone?" asked Hewitt.

"Well, I'll tell you what we've done as yet. First, of course, I went
round to all the banks. There was nothing to be got from that. The
cashiers all knew him by sight, and one was a personal friend of his. He
had called as usual, said nothing in particular, cashed his bills in the
ordinary way, and finished up at the Eastern Consolidated Bank at about
a quarter-past one. So far there was nothing whatever. But I had started
two or three men meanwhile making inquiries at the railway stations, and
so on. I had scarcely left the Eastern Consolidated when one of them
came after me with news. He had tried Palmer's Tourist Office, although
that seemed an unlikely place, and there struck the track."

"Had he been there?"

"Not only had he been there, but he had taken a tourist ticket for
France. It was quite a smart move, in a way. You see it was the sort of
ticket that lets you do pretty well what you like; you have the choice
of two or three different routes to begin with, and you can break your
journey where you please, and make all sorts of variations. So that a
man with a ticket like that, and a few hours' start, could twist about
on some remote branch route, and strike off in another direction
altogether, with a new ticket, from some out-of-the-way place, while we
were carefully sorting out and inquiring along the different routes he
_might_ have taken. Not half a bad move for a new hand; but he made one
bad mistake, as new hands always do--as old hands do, in fact, very
often. He was fool enough to give his own name, C. Laker! Although that
didn't matter much, as the description was enough to fix him. There he
was, wallet and all, just as he had come from the Eastern Consolidated
Bank. He went straight from there to Palmer's, by the bye, and probably
in a cab. We judge that by the time. He left the Eastern Consolidated at
a quarter-past one, and was at Palmer's by twenty-five-past--ten
minutes. The clerk at Palmer's remembered the time because he was
anxious to get out to his lunch, and kept looking at the clock,
expecting another clerk in to relieve him. Laker didn't take much in the
way of luggage, I fancy. We inquired carefully at the stations, and got
the porters to remember the passengers for whom they had been carrying
luggage, but none appeared to have had any dealings with our man. That,
of course, is as one would expect. He'd take as little as possible with
him, and buy what he wanted on the way, or when he'd reached his
hiding-place. Of course, I wired to Calais (it was a Dover to Calais
route ticket) and sent a couple of smart men off by the 8.15 mail from
Charing Cross. I expect we shall hear from them in the course of the
day. I am being kept in London in view of something expected at
headquarters, or I should have been off myself."

"That is all, then, up to the present? Have you anything else in view?"

"That's all I've absolutely ascertained at present. As for what I'm
going to do"--a slight smile curled Plummer's lip--"well, I shall see.
I've a thing or two in my mind."

Hewitt smiled slightly himself; he recognised Plummer's touch of
professional jealousy. "Very well," he said, rising, "I'll make an
inquiry or two for myself at once. Perhaps, Mr. Neal, you'll allow one
of your clerks to show me the banks, in their regular order, at which
Laker called yesterday. I think I'll begin at the beginning."

Mr. Neal offered to place at Hewitt's disposal anything or anybody the
bank contained, and the conference broke up. As Hewitt, with the clerk,
came through the rooms separating Mr. Neal's sanctum from the outer
office, he fancied he saw the two veiled women leaving by a side door.

The first bank was quite close to Liddle, Neal & Liddle's. There the
cashier who had dealt with Laker the day before remembered nothing in
particular about the interview. Many other walk-clerks had called
during the morning, as they did every morning, and the only
circumstances of the visit that he could say anything definite about
were those recorded in figures in the books. He did not know Laker's
name till Plummer had mentioned it in making inquiries on the previous
afternoon. As far as he could remember, Laker behaved much as usual,
though really he did not notice much; he looked chiefly at the bills. He
described Laker in a way that corresponded with the photograph that
Hewitt had borrowed from the bank; a young man with a brown moustache
and ordinary-looking, fairly regular face, dressing much as other clerks
dressed--tall hat, black cutaway coat, and so on. The numbers of the
notes handed over had already been given to Inspector Plummer, and these
Hewitt did not trouble about.

The next bank was in Cornhill, and here the cashier was a personal
friend of Laker's--at any rate, an acquaintance--and he remembered a
little more. Laker's manner had been quite as usual, he said; certainly
he did not seem preoccupied or excited in his manner. He spoke for a
moment or two--of being on the river on Sunday, and so on--and left in
his usual way.

"Can you remember _everything_ he said?" Hewitt asked. "If you can tell
me, I should like to know exactly what he did and said to the smallest
particular."

"Well, he saw me a little distance off--I was behind there, at one of
the desks--and raised his hand to me, and said, 'How d'ye do?' I came
across and took his bills, and dealt with them in the usual way. He had
a new umbrella lying on the counter--rather a handsome umbrella--and I
made a remark about the handle. He took it up to show me, and told me it
was a present he had just received from a friend. It was a gorse-root
handle, with two silver bands, one with his monogram C.W.L. I said it
was a very nice handle, and asked him whether it was fine in his
district on Sunday. He said he had been up the river, and it was very
fine there. And I think that was all."

"Thank you. Now about this umbrella. Did he carry it rolled? Can you
describe it in detail?"

"Well, I've told you about the handle, and the rest was much as usual, I
think; it wasn't rolled--just flapping loosely, you know. It was rather
an odd-shaped handle, though. I'll try and sketch it, if you like, as
well as I can remember." He did so, and Hewitt saw in the result rough
indications of a gnarled crook, with one silver band near the end, and
another, with the monogram, a few inches down the handle. Hewitt put the
sketch in his pocket, and bade the cashier good-day.

At the next bank the story was the same as at the first--there was
nothing remembered but the usual routine. Hewitt and the clerk turned
down a narrow paved court, and through into Lombard Street for the next
visit. The bank--that of Buller, Clayton, Ladds & Co.--was just at the
corner at the end of the court, and the imposing stone entrance-porch
was being made larger and more imposing still, the way being almost
blocked by ladders and scaffold-poles. Here there was only the usual
tale, and so on through the whole walk. The cashiers knew Laker only by
sight, and that not always very distinctly. The calls of walk-clerks
were such matters of routine that little note was taken of the persons
of the clerks themselves, who were called by the names of their firms,
if they were called by any names at all. Laker had behaved much as
usual, so far as the cashiers could remember, and when finally the
Eastern Consolidated was left behind, nothing more had been learnt than
the chat about Laker's new umbrella.

Hewitt had taken leave of Mr. Neal's clerk, and was stepping into a
hansom, when he noticed a veiled woman in widow's weeds hailing another
hansom a little way behind. He recognised the figure again, and said to
the driver, "Drive fast to Palmer's Tourist Office, but keep your eye on
that cab behind, and tell me presently if it is following us."

The cabman drove off, and after passing one or two turnings, opened the
lid above Hewitt's head, and said, "That there other keb _is_
a-follerin' us, sir, an' keepin' about even distance all along."

"All right; that's what I wanted to know. Palmer's now."

At Palmer's the clerk who had attended to Laker remembered him very
well, and described him. He also remembered the wallet, and _thought_ he
remembered the umbrella--was practically sure of it, in fact, upon
reflection. He had no record of the name given, but remembered it
distinctly to be Laker. As a matter of fact, names were never asked in
such a transaction, but in this case Laker appeared to be ignorant of
the usual procedure, as well as in a great hurry, and asked for the
ticket and gave his name all in one breath, probably assuming that the
name would be required.

Hewitt got back to his cab, and started for Charing Cross. The cabman
once more lifted the lid and informed him that the hansom with the
veiled woman in it was again following, having waited while Hewitt had
visited Palmer's. At Charing Cross Hewitt discharged his cab and walked
straight to the lost property office. The man in charge knew him very
well, for his business had carried him there frequently before.

"I fancy an umbrella was lost in the station yesterday," Hewitt said.
"It was a new umbrella, silk, with a gnarled gorse-root handle and two
silver bands, something like this sketch. There was a monogram on the
lower band--'C. W. L.' were the letters. Has it been brought here?"

"There was two or three yesterday," the man said; "let's see." He took
the sketch and retired to a corner of his room. "Oh, yes--here it is, I
think; isn't this it? Do you claim it?"

"Well, not exactly that, but I think I'll take a look at it, if you'll
let me. By the way, I see it's rolled up. Was it found like that?"

"No; the chap rolled it up what found it--porter he was. It's a fad of
his, rolling up umbrellas close and neat, and he's rather proud of it.
He often looks as though he'd like to take a man's umbrella away and
roll it up for him when it's a bit clumsy done. Rum fad, eh?"

"Yes; everybody has his little fad, though. Where was this found--close
by here?"

"Yes, sir; just there, almost opposite this window, in the little
corner."

"About two o'clock?"

"Ah, about that time, more or less."

Hewitt took the umbrella up, unfastened the band, and shook the silk out
loose. Then he opened it, and as he did so a small scrap of paper fell
from inside it. Hewitt pounced on it like lightning. Then, after
examining the umbrella thoroughly, inside and out, he handed it back to
the man, who had not observed the incident of the scrap of paper.

"That will do, thanks," he said. "I only wanted to take a peep at
it--just a small matter connected with a little case of mine.
Good-morning."

He turned suddenly and saw, gazing at him with a terrified expression
from a door behind, the face of the woman who had followed him in the
cab. The veil was lifted, and he caught but a mere glance of the face
ere it was suddenly withdrawn. He stood for a moment to allow the woman
time to retreat, and then left the station and walked toward his office,
close by.

Scarcely thirty yards along the Strand he met Plummer.

"I'm going to make some much closer inquiries all down the line as far
as Dover," Plummer said. "They wire from Calais that they have no clue
as yet, and I mean to make quite sure, if I can, that Laker hasn't
quietly slipped off the line somewhere between here and Dover. There's
one very peculiar thing," Plummer added confidentially. "Did you see the
two women who were waiting to see a member of the firm at Liddle, Neal &
Liddle's?"

"Yes. Laker's mother and his _fiancée_, I was told."

"That's right. Well, do you know that girl--Shaw her name is--has been
shadowing me ever since I left the Bank. Of course I spotted it from
the beginning--these amateurs don't know how to follow anybody--and, as
a matter of fact, she's just inside that jeweller's shop door behind me
now, pretending to look at the things in the window. But it's odd, isn't
it?"

"Well," Hewitt replied, "of course it's not a thing to be neglected. If
you'll look very carefully at the corner of Villiers Street, without
appearing to stare, I think you will possibly observe some signs of
Laker's mother. She's shadowing _me_."

Plummer looked casually in the direction indicated, and then immediately
turned his eyes in another direction.

"I see her," he said; "she's just taking a look round the corner. That's
a thing not to be ignored. Of course, the Lakers' house is being
watched--we set a man on it at once, yesterday. But I'll put some one on
now to watch Miss Shaw's place, too. I'll telephone through to
Liddle's--probably they'll be able to say where it is. And the women
themselves must be watched, too. As a matter of fact, I had a notion
that Laker wasn't alone in it. And it's just possible, you know, that he
has sent an accomplice off with his tourist ticket to lead us a dance
while he looks after himself in another direction. Have you done
anything?"

"Well," Hewitt replied, with a faint reproduction of the secretive
smile with which Plummer had met an inquiry of his earlier in the
morning, "I've been to the station here, and I've found Laker's umbrella
in the lost property office."

"Oh! Then probably he _has_ gone. I'll bear that in mind, and perhaps
have a word with the lost property man."

Plummer made for the station and Hewitt for his office. He mounted the
stairs and reached his door just as I myself, who had been disappointed
in not finding him in, was leaving. I had called with the idea of taking
Hewitt to lunch with me at my club, but he declined lunch. "I have an
important case in hand," he said. "Look here, Brett. See this scrap of
paper. You know the types of the different newspapers--which is this?"

He handed me a small piece of paper. It was part of a cutting containing
an advertisement, which had been torn in half.

[Illustration]

"I _think_," I said, "this is from the _Daily Chronicle_, judging by the
paper. It is plainly from the 'agony column,' but all the papers use
pretty much the same type for these advertisements, except the _Times_.
If it were not torn I could tell you at once, because the _Chronicle_
columns are rather narrow."

"Never mind--I'll send for them all." He rang, and sent Kerrett for a
copy of each morning paper of the previous day. Then he took from a
large wardrobe cupboard a decent but well-worn and rather roughened tall
hat. Also a coat a little worn and shiny on the collar. He exchanged
these for his own hat and coat, and then substituted an old necktie for
his own clean white one, and encased his legs in mud-spotted leggings.
This done, he produced a very large and thick pocket-book, fastened by a
broad elastic band, and said, "Well, what do you think of this? Will it
do for Queen's taxes, or sanitary inspection, or the gas, or the
water-supply?"

"Very well indeed, I should say," I replied. "What's the case?"

"Oh, I'll tell you all about that when it's over--no time now. Oh, here
you are, Kerrett. By the bye, Kerrett, I'm going out presently by the
back way. Wait for about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour after I am
gone, and then just go across the road and speak to that lady in black,
with the veil, who is waiting in that little foot-passage opposite. Say
Mr. Martin Hewitt sends his compliments, and he advises her not to wait,
as he has already left his office by another door, and has been gone
some little time. That's all; it would be a pity to keep the poor woman
waiting all day for nothing. Now the papers. _Daily News, Standard,
Telegraph, Chronicle_--yes, here it is, in the Chronicle."

The whole advertisement read thus:--

    YOB.--H.R. Shop roast. You 1st. Then to-night. 02. 2nd top
    3rd L. No. 197 red bl. straight mon. One at a time.

"What's this," I asked, "a cryptogram?"

"I'll see," Hewitt answered. "But I won't tell you anything about it
till afterwards, so you get your lunch. Kerrett, bring the directory."

This was all I actually saw of this case myself, and I have written the
rest in its proper order from Hewitt's information, as I have written
some other cases entirely.

To resume at the point where, for the time I lost sight of the matter.
Hewitt left by the back way and stopped an empty cab as it passed.
"Abney Park Cemetery" was his direction to the driver. In little more
than twenty minutes the cab was branching off down the Essex Road on its
way to Stoke Newington, and in twenty minutes more Hewitt stopped it in
Church Street, Stoke Newington. He walked through a street or two, and
then down another, the houses of which he scanned carefully as he
passed. Opposite one which stood by itself he stopped, and, making a
pretence of consulting and arranging his large pocket-book, he took a
good look at the house. It was rather larger, neater, and more
pretentious than the others in the street, and it had a natty little
coach-house just visible up the side entrance. There were red blinds
hung with heavy lace in the front windows, and behind one of these
blinds Hewitt was able to catch the glint of a heavy gas chandelier.

He stepped briskly up the front steps and knocked sharply at the door.
"Mr. Merston?" he asked, pocket-book in hand, when a neat parlour-maid
opened the door.

"Yes."

"Ah!" Hewitt stepped into the hall and pulled off his hat; "it's only
the meter. There's been a deal of gas running away somewhere here, and
I'm just looking to see if the meters are right. Where is it?"

The girl hesitated. "I'll--I'll ask master," she said.

"Very well. I don't want to take it away, you know--only to give it a
tap or two, and so on."

The girl retired to the back of the hall, and without taking her eyes
off Martin Hewitt, gave his message to some invisible person in a back
room, whence came a growling reply of "All right."

Hewitt followed the girl to the basement, apparently looking straight
before him, but in reality taking in every detail of the place. The gas
meter was in a very large lumber cupboard under the kitchen stairs. The
girl opened the door and lit a candle. The meter stood on the floor,
which was littered with hampers and boxes and odd sheets of brown paper.
But a thing that at once arrested Hewitt's attention was a garment of
some sort of bright blue cloth, with large brass buttons, which was
lying in a tumbled heap in a corner, and appeared to be the only thing
in the place that was not covered with dust. Nevertheless, Hewitt took
no apparent notice of it, but stooped down and solemnly tapped the meter
three times with his pencil, and listened with great gravity, placing
his ear to the top. Then he shook his head and tapped again. At length
he said:--

"It's a bit doubtful. I'll just get you to light the gas in the kitchen
a moment. Keep your hand to the burner, and when I call out shut it off
_at once_; see?"

The girl turned and entered the kitchen, and Hewitt immediately seized
the blue coat--for a coat it was. It had a dull red piping in the seams,
and was of the swallow-tail pattern--a livery coat, in fact. He held it
for a moment before him, examining its pattern and colour, and then
rolled it up and flung it again into the corner.

"Right!" he called to the servant. "Shut off!"

The girl emerged from the kitchen as he left the cupboard.

"Well," she asked, "are you satisfied now?"

"Quite satisfied, thank you," Hewitt replied.

"Is it all right?" she continued, jerking her hand toward the cupboard.

"Well, no, it isn't; there's something wrong there, and I'm glad I came.
You can tell Mr. Merston, if you like, that I expect his gas bill will
be a good deal less next quarter." And there was a suspicion of a
chuckle in Hewitt's voice as he crossed the hall to leave. For a gas
inspector is pleased when he finds at length what he has been searching
for.

Things had fallen out better than Hewitt had dared to expect. He saw the
key of the whole mystery in that blue coat; for it was the uniform coat
of the hall porters at one of the banks that he had visited in the
morning, though which one he could not for the moment remember. He
entered the nearest post-office and despatched a telegram to Plummer,
giving certain directions and asking the inspector to meet him; then he
hailed the first available cab and hurried toward the City.

At Lombard Street he alighted, and looked in at the door of each bank
till he came to Buller, Clayton, Ladds & Co.'s. This was the bank he
wanted. In the other banks the hall porters wore mulberry coats,
brick-dust coats, brown coats, and what not, but here, behind the
ladders and scaffold poles which obscured the entrance, he could see a
man in a blue coat, with dull red piping and brass buttons. He sprang up
the steps, pushed open the inner swing door, and finally satisfied
himself by a closer view of the coat, to the wearer's astonishment. Then
he regained the pavement and walked the whole length of the bank
premises in front, afterwards turning up the paved passage at the side,
deep in thought. The bank had no windows or doors on the side next the
court, and the two adjoining houses were old and supported in places by
wooden shores. Both were empty, and a great board announced that tenders
would be received in a month's time for the purchase of the old
materials of which they were constructed; also that some part of the
site would be let on a long building lease.

Hewitt looked up at the grimy fronts of the old buildings. The windows
were crusted thick with dirt--all except the bottom window of the house
nearer the bank, which was fairly clean, and seemed to have been quite
lately washed. The door, too, of this house was cleaner than that of the
other, though the paint was worn. Hewitt reached and fingered a hook
driven into the left-hand doorpost about six feet from the ground. It
was new, and not at all rusted; also a tiny splinter had been displaced
when the hook was driven in, and clean wood showed at the spot.

Having observed these things, Hewitt stepped back and read at the bottom
of the big board the name, "Winsor & Weekes, Surveyors and Auctioneers,
Abchurch Lane." Then he stepped into Lombard Street.

Two hansoms pulled up near the post-office, and out of the first stepped
Inspector Plummer and another man. This man and the two who alighted
from the second hansom were unmistakably plain-clothes constables--their
air, gait, and boots proclaimed it.

"What's all this?" demanded Plummer, as Hewitt approached.

"You'll soon see, I think. But, first, have you put the watch on No.
197, Hackworth Road?"

"Yes; nobody will get away from there alone."

"Very good. I am going into Abchurch Lane for a few minutes. Leave your
men out here, but just go round into the court by Buller, Clayton &
Ladds's, and keep your eye on the first door on the left. I think we'll
find something soon. Did you get rid of Miss Shaw?"

"No, she's behind now, and Mrs. Laker's with her. They met in the
Strand, and came after us in another cab. Rare fun, eh! They think we're
pretty green! It's quite handy, too. So long as they keep behind me it
saves all trouble of watching _them_." And Inspector Plummer chuckled
and winked.

"Very good. You don't mind keeping your eye on that door, do you? I'll
be back very soon," and with that Hewitt turned off into Abchurch Lane.

At Winsor & Weekes's information was not difficult to obtain. The houses
were destined to come down very shortly, but a week or so ago an office
and a cellar in one of them was let temporarily to a Mr. Westley. He
brought no references; indeed, as he paid a fortnight's rent in advance,
he was not asked for any, considering the circumstances of the case. He
was opening a London branch for a large firm of cider merchants, he
said, and just wanted a rough office and a cool cellar to store samples
in for a few weeks till the permanent premises were ready. There was
another key, and no doubt the premises might be entered if there were
any special need for such a course. Martin Hewitt gave such excellent
reasons that Winsor & Weekes's managing clerk immediately produced the
key and accompanied Hewitt to the spot.

"I think you'd better have your men handy," Hewitt remarked to Plummer
when they reached the door, and a whistle quickly brought the men over.

The key was inserted in the lock and turned, but the door would not
open; the bolt was fastened at the bottom. Hewitt stooped and looked
under the door.

"It's a drop bolt," he said. "Probably the man who left last let it fall
loose, and then banged the door, so that it fell into its place. I must
try my best with a wire or a piece of string."

A wire was brought, and with some manoeuvring Hewitt contrived to pass
it round the bolt, and lift it little by little, steadying it with the
blade of a pocket-knife. When at length the bolt was raised out of the
hole, the knife-blade was slipped under it, and the door swung open.

They entered. The door of the little office just inside stood open, but
in the office there was nothing, except a board a couple of feet long in
a corner. Hewitt stepped across and lifted this, turning its downward
face toward Plummer. On it, in fresh white paint on a black ground, were
painted the words--

  "BULLER, CLAYTON, LADDS & CO.,
      TEMPORARY ENTRANCE."

Hewitt turned to Winsor & Weekes's clerk and asked, "The man who took
this room called himself Westley, didn't he?"

"Yes."

"Youngish man, clean-shaven, and well-dressed?"

"Yes, he was."

"I fancy," Hewitt said, turning to Plummer, "I _fancy_ an old friend of
yours is in this--Mr. Sam Gunter."

"What, the 'Hoxton Yob'?"

"I think it's possible he's been Mr. Westley for a bit, and somebody
else for another bit. But let's come to the cellar."

Winsor & Weekes's clerk led the way down a steep flight of steps into a
dark underground corridor, wherein they lighted their way with many
successive matches. Soon the corridor made a turn to the right, and as
the party passed the turn, there came from the end of the passage before
them a fearful yell.

"Help! help! Open the door! I'm going mad--mad! O my God!"

And there was a sound of desperate beating from the inside of the cellar
door at the extreme end. The men stopped, startled.

"Come," said Hewitt, "more matches!" and he rushed to the door. It was
fastened with a bar and padlock.

"Let me out, for God's sake!" came the voice, sick and hoarse, from the
inside. "Let me out!"

"All right!" Hewitt shouted. "We have come for you. Wait a moment."

The voice sank into a sort of sobbing croon, and Hewitt tried several
keys from his own bunch on the padlock. None fitted. He drew from his
pocket the wire he had used for the bolt of the front door, straightened
it out, and made a sharp bend at the end.

"Hold a match close," he ordered shortly, and one of the men obeyed.
Three or four attempts were necessary, and several different bendings of
the wire were effected, but in the end Hewitt picked the lock, and flung
open the door.

From within a ghastly figure fell forward among them fainting, and
knocked out the matches.

"Hullo!" cried Plummer. "Hold up! Who are you?"

"Let's get him up into the open," said Hewitt. "He can't tell you who he
is for a bit, but I believe he's Laker."

"Laker! What, here?"

"I think so. Steady up the steps. Don't bump him. He's pretty sore
already, I expect."

Truly the man was a pitiable sight. His hair and face were caked in dust
and blood, and his finger-nails were torn and bleeding. Water was sent
for at once, and brandy.

"Well," said Plummer hazily, looking first at the unconscious prisoner
and then at Hewitt, "but what about the swag?"

"You'll have to find that yourself," Hewitt replied. "I think my share
of the case is about finished. I only act for the Guarantee Society, you
know, and if Laker's proved innocent----"

"Innocent! How?"

"Well, this is what took place, as near as I can figure it. You'd better
undo his collar, I think"--this to the men. "What I believe has happened
is this. There has been a very clever and carefully prepared conspiracy
here, and Laker has not been the criminal, but the victim."

"Been robbed himself, you mean? But how? Where?"

"Yesterday morning, before he had been to more than three banks--here,
in fact."

"But then how? You're all wrong. We _know_ he made the whole round, and
did all the collection. And then Palmer's office, and all, and the
umbrella; why----"

The man lay still unconscious. "Don't raise his head," Hewitt said. "And
one of you had best fetch a doctor. He's had a terrible shock." Then
turning to Plummer he went on, "As to _how_ they managed the job I'll
tell you what I think. First it struck some very clever person that a
deal of money might be got by robbing a walk-clerk from a bank. This
clever person was one of a clever gang of thieves--perhaps the Hoxton
Row gang, as I think I hinted. Now you know quite as well as I do that
such a gang will spend any amount of time over a job that promises a big
haul, and that for such a job they can always command the necessary
capital. There are many most respectable persons living in good style in
the suburbs whose chief business lies in financing such ventures, and
taking the chief share of the proceeds. Well, this is their plan,
carefully and intelligently carried out. They watch Laker, observe the
round he takes, and his habits. They find that there is only one of the
clerks with whom he does business that he is much acquainted with, and
that this clerk is in a bank which is commonly second in Laker's round.
The sharpest man among them--and I don't think there's a man in London
could do this as well as young Sam Gunter--studies Laker's dress and
habits just as an actor studies a character. They take this office and
cellar, as we have seen, _because it is next door to a bank whose front
entrance is being altered_--a fact which Laker must know from his daily
visits. The smart man--Gunter, let us say, and I have other reasons for
believing it to be he--makes up precisely like Laker, false moustache,
dress, and everything, and waits here with the rest of the gang. One of
the gang is dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons, like a
hall-porter in Buller's bank. Do you see?"

"Yes, I think so. It's pretty clear now."

"A confederate watches at the top of the court, and the moment Laker
turns in from Cornhill--having already been, mind, at the only bank
where he was so well known that the disguised thief would not have
passed muster--as soon as he turns in from Cornhill, I say, a signal is
given, and that board"--pointing to that with the white letters--"is
hung on the hook in the doorpost. The sham porter stands beside it, and
as Laker approaches says, 'This way in, sir, this morning. The front
way's shut for the alterations.' Laker, suspecting nothing, and
supposing that the firm have made a temporary entrance through the empty
house, enters. He is seized when well along the corridor, the board is
taken down and the door shut. Probably he is stunned by a blow on the
head--see the blood now. They take his wallet and all the cash he has
already collected. Gunter takes the wallet and also the umbrella, since
it has Laker's initials, and is therefore distinctive. He simply
completes the walk in the character of Laker, beginning with Buller,
Clayton & Ladds's just round the corner. It is nothing but routine work,
which is quickly done, and nobody notices him particularly--it is the
bills they examine. Meanwhile this unfortunate fellow is locked up in
the cellar here, right at the end of the underground corridor, where he
can never make himself heard in the street, and where next him are only
the empty cellars of the deserted house next door. The thieves shut the
front door and vanish. The rest is plain. Gunter, having completed the
round, and bagged some £15,000 or more, spends a few pounds in a tourist
ticket at Palmer's as a blind, being careful to give Laker's name. He
leaves the umbrella at Charing Cross in a conspicuous place right
opposite the lost property office, where it is sure to be seen, and so
completes his false trail."

"Then who are the people at 197, Hackworth Road?"

"The capitalist lives there--the financier, and probably the directing
spirit of the whole thing. Merston's the name he goes by there, and I've
no doubt he cuts a very imposing figure in chapel every Sunday. He'll be
worth picking up--this isn't the first thing he's been in, I'll
warrant."

"But--but what about Laker's mother and Miss Shaw?"

"Well, what? The poor women are nearly out of their minds with terror
and shame, that's all, but though they may think Laker a criminal,
they'll never desert him. They've been following us about with a feeble,
vague sort of hope of being able to baffle us in some way or help him if
we caught him, or something, poor things. Did you ever hear of a real
woman who'd desert a son or a lover merely because he was a criminal?
But here's the doctor. When he's attended to him will you let your men
take Laker home? I must hurry and report to the Guarantee Society, I
think."

"But," said the perplexed Plummer, "where did you get your clue? You
must have had a tip from some one, you know--you can't have done it by
clairvoyance. What gave you the tip?"

"The _Daily Chronicle_."

"The _what_?"

"The _Daily Chronicle_. Just take a look at the 'agony column' in
yesterday morning's issue, and read the message to 'Yob'--to Gunter, in
fact. That's all."

By this time a cab was waiting in Lombard Street, and two of Plummer's
men, under the doctor's directions, carried Laker to it. No sooner,
however, were they in the court than the two watching women threw
themselves hysterically upon Laker, and it was long before they could be
persuaded that he was not being taken to gaol. The mother shrieked
aloud, "My boy--my boy! Don't take him! Oh, don't take him! They've
killed my boy! Look at his head--oh, his head!" and wrestled desperately
with the men, while Hewitt attempted to soothe her, and promised to
allow her to go in the cab with her son if she would only be quiet. The
younger woman made no noise, but she held one of Laker's limp hands in
both hers.

Hewitt and I dined together that evening, and he gave me a full account
of the occurrences which I have here set down. Still, when he was
finished I was not able to see clearly by what process of reasoning he
had arrived at the conclusions that gave him the key to the mystery, nor
did I understand the "agony column" message, and I said so.

"In the beginning," Hewitt explained, "the thing that struck me as
curious was the fact that Laker was said to have given his own name at
Palmer's in buying his ticket. Now, the first thing the greenest and
newest criminal thinks of is changing his name, so that the giving of
his own name seemed unlikely to begin with. Still, he _might_ have made
such a mistake, as Plummer suggested when he said that criminals usually
make a mistake somewhere--as they do, in fact. Still, it was the least
likely mistake I could think of--especially as he actually didn't wait
to be asked for his name, but blurted it out when it wasn't really
wanted. And it was conjoined with another rather curious mistake, or
what would have been a mistake if the thief were Laker. Why should he
conspicuously display his wallet--such a distinctive article--for the
clerk to see and note? Why rather had he not got rid of it before
showing himself? Suppose it should be somebody personating Laker? In any
case I determined not to be prejudiced by what I had heard of Laker's
betting. A man may bet without being a thief.

"But, again, supposing it _were_ Laker? Might he not have given his
name, and displayed his wallet, and so on, while buying a ticket for
France, in order to draw pursuit after himself in that direction while
he made off in another, in another name, and disguised? Each supposition
was plausible. And, in either case, it might happen that whoever was
laying this trail would probably lay it a little farther. Charing Cross
was the next point, and there I went. I already had it from Plummer that
Laker had not been recognised there. Perhaps the trail had been laid in
some other manner. Something left behind with Laker's name on it,
perhaps? I at once thought of the umbrella with his monogram, and,
making a long shot, asked for it at the lost property office, as you
know. The guess was lucky. In the umbrella, as you know, I found that
scrap of paper. That, I judged, had fallen in from the hand of the man
carrying the umbrella. He had torn the paper in half in order to fling
it away, and one piece had fallen into the loosely flapping umbrella. It
is a thing that will often happen with an omnibus ticket, as you may
have noticed. Also, it was proved that the umbrella _was_ unrolled when
found, and rolled immediately after. So here was a piece of paper
dropped by the person who had brought the umbrella to Charing Cross and
left it. I got the whole advertisement, as you remember, and I studied
it. 'Yob' is back-slang for 'boy,' and it is often used in nicknames to
denote a young smooth-faced thief. Gunter, the man I suspect, as a
matter of fact, is known as the 'Hoxton Yob.' The message, then, was
addressed to some one known by such a nickname. Next, 'H.R. shop roast.'
Now, in thieves' slang, to 'roast' a thing or a person is to watch it or
him. They call any place a shop--notably, a thieves' den. So that this
meant that some resort--perhaps the 'Hoxton Row shop'--was watched. 'You
1st then to-night' would be clearer, perhaps, when the rest was
understood. I thought a little over the rest, and it struck me that it
must be a direction to some other house, since one was warned of as
being watched. Besides, there was the number, 197, and 'red bl.,' which
would be extremely likely to mean 'red blinds,' by way of clearly
distinguishing the house. And then the plan of the thing was plain. You
have noticed, probably, that the map of London which accompanies the
Post Office Directory is divided, for convenience of reference, into
numbered squares?"

"Yes. The squares are denoted by letters along the top margin and
figures down the side. So that if you consult the directory, and find a
place marked as being in D 5, for instance, you find vertical divisions
D, and run your finger down it till it intersects horizontal division 5,
and there you are."

"Precisely. I got my Post Office Directory, and looked for 'O 2.' It was
in North London, and took in parts of Abney Park Cemetery and Clissold
Park; '2nd top' was the next sign. Very well, I counted the second
street intersecting the top of the square--counting, in the usual way,
from the left. That was Lordship Road. Then, '3rd L.' From the point
where Lordship Road crossed the top of the square, I ran my finger down
the road till it came to '3rd L,' or, in other words, the third turning
on the left--Hackworth Road. So there we were, unless my guesses were
altogether wrong. 'Straight mon' probably meant 'straight moniker'--that
is to say, the proper name, a thief's _real_ name, in contradistinction
to that he may assume. I turned over the directory till I found
Hackworth Road, and found that No. 197 was inhabited by a Mr. Merston.
From the whole thing I judged this. There was to have been a meeting at
the 'H.R. shop,' but that was found, at the last moment, to be watched
by the police for some purpose, so that another appointment was made for
this house in the suburbs. 'You 1st. Then to-night'--the person
addressed was to come first, and the others in the evening. They were to
ask for the householder's 'straight moniker'--Mr. Merston. And they were
to come one at a time.

"Now, then, what was this? What theory would fit it? Suppose this were a
robbery, directed from afar by the advertiser. Suppose, on the day
before the robbery, it was found that the place fixed for division of
spoils were watched. Suppose that the principal thereupon advertised (as
had already been agreed in case of emergency) in these terms. The
principal in the actual robbery--the 'Yob' addressed--was to go first
with the booty. The others were to come after, one at a time. Anyway,
the thing was good enough to follow a little further, and I determined
to try No. 197, Hackworth Road. I have told you what I found there, and
how it opened my eyes. I went, of course, merely on chance, to see what
I might chance to see. But luck favoured, and I happened on that
coat--brought back rolled up, on the evening after the robbery,
doubtless by the thief who had used it, and flung carelessly into the
handiest cupboard. _That_ was this gang's mistake."

"Well, I congratulate you," I said. "I hope they'll catch the rascals."

"I rather think they will, now they know where to look. They can
scarcely miss Merston, anyway. There has been very little to go upon in
this case, but I stuck to the thread, however slight, and it brought me
through. The rest of the case, of course, is Plummer's. It was a
peculiarity of my commission that I could equally well fulfil it by
catching the man with all the plunder, or by proving him innocent.
Having done the latter, my work was at an end, but I left it where
Plummer will be able to finish the job handsomely."

Plummer did. Sam Gunter, Merston, and one accomplice were taken--the
first and last were well known to the police--and were identified by
Laker. Merston, as Hewitt had suspected, had kept the lion's share for
himself, so that altogether, with what was recovered from him and the
other two, nearly £11,000 was saved for Messrs. Liddle, Neal & Liddle.
Merston, when taken, was in the act of packing up to take a holiday
abroad, and there cash his notes, which were found, neatly packed in
separate thousands, in his portmanteau. As Hewitt had predicted, his
gas bill _was_ considerably less next quarter, for less than half-way
through it he began a term in gaol.

As for Laker, he was reinstated, of course, with an increase of salary
by way of compensation for his broken head. He had passed a terrible
twenty-six hours in the cellar, unfed and unheard. Several times he had
become insensible, and again and again he had thrown himself madly
against the door, shouting and tearing at it, till he fell back
exhausted, with broken nails and bleeding fingers. For some hours before
the arrival of his rescuers he had been sitting in a sort of stupor,
from which he was suddenly aroused by the sound of voices and footsteps.
He was in bed for a week, and required a rest of a month in addition
before he could resume his duties. Then he was quietly lectured by Mr.
Neal as to betting, and, I believe, dropped that practice in
consequence. I am told that he is "at the counter" now--a considerable
promotion.




THE CASE OF THE LOST FOREIGNER.


I have already said in more than one place that Hewitt's personal
relations with the members of the London police force were of a cordial
character. In the course of his work it has frequently been Hewitt's hap
to learn of matters on which the police were glad of information, and
that information was always passed on at once; and so long as no
infringement of regulations or damage to public service were involved,
Hewitt could always rely on a return in kind.

It was with a message of a useful sort that Hewitt one day dropped into
Vine Street police-station and asked for a particular inspector, who was
not in. Hewitt sat and wrote a note, and by way of making conversation
said to the inspector on duty, "Anything very startling this way
to-day?"

"Nothing _very_ startling, perhaps, as yet," the inspector replied. "But
one of our chaps picked up rather an odd customer a little while ago.
Lunatic of some sort, I should think--in fact, I've sent for the doctor
to see him. He's a foreigner--a Frenchman, I believe. He seemed horribly
weak and faint; but the oddest thing occurred when one of the men,
thinking he might be hungry, brought in some bread. He went into fits of
terror at the sight of it, and wouldn't be pacified till they took it
away again."

"That was strange."

"Odd, wasn't it? And he _was_ hungry too. They brought him some more a
little while after, and he didn't funk it a bit,--pitched into it, in
fact, like anything, and ate it all with some cold beef. It's the way
with some lunatics--never the same five minutes together. He keeps
crying like a baby, and saying things we can't understand. As it
happens, there's nobody in just now who speaks French."

"I speak French," Hewitt replied. "Shall I try him?"

"Certainly, if you will. He's in the men's room below. They've been
making him as comfortable as possible by the fire until the doctor
comes. He's a long time. I expect he's got a case on."

Hewitt found his way to the large mess-room, where three or four
policemen in their shirt-sleeves were curiously regarding a young man of
very disordered appearance who sat on a chair by the fire. He was pale,
and exhibited marks of bruises on his face, while over one eye was a
scarcely healed cut. His figure was small and slight, his coat was torn,
and he sat with a certain indefinite air of shivering suffering. He
started and looked round apprehensively as Hewitt entered. Hewitt bowed
smilingly, wished him good-day, speaking in French, and asked him if he
spoke the language.

The man looked up with a dull expression, and after an effort or two, as
of one who stutters, burst out with, "_Je le nie!_"

"That's strange," Hewitt observed to the men. "I ask him if he speaks
French, and he says he denies it--speaking _in_ French."

"He's been saying that very often, sir," one of the men answered, "as
well as other things we can't make anything of."

Hewitt placed his hand kindly on the man's shoulder and asked his name.
The reply was for a little while an inarticulate gurgle, presently
merging into a meaningless medley of words and syllables--"_Qu'est ce
qu'_--_il n'a_--Leystar Squarr--_sacré nom_--not spik it--_quel
chemin_--sank you ver' mosh--_je le nie! je le nie!_" He paused, stared,
and then, as though realizing his helplessness, he burst into tears.

"He's been a-cryin' two or three times," said the man who had spoken
before. "He was a-cryin' when we found him."

Several more attempts Hewitt made to communicate with the man, but
though he seemed to comprehend what was meant, he replied with nothing
but meaningless gibber, and finally gave up the attempt, and, leaning
against the side of the fireplace, buried his head in the bend of his
arm.

Then the doctor arrived and made _his_ examination. While it was in
progress Hewitt took aside the policeman who had been speaking before
and questioned him further. He had himself found the Frenchman in a dull
back street by Golden Square, where the man was standing helpless and
trembling, apparently quite bewildered and very weak. He had brought him
in, without having been able to learn anything about him. One or two
shopkeepers in the street where he was found were asked, but knew
nothing of him--indeed, had never seen him before.

"But the curiousest thing," the policeman proceeded, "was in this 'ere
room, when I brought him a loaf to give him a bit of a snack, seein' he
looked so weak an' 'ungry. You'd 'a thought we was a-goin' to poison
'im. He fair screamed at the very sight o' the bread, an' he scrouged
hisself up in that corner an' put his hands in front of his face. I
couldn't make out what was up at first--didn't tumble to it's bein' the
bread he was frightened of, seein' as he looked like a man as 'ud be
frightened at anything else afore _that_. But the nearer I came with it
the more he yelled, so I took it away an' left it outside, an' then he
calmed down. An' s'elp me, when I cut some bits off that there very loaf
an' brought 'em in, with a bit o' beef, he just went for 'em like one
o'clock. _He_ wasn't frightened o' no bread then, you bet. Rum thing,
how the fancies takes 'em when they're a bit touched, ain't it? All one
way one minute, all the other the next."

"Yes, it is. By the way, have you another uncut loaf in the place?"

"Yes, sir. Half a dozen if you like."

"One will be enough. I am going over to speak to the doctor. Wait awhile
until he seems very quiet and fairly comfortable; then bring a loaf in
quietly and put it on the table, not far from his elbow. Don't attract
his attention to what you are doing."

The doctor stood looking thoughtfully down on the Frenchman, who, for
his part, stared gloomily, but tranquilly, at the fireplace. Hewitt
stepped quietly over to the doctor and, without disturbing the man by
the fire, said interrogatively, "Aphasia?"

The doctor tightened his lips, frowned, and nodded significantly.
"Motor," he murmured, just loudly enough for Hewitt to hear; "and
there's a general nervous break-down as well, I should say. By the way,
perhaps there's no agraphia. Have you tried him with pen and paper?"

Pen and paper were brought and set before the man. He was told, slowly
and distinctly, that he was among friends, whose only object was to
restore him to his proper health. Would he write his name and address,
and any other information he might care to give about himself, on the
paper before him?

The Frenchman took the pen and stared at the paper; then slowly, and
with much hesitation, he traced these marks:--

[Illustration]

The man paused after the last of these futile characters, and his pen
stabbed into the paper with a blot, as he dazedly regarded his work.
Then with a groan he dropped it, and his face sank again into the bend
of his arm.

The doctor took the paper and handed it to Hewitt. "Complete agraphia,
you see," he said. "He can't write a word. He begins to write 'Monsieur'
from sheer habit in beginning letters thus; but the word tails off into
a scrawl. Then his attempts become mere scribble, with just a trace of
some familiar word here and there--but quite meaningless all."

Although he had never before chanced to come across a case of aphasia
(happily a rare disease), Hewitt was acquainted with its general nature.
He knew that it might arise either from some physical injury to the
brain, or from a break-down consequent on some terrible nervous strain.
He knew that in the case of motor aphasia the sufferer, though fully
conscious of all that goes on about him, and though quite understanding
what is said to him is entirely powerless to put his own thoughts into
spoken words--has lost, in fact, the connection between words and their
spoken symbols. Also that in most bad cases agraphia--the loss of
ability to write words with any reference to their meaning--is commonly
an accompaniment.

"You will have him taken to the infirmary, I suppose?" Hewitt asked.

"Yes," the doctor replied. "I shall go and see about it at once."

The man looked up again as they spoke. The policeman had, in accordance
with Hewitt's request, placed a loaf of bread on the table near him, and
now as he looked up he caught sight of it. He started visibly and paled,
but gave no such signs of abject terror as the policeman had previously
observed. He appeared nervous and uneasy, however, and presently reached
stealthily toward the loaf. Hewitt continued to talk to the doctor,
while closely watching the Frenchman's behaviour from the corner of his
eye.

The loaf was what is called a "plain cottage," of solid and regular
shape. The man reached it and immediately turned it bottom up on the
table. Then he sank back in his chair with a more contented expression,
though his gaze was still directed toward the loaf. The policeman
grinned silently at this curious manoeuvre.

The doctor left, and Hewitt accompanied him to the door of the room. "He
will not be moved just yet, I take it?" Hewitt asked as they parted.

"It may take an hour or two," the doctor replied. "Are you anxious to
keep him here?"

"Not for long; but I think there's a curious inside to the case, and I
may perhaps learn something of it by a little watching. But I can't
spare very long."

At a sign from Hewitt the loaf was removed. Then Hewitt pulled the small
table closer to the Frenchman and pushed the pen and sheets of paper
toward him. The manoeuvre had its result. The man looked up and down
the room vacantly once or twice and then began to turn the papers over.
From that he went to dipping the pen in the inkpot, and presently he was
scribbling at random on the loose sheets. Hewitt affected to leave him
entirely alone, and seemed to be absorbed in a contemplation of a
photograph of a police-division brass band that hung on the wall, but he
saw every scratch the man made.

At first there was nothing but meaningless scrawls and attempted words.
Then rough sketches appeared, of a man's head, a chair or what not. On
the mantelpiece stood a small clock--apparently a sort of humble
presentation piece, the body of the clock being set in a horse-shoe
frame, with crossed whips behind it. After a time the Frenchman's eyes
fell on this, and he began a crude sketch of it. That he relinquished,
and went on with other random sketches and scribblings on the same piece
of paper, sketching and scribbling over the sketches in a
half-mechanical sort of way, as of one who trifles with a pen during a
brown study. Beginning at the top left-hand corner of the paper, he
travelled all round it till he arrived at the left-hand bottom corner.
Then dashing his pen hastily across his last sketch he dropped it, and
with a great shudder turned away again and hid his face by the
fireplace.

Hewitt turned at once and seized the papers on the table. He stuffed
them all into his coat-pocket, with the exception of the last which the
man had been engaged on, and this, a facsimile of which is subjoined, he
studied earnestly for several minutes.

Hewitt wished the men good-day, and made his way to the inspector.

"Well," the inspector said, "not much to be got out of him, is there?
The doctor will be sending for him presently."

[Illustration]

"I fancy," said Hewitt, "that this may turn out a very important case.
Possibly--quite possibly--I may not have guessed correctly, and so I
won't tell you anything of it till I know a little more. But what I want
now is a messenger. Can I send somebody at once in a cab to my friend
Brett at his chambers?"

"Certainly. I'll find somebody. Want to write a note?"

Hewitt wrote and despatched a note, which reached me in less than ten
minutes. Then he asked the inspector, "Have you searched the Frenchman?"

"Oh, yes. We went all over him, when we found he couldn't explain
himself, to see if we could trace his friends or his address. He didn't
seem to mind. But there wasn't a single thing in his pocket--not a
single thing, barring a rag of a pocket-handkerchief with no marking on
it."

"You noticed that somebody had stolen his watch, I suppose?"

"Well, he hadn't got one."

"But he had one of those little vertical button-holes in his waistcoat,
used to fasten a watchguard to, and it was much worn and frayed, so that
he must be in the habit of carrying a watch; and it is gone."

"Yes, and everything else too, eh? Looks like robbery. He's had a knock
or two in the face--notice that?"

"I saw the bruises and the cut, of course; and his collar has been
broken away, with the back button; somebody has taken him by the collar
or throat. Was he wearing a hat when he was found?"

"No."

"That would imply that he had only just left a house. What street was he
found in?"

"Henry Street--a little off Golden Square. Low street, you know."

"Did the constable notice a door open near by?"

The inspector shook his head. "Half the doors in the street are open,"
he said, "pretty nearly all day."

"Ah, then there's nothing in that. I don't think he lives there, by the
bye. I fancy he comes from more in the Seven Dials or Drury Lane
direction. Did you notice anything about the man that gave you a clue to
his occupation--or at any rate to his habits?"

"Can't say I did."

"Well, just take a look at the back of his coat before he goes
away--just over the loins. Good-day."

As I have said, Hewitt's messenger was quick. I happened to be
in--having lately returned from a latish lunch--when he arrived with
this note:--

    "My dear B.,--I meant to have lunched with you to-day, but have
    been kept. I expect you are idle this afternoon, and I have a
    case that will interest you--perhaps be useful to you from a
    journalistic point of view. If you care to see anything of it, cab
    away _at once_ to Fitzroy Square, south side, where I'll meet you.
    I will wait no later than 3.30. Yours, M. H."

I had scarce a quarter of an hour, so I seized my hat and left my
chambers at once. As it happened, my cab and Hewitt's burst into Fitzroy
Square from opposite sides almost at the same moment, so that we lost no
time.

"Come," said Hewitt, taking my arm and marching me off, "we are going to
look for some stabling. Try to feel as though you'd just set up a
brougham and had come out to look for a place to put it in. I fear we
may have to delude some person with that belief presently."

"Why--what do you want stables for? And why make me your excuse?"

"As to what I want the stables for--really I'm not altogether sure
myself. As to making you an excuse--well, even the humblest excuse is
better than none. But come, here are some stables. Not good enough,
though, even if any of them were empty. Come on."

We had stopped for an instant at the entrance to a small alley of rather
dirty stables, and Hewitt, paying apparently but small attention to the
stables themselves, had looked sharply about him with his gaze in the
air.

"I know this part of London pretty well," Hewitt observed, "and I can
only remember one other range of stabling near by; we must try that. As
a matter of fact, I'm coming here on little more than conjecture, though
I shall be surprised if there isn't something in it. Do you know
anything of aphasia?"

"I have heard of it, of course, though I can't say I remember ever
knowing a case."

"I've seen one to-day--very curious case. The man's a Frenchman,
discovered helpless in the street by a policeman. The only thing he can
say that has any meaning in it at all is '_je le nie_,' and that he says
mechanically, without in the least knowing what he is saying. And he
can't write. But he got sketching and scrawling various things on some
paper, and his scrawls--together with another thing or two--have given
me an idea. We're following it up now. When we are less busy, and in a
quiet place, I'll show you the sketches and explain things generally;
there's no time now, and I _may_ want your help for a bit, in which case
ignorance may prevent you spoiling things, you clumsy ruffian. Hullo!
here we are, I think!"

We had stopped at the end of another stable-yard, rather dirtier than
the first. The stables were sound but inelegant sheds, and one or two
appeared to be devoted to other purposes, having low chimneys, on one of
which an old basket was rakishly set by way of cowl. Beside the entrance
a worn-out old board was nailed, with the legend, "Stabling to Let," in
letters formerly white on a ground formerly black.

"Come," said Hewitt, "we'll explore."

We picked our way over the greasy cobble-stones and looked about us. On
the left was the wall enclosing certain back-yards, and on the right the
stables. Two doors in the middle of these were open, and a butcher's
young man, who with his shiny bullet head would have been known for a
butcher's young man anywhere, was wiping over the new-washed wheel of a
smart butcher's cart.

"Good-day," Hewitt said pleasantly to the young man. "I notice there's
some stabling to let here. Now, where should I inquire about it?"

"Jones, Whitfield Street," the young man answered, giving the wheel a
final spin. "But there's only one little place to let now, I think, and
it ain't very grand."

"Oh, which is that?"

"Next but one to the street there. A chap 'ad it for wood-choppin', but
'e chucked it. There ain't room for more'n a donkey an' a barrow."

"Ah, that's a pity. We're not particular, but want something big
enough, and we don't mind paying a fair price. Perhaps we might make an
arrangement with somebody here who has a stable?"

The young man shook his head.

"I shouldn't think so," he said doubtfully; "they're mostly shop-people
as wants all the room theirselves. My guv'nor couldn't do nothink, I
know. These 'ere two stables ain't scarcely enough for all 'e wants as
it is. Then there's Barkett the greengrocer 'ere next door. _That_ ain't
no good. Then, next to that, there's the little place as is to let, and
at the end there's Griffith's at the butter-shop."

"And those the other way?"

"Well, this 'ere first one's Curtis's, Euston Road--that's a
butter-shop, too, an' 'e 'as the next after that. The last one, up at
the end--I dunno quite whose that is. It ain't been long took, but I
b'lieve it's some foreign baker's. I ain't ever see anythink come out of
it, though; but there's a 'orse there, I know--I seen the feed took in."

Hewitt turned thoughtfully away.

"Thanks," he said. "I suppose we can't manage it, then. Good-day."

We walked to the street as the butcher's young man wheeled in his cart
and flung away his pail of water.

"Will you just hang about here, Brett," he asked, "while I hurry round
to the nearest iron-monger's? I shan't be gone long. We're going to work
a little burglary. Take note if anybody comes to that stable at the
farther end."

He hurried away and I waited. In a few moments the butcher's young man
shut his doors and went whistling down the street, and in a few moments
more Hewitt appeared.

"Come," he said, "there's nobody about now; we'll lose no time. I've
bought a pair of pliers and a few nails."

We re-entered the yard at the door of the last stable. Hewitt stooped
and examined the padlock. Taking a nail in his pliers he bent it
carefully against the brick wall. Then using the nail as a key, still
held by the pliers, and working the padlock gently in his left hand, in
an astonishingly few seconds he had released the hasp and taken off the
padlock. "I'm not altogether a bad burglar," he remarked. "Not so bad,
really."

The padlock fastened a bar which, when removed, allowed the door to be
opened. Opening it, Hewitt immediately seized a candle stuck in a bottle
which stood on a shelf, pulled me in, and closed the door behind us.

"We'll do this by candle-light," he said, as he struck a match. "If the
door were left open it would be seen from the street. Keep your ears
open in case anybody comes down the yard."

The part of the shed that we stood in was used as a coach-house, and was
occupied by a rather shabby tradesman's cart, the shafts of which rested
on the ground. From the stall adjoining came the sound of the shuffling
and trampling of an impatient horse.

We turned to the cart. On the name-board at the side were painted in
worn letters the words, "Schuyler, Baker." The address, which had been
below, was painted out.

Hewitt took out the pins and let down the tail board. Within the cart
was a new bed-mattress which covered the whole surface at the bottom. I
felt it, pressed it from the top, and saw that it was an ordinary spring
mattress--perhaps rather unusually soft in the springs. It seemed a
curious thing to keep in a baker's cart.

Hewitt, who had set the candle on a convenient shelf, plunged his arm
into the farthermost recesses of the cart and brought forth a very long
French loaf, and then another. Diving again he produced certain loaves
of the sort known as the "plain cottage "--two sets of four each, each
set baked together in a row. "Feel this bread," said Hewitt, and I felt
it. It was stale--almost as hard as wood.

Hewitt produced a large pocket-knife, and with what seemed to me to be
superfluous care and elaboration, cut into the top of one of the cottage
loaves. Then he inserted his fingers in the gap he had made and firmly
but slowly tore the hard bread into two pieces. He pulled away the crumb
from within till there was nothing left but a rather thick outer shell.

"No," he said, rather to himself than to me, "there's nothing in
_that_." He lifted one of the very long French loaves and measured it
against the interior of the cart. It had before been propped diagonally,
and now it was noticeable that it was just a shade longer than the
inside of the cart was wide. Jammed in, in fact, it held firmly. Hewitt
produced his knife again, and divided this long loaf in the centre;
there was nothing but bread in _that_. The horse in the stall fidgeted
more than ever.

"That horse hasn't been fed lately, I fancy," Hewitt said. "We'll give
the poor chap a bit of this hay in the corner."

"But," I said, "what about this bread? What did you expect to find in
it? I can't see what you're driving at."

"I'll tell you," Hewitt replied, "I'm driving after something I expect
to find, and close at hand here, too. How are your nerves to-day--pretty
steady? The thing may try them."

Before I could reply there was a sound of footsteps in the yard outside,
approaching. Hewitt lifted his finger instantly for silence and
whispered hurriedly, "There's only one. If he comes _here_, we grab
him."

The steps came nearer and stopped outside the door. There was a pause,
and then a slight drawing in of breath, as of a person suddenly
surprised. At that moment the door was slightly shifted ajar and an eye
peeped in.

"Catch him!" said Hewitt aloud, as we sprang to the door. "He mustn't
get away!"

I had been nearer the doorway, and was first through it. The stranger
ran down the yard at his best, but my legs were the longer, and half-way
to the street I caught him by the shoulder and swung him round. Like
lightning he whipped out a knife, and I flung in my left instantly on
the chance of flooring him. It barely checked him, however, and the
knife swung short of my chest by no more than two inches; but Hewitt had
him by the wrist and tripped him forward on his face. He struggled like
a wild beast, and Hewitt had to stand on his forearm and force up his
wrist till the bones were near breaking before he dropped his knife. But
throughout the struggle the man never shouted, called for help, nor,
indeed, made the slightest sound, and we on our part were equally
silent. It was quickly over, of course, for he was on his face, and we
were two. We dragged our prisoner into the stable and closed the door
behind us. So far as we had seen, nobody had witnessed the capture from
the street, though, of course, we had been too busy to be certain.

"There's a set of harness hanging over at the back," said Hewitt; "I
think we'll tie him up with the traces and reins--nothing like leather.
We don't need a gag; I know he won't shout."

While I got the straps Hewitt held the prisoner by a peculiar
neck-and-wrist grip that forbade him to move except at the peril of a
snapped arm. He had probably never been a person of pleasant aspect,
being short, strongly and squatly built, large and ugly of feature, and
wild and dirty of hair and beard. And now, his face flushed with
struggling and smeared with mud from the stable-yard, his nose bleeding
and his forehead exhibiting a growing bump, he looked particularly
repellent. We strapped his elbows together behind, and as he sullenly
ignored a demand for the contents of his pockets Hewitt unceremoniously
turned them out. Helpless as he was, the man struggled to prevent this,
though, of course, ineffectually. There were papers, tobacco, a bunch of
keys, and various odds and ends. Hewitt was glancing hastily at the
papers when, suddenly dropping them, he caught the prisoner by the
shoulder and pulled him away from a partly-consumed hay-truss which
stood in a corner, and toward which he had quietly sidled.

"Keep him still," said Hewitt; "we haven't examined this place yet." And
he commenced to pull away the hay from the corner.

Presently a large piece of sackcloth was revealed, and this being lifted
left visible below it another batch of loaves of the same sort as we had
seen in the cart. There were a dozen of them in one square batch, and
the only thing about them that differed them from those in the cart was
their position, for the batch lay bottom side up.

"That's enough, I think," Hewitt said. "Don't touch them, for Heaven's
sake!" He picked up the papers he had dropped. "That has saved us a
little search," he continued. "See here, Brett; I was in the act of
telling you my suspicions when this little affair interrupted me. If you
care to look at one or two of these letters you'll see what I should
have told you. It's Anarchism and bombs, of course. I'm about as certain
as I can be that there's a reversible dynamite bomb inside each of those
innocent loaves, though I assure you I don't mean meddling with them
now. But see here. Will you go and bring in a four-wheeler? Bring it
right down the yard. There's more to do, and we mustn't attract
attention."

I hurried away and found the cab. The meaning of the loaves, the cart,
and the spring-mattress was now plain. There was an Anarchist plot to
carry out a number of explosions probably simultaneously, in different
parts of the city. I had, of course, heard much of the terrible
"reversing" bombs--those bombs which, containing a tube of acid plugged
by wadding, required no fuse, and only needed to be inverted to be set
going to explode in a few minutes. The loaves containing these bombs
would form an effectual "blind," and they were to be distributed,
probably in broad daylight, in the most natural manner possible, in a
baker's cart. A man would be waiting near the scene of each contemplated
explosion. He would be given a loaf taken from the inverted batch. He
would take it--perhaps wrapped in paper, but still inverted, and
apparently the most innocent object possible--to the spot selected,
deposit it, right side up--which would reverse the inner tube and set up
the action--in some quiet corner, behind a door or what not, and make
his own escape, while the explosion tore down walls and--if the
experiment were lucky--scattered the flesh and bones of unsuspecting
people.

The infernal loaves were made and kept reversed, to begin with, in order
to stand more firmly, and--if observed--more naturally, when turned
over to explode. Even if a child picked up the loaf and carried it off,
that child at least would be blown to atoms, which at any rate would
have been something for the conspirators to congratulate themselves
upon. The spring-mattress, of course, was to ease the jolting to the
bombs, and obviate any random jerking loose of the acid, which might
have had the deplorable result of sacrificing the valuable life of the
conspirator who drove the cart. The other loaves, too, with no explosive
contents, had their use. The two long ones, which fitted across the
inside of the cart, would be jammed across so as to hold the bombs in
the centre, and the others would be used to pack the batch on the other
sides and prevent any dangerous slipping about. The thing seemed pretty
plain, except that as yet I had no idea of how Hewitt learned anything
of the business.

I brought the four-wheeler up to the door of the stable and we thrust
the man into it, and Hewitt locked the stable door with its proper key.
Then we drove off to Tottenham Court Road police-station, and, by
Hewitt's order, straight into the yard.

In less than ten minutes from our departure from the stable our prisoner
was finally secured, and Hewitt was deep in consultation with police
officials. Messengers were sent and telegrams despatched, and presently
Hewitt came to me with information.

"The name of the helpless Frenchman the police found this morning," he
said, "appears to be Gérard--at least I am almost certain of it. Among
the papers found on the prisoner--whose full name doesn't appear, but
who seems to be spoken of as Luigi (he is Italian)--among the papers, I
say, is a sort of notice convening a meeting for this evening to decide
as to the 'final punishment' to be awarded the 'traitor Gérard, now in
charge of comrade Pingard.'

"The place of meeting is not mentioned, but it seems more than probable
that it will be at the Bakunin Club, not five minutes' walk from this
place. The police have all these places under quiet observation, of
course, and that is the club at which apparently important Anarchist
meetings have been held lately. It is the only club that has never been
raided as yet, and, it would seem, the only one they would feel at all
safe in using for anything important.

"Moreover, Luigi just now simply declined to open his mouth when asked
where the meeting was to be, and said nothing when the names of several
other places were suggested, but suddenly found his tongue at the
mention of the Bakunin Club, and denied vehemently that the meeting was
to be there--it was the only thing he uttered. So that it seems pretty
safe to assume that it _is_ to be there. Now, of course, the matter's
very serious. Men have been despatched to take charge of the stable very
quietly, and the club is to be taken possession of at once--also very
quietly. It must be done without a moment's delay, and as there is a
chance that the only detective officers within reach at the moment may
be known by sight, I have undertaken to get in first. Perhaps you'll
come? We may have to take the door with a rush."

Of course I meant to miss nothing if I could help it, and said so.

"Very well," replied Hewitt, "we'll get ourselves up a bit." He began
taking off his collar and tie. "It is getting dusk," he proceeded, "and
we shan't want old clothes to make ourselves look sufficiently shabby.
We're both wearing bowler hats, which is lucky. Make a dent in yours--if
you can do so without permanently damaging it."

We got rid of our collars and made chokers of our ties. We turned our
coat-collars up at one side only, and then, with dented hats worn
raffishly, and our hands in our pockets, we looked disreputable enough
for all practical purposes in twilight. A cordon of plain-clothes police
had already been forming round the club, we were told, and so we sallied
forth. We turned into Windmill Street, crossed Whitfield Street, and in
a turning or two we came to the Bakunin Club. I could see no sign of
anything like a ring of policemen, and said so. Hewitt chuckled. "Of
course not," he said; "they don't go about a job of this sort with drums
beating and flags flying. But they are all there, and some are watching
us. There is the house. I'll negotiate."

The house was one of the very shabby _passé_ sort that abound in that
quarter. The very narrow area was railed over, and almost choked with
rubbish. Visible above it were three floors, the lowest indicated by the
door and one window, and the other two by two windows each--mean and
dirty all. A faint light appeared in the top floor, and another from
somewhere behind the refuse-heaped area. Everywhere else was in
darkness. Hewitt looked intently into the area, but it was impossible to
discern anything behind the sole grimy patch of window that was visible.
Then we stepped lightly up the three or four steps to the door and rang
the bell.

We could hear slippered feet mounting a stair and approaching. A latch
was shifted, a door opened six inches, an indistinct face appeared, and
a female voice asked, "_Qui est là?_"

"_Deux camarades_," Hewitt grunted testily. "_Ouvrez vite._"

I had noticed that the door was kept from opening further by a short
chain. This chain the woman unhooked from the door, but still kept the
latter merely ajar, as though intending to assure herself still
further. But Hewitt immediately pushed the door back, planted his foot
against it, and entered, asking carelessly as he did so, "_Où se trouve
Luigi?_"

I followed on his heels, and in the dark could just distinguish that
Hewitt pushed the woman instantly against the wall and clapped his hand
to her mouth. At the same moment a file of quiet men were suddenly
visible ascending the steps at my heels. They were the police.

The door was closed behind us almost noiselessly, and a match was
struck. Two men stood at the bottom of the stairs, and the others
searched the house. Only two men were found--both in a top room. They
were secured and brought down.

The woman was now ungagged, and she used her tongue at a great rate. One
of the men was a small, meek-looking slip of a fellow, and he appeared
to be the woman's husband. "Eh, messieurs le police," she exclaimed
vehemently, "it ees not of 'im, mon pauvre Pierre, zat you sall rrun in.
'Im and me--we are not of the clob--we work only--we housekeep."

Hewitt whispered to an officer, and the two men were taken below. Then
Hewitt spoke to the woman, whose protests had not ceased. "You say you
are not of the club," he said, "but what is there to prove that? If you
are but housekeepers, as you say, you have nothing to fear. But you can
only prove it by giving the police information. For instance, now, about
Gérard. What have they done with him?"

"Jean Pingard--'im you 'ave take downstairs--'e 'ave lose 'im. Jean
Pingard get last night all a-boosa--all dronk like zis"--she rolled her
head and shoulders to express intoxication--"and he sleep too much
to-day, when Émile go out, and Gérard, he go too, and nobody know. I
will tell you anysing. We are not of the clob--we housekeep, me and
Pierre."

"But what did they do to Gérard before he went away?"

The woman was ready and anxious to tell anything. Gérard had been
selected to do something--what it was exactly she did not know, but
there was a horse and cart, and he was to drive it. Where the horse and
cart was also she did not know, but Gérard had driven a cart before in
his work for a baker, and he was to drive one in connection with some
scheme among the members of the club. But _le pauvre Gérard_ at the last
minute disliked to drive the cart; he had fear. He did not say he had
fear, but he prepared a letter--a letter that was not signed. The letter
was to be sent to the police, and it told them the whereabouts of the
horse and cart, so that the police might seize these things, and then
there would be nothing for Gérard, who had fear, to do in the way of
driving. No, he did not betray the names of the comrades, but he told
the place of the horse and the cart.

Nevertheless, the letter was never sent. There was suspicion, and the
letter was found in a pocket and read. Then there was a meeting, and
Gérard was confronted with his letter. He could say nothing but "_Je le
nie!_"--found no explanation but that. There was much noise, and she had
observed from a staircase, from which one might see through a
ventilating hole, Gérard had much fear--very much fear. His face was
white, and it moved; he prayed for mercy, and they talked of killing
him. It was discussed how he should be killed, and the poor Gérard was
more terrified. He was made to take off his collar, and a razor was
drawn across his throat, though without cutting him, till he fainted.

Then water was flung over him, and he was struck in the face till he
revived. He again repeated, "_Je le nie! je le nie!_" and nothing more.
Then one struck him with a bottle, and another with a stick; the point
of a knife was put against his throat and held there, but this time he
did not faint, but cried softly, as a man who is drunk, "_Je le nie! je
le nie!_" So they tied a handkerchief about his neck, and twisted it
till his face grew purple and black, and his eyes were round and
terrible, and then they struck his face, and he fainted again. But they
took away the handkerchief, having fear that they could not easily get
rid of the body if he were killed, for there was no preparation. So they
decided to meet again and discuss when there would be preparation.
Wherefore they took him away to the rooms of Jean Pingard--of Jean and
Émile Pingard--in Henry Street, Golden Square. But Émile Pingard had
gone out, and Jean was drunk and slept, and they lost him. Jean Pingard
was he downstairs--the taller of the two; the other was but _le pauvre
Pierre_, who, with herself, was not of the club. They worked only; they
were the keepers of the house. There was nothing for which they should
be arrested, and she would give the police any information they might
ask.

"As I thought, you see," Hewitt said to me, "the man's nerves have
broken down under the terror and the strain, and aphasia is the result.
I think I told you that the only articulate thing he could say was '_Je
le nie!_' and now we know how those words were impressed on him till he
now pronounces them mechanically, with no idea of their meaning. Come,
we can do no more here now. But wait a moment."

There were footsteps outside. The light was removed, and a policeman
went to the door and opened it as soon as the bell rang. Three men
stepped in one after another, and the door was immediately shut behind
them--they were prisoners.

We left quietly, and although we, of course, expected it, it was not
till the next morning that we learned absolutely that the largest arrest
of Anarchists ever made in this country was made at the Bakunin Club
that night. Each man as he came was admitted--and collared.

       *       *       *       *       *

We made our way to Luzatti's, and it was over our dinner that Hewitt put
me in full possession of the earlier facts of this case, which I have
set down as impersonal narrative in their proper place at the beginning.

"But," I said, "what of that aimless scribble you spoke of that Gérard
made in the police station? Can I see it?"

Hewitt turned to where his coat hung behind him and took a handful of
papers from his pocket.

"Most of these," he said, "mean nothing at all. _That_ is what he wrote
at first," and he handed me the first of the two papers which were
presented in facsimile in the earlier part of this narrative.

"You see," he said, "he has begun mechanically from long use to write
'monsieur'--the usual beginning of a letter. But he scarcely makes three
letters before tailing off into sheer scribble. He tries again and
again, and although once there is something very like 'que,' and once
something like a word preceded by a negative 'n,' the whole thing is
meaningless.

"This" (he handed me the other paper which has been printed in
facsimile) "_does_ mean something, though Gérard never intended it. Can
you spot the meaning? Really, I think it's pretty plain--especially now
that you know as much as I about the day's adventures. The thing at the
top left-hand corner, I may tell you, Gérard intended for a sketch of a
clock on the mantelpiece in the police-station."

I stared hard at the paper, but could make nothing whatever of it. "I
only see the horse-shoe clock," I said, "and a sort of second,
unsuccessful attempt to draw it again. Then there is a horse-shoe
dotted, but scribbled over, and then a sort of kite or balloon on a
string, a Highlander, and--well, I don't understand it, I confess. Tell
me."

"I'll explain what I learned from that," Hewitt said, "and also what led
me to look for it. From what the inspector told me, I judged the man to
be in a very curious state, and I took a fancy to see him. Most I was
curious to know why he should have a terror of bread at one moment and
eat it ravenously at another. When I saw him I felt pretty sure that he
was not mad, in the common sense of the term. As far as I could judge
it seemed to be a case of aphasia.

"Then when the doctor came I had a chat (as I have already told you)
with the policeman who found the man. He told me about the incident of
the bread with rather more detail than I had had from the inspector.
Thus it was plain that the man was terrified at the bread only when it
was in the form of a loaf, and ate it eagerly when it was cut into
pieces. That was _one_ thing to bear in mind. He was not afraid of
_bread_, but only of a _loaf_.

"Very well. I asked the policeman to find another uncut loaf, and to put
it near the man when his attention was diverted. Meantime the doctor
reported that my suspicion as to aphasia was right. The man grew more
comfortable, and was assured that he was among friends and had nothing
to fear, so that when at length he found the loaf near his elbow he was
not so violently terrified, only very uneasy. I watched him and saw him
turn it bottom up--a very curious thing to do; he immediately became
less uneasy--the turning over of the loaf seemed to have set his mind at
rest in some way. This was more curious still. I thought for some little
while before accepting the bomb theory as the most probable.

"The doctor left, and I determined to give the man another chance with
pen and paper. I felt pretty certain that if he were allowed to
scribble and sketch as he pleased, sooner or later he would do something
that would give me some sort of a hint. I left him entirely alone and
let him do as he pleased, but I watched.

"After all the futile scribble which you have seen, he began to sketch,
first a man's head, then a chair--just what he might happen to see in
the room. Presently he took to the piece of paper you have before you.
He observed that clock and began to sketch it, then went on to other
things, such as you see, scribbling idly over most of them when
finished. When he had made the last of the sketches he made a hasty
scrawl of his pen over it and broke down. It had brought his terror to
his mind again somehow.

"I seized the paper and examined it closely. Now just see. Ignore the
clock, which was merely a sketch of a thing before him, and look at the
three things following. What are they? A horse-shoe, a captive balloon,
and a Highlander. Now, can't you think of something those three things
in that order suggest?"

I could think of nothing whatever, and I confessed as much.

"Think, now. Tottenham Court Road!"

I started. "Of course," I said. "That never struck me. There's the
Horse-shoe Hotel, with the sign outside, there's the large toy and
fancy shop half-way up, where they have a captive balloon moored to the
roof as an advertisement, and there's the tobacco and snuff shop on the
left, toward the other end, where they have a life-size wooden
Highlander at the door--an uncommon thing, indeed, nowadays."

"You are right. The curious conjunction struck me at once. There they
are, all three, and just in the order in which one meets them going up
from Oxford Street. Also, as if to confirm the conjecture, note the
_dotted_ horse-shoe. Don't you remember that at night the Horse-shoe
Hotel sign is illuminated by two rows of gas lights?

"Now here was my clue at last. Plainly, this man, in his mechanical
sketching, was following a regular train of thought, and unconsciously
illustrating it as he went along. Many people in perfect health and
mental soundness do the same thing if a pen and a piece of waste paper
be near. The man's train of thought led him, in memory, up Tottenham
Court Road, and further, to where some disagreeable recollection upset
him. It was my business to trace this train of thought. Do you remember
the feat of Dupin in Poe's story, 'The Murders in the Rue Morgue'--how
he walks by his friend's side in silence for some distance, and then
suddenly breaks out with a divination of his thoughts, having silently
traced them from a fruiterer with a basket, through paving-stones,
Epicurus, Dr. Nichols, the constellation Orion, and a Latin poem, to a
cobbler lately turned actor?

"Well, it was some such task as this (but infinitely simpler, as a
matter of fact) that was set me. This man begins by drawing the
horse-shoe clock. Having done with that, and with the horse-shoe still
in his mind, he starts to draw a horse-shoe simply. It is a failure, and
he scribbles it out. His mind at once turns to the Horse-shoe Hotel,
which he knows from frequently passing it, and its sign of gas-jets. He
sketches _that_, making dots for the gas lights. Once started in
Tottenham Court Road, his mind naturally follows his usual route along
it. He remembers the advertising captive balloon half-way up, and down
_that_ goes on his paper. In imagination he crosses the road, and keeps
on till he comes to the very noticeable Highlander outside the
tobacconist's. _That_ is sketched. Thus it is plain that a familiar
route with him was from New Oxford Street up Tottenham Court Road.

"At the police-station I ventured to guess from this that he lived
somewhere near Seven Dials. Perhaps before long we shall know if this
was right. But to return to the sketches. After the Highlander there is
something at first not very distinct. A little examination, however,
shows it to be intended for a chimney-pot partly covered with a basket.
Now an old basket, stuck sideways on a chimney by way of cowl, is not an
uncommon thing in parts of the country, but it is very unusual in
London. Probably, then, it would be in some by-street or alley. Next and
last, there is a horse's head, and it was at this that the man's trouble
returned to him.

"Now, when one goes to a place and finds a horse there, that place is
not uncommonly a stable; and, as a matter of fact, the basket-cowl would
be much more likely to be found in use in a range of back stabling than
anywhere else. Suppose, then, that after taking the direction indicated
in the sketches--the direction of Fitzroy Square, in fact--one were to
find a range of stabling with a basket-cowl visible about it? I know my
London pretty well, as you are aware, and I could remember but two
likely stable-yards in that particular part--the two we looked at, in
the second of which you may possibly have noticed just such a
basket-cowl as I have been speaking of.

"Well, what we did you know, and that we found confirmation of my
conjecture about the loaves you also know. It was the recollection of
the horse and cart, and what they were to transport, and what the end
of it all had been, that upset Gérard as he drew the horse's head. You
will notice that the sketches have not been done in separate rows, left
to right--they have simply followed one another all round the paper,
which means preoccupation and unconsciousness on the part of the man who
made them."

"But," I asked, "supposing those loaves to contain bombs, how were the
bombs put there? Baking the bread round them would have been risky,
wouldn't it?"

"Certainly. What they did was to cut the loaves, each row, down the
centre. Then most of the crumb was scooped out, the explosive inserted,
and the sides joined up and glued. I thought you had spotted the joins,
though they certainly were neat."

"No, I didn't examine closely. Luigi, of course, had been told off for a
daily visit to feed the horse, and that is how we caught him."

"One supposes so. They hadn't rearranged their plans as to going on with
the outrages after Gérard's defection. By the way, I noticed that he was
accustomed to driving when I first saw him. There was an unmistakable
mark on his coat, just at the small of the back, that drivers get who
lean against a rail in a cart."

The loaves were examined by official experts, and, as everybody now
knows, were found to contain, as Hewitt had supposed, large charges of
dynamite. What became of some half-dozen of the men captured is also
well known: their sentences were exemplary.

THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *



APPLETONS' TOWN AND COUNTRY LIBRARY.

PUBLISHED SEMIMONTHLY.

  1. _The Steel Hammer._ By LOUIS ULBACH.
  2. _Eve._ A Novel. By S. BARING-GOULD.
  3. _For Fifteen Years._ A Sequel to The Steel Hammer. By LOUIS ULBACH.
  4. _A Counsel of Perfection._ A Novel. By LUCAS MALET.
  5. _The Deemster._ A Romance. By HALL CAINE.
  5½. _The Bondman._ (New edition.) By HALL CAINE.
  6. _A Virginia Inheritance._ By $1
  7. _Ninette_: An Idyll of Provence. By the author of Véra.
  8. "_The Right Honourable._" By JUSTIN MCCARTHY and Mrs. CAMPBELL-PRAED.
  9. _The Silence of Dean Maitland._ By MAXWELL GRAY.
  10. _Mrs. Lorimer_: A Study in Black and White. By LUCAS MALET.
  11. _The Elect Lady._ By GEORGE MACDONALD.
  12. _The Mystery of the "Ocean Star."_ By W. CLARK RUSSELL.
  13. _Aristocracy._ A Novel.
  14. _A Recoiling Vengeance._ By FRANK BARRETT. With Illustrations.
  15. _The Secret of Fontaine-la-Croix._ By MARGARET FIELD.
  16. _The Master of Rathkelly._ By HAWLEY SMART.
  17. _Donovan_: A Modern Englishman. By EDNA LYALL.
  18. _This Mortal Coil._ By GRANT ALLEN.
  19. _A Fair Emigrant._ By ROSA MULHOLLAND.
  20. _The Apostate._ By ERNEST DAUDET.
  21. _Raleigh Westgate_; or, Epimenides in Maine. By HELEN KENDRICK
          JOHNSON.
  22. _Arius the Libyan._ A Romance of the Primitive Church.
  23. _Constance_, and _Calbot's Rival_. By JULIAN HAWTHORNE.
  24. _We Two._ By EDNA LYALL.
  25. _A Dreamer of Dreams._ By the author of Thoth.
  26. _The Ladies' Gallery._ By JUSTIN MCCARTHY and Mrs. CAMPBELL-PRAED.
  27. _The Reproach of Annesley._ By MAXWELL GRAY.
  28. _Near to Happiness._
  29. _In the Wire Grass._ By LOUIS PENDLETON.
  30. _Lace._ A Berlin Romance. By PAUL LINDAU.
  30½. _The Black Poodle._ By F. ANSTEY.
  31. _American Coin._ A Novel. By the author of Aristocracy.
  32. _Won by Waiting._ By EDNA LYALL.
  33. _The Story of Helen Davenant._ By VIOLET FANE.
  34. _The Light of Her Countenance._ By H. H. BOYESEN.
  35. _Mistress Beatrice Cope._ By M. E. LE CLERC.
  36. _The Knight-Errant._ By EDNA LYALL.
  37. _In the Golden Days._ By EDNA LYALL.
  38. _Giraldi_; or, The Curse of Love. By ROSS GEORGE DERING.
  39. _A Hardy Norseman._ By EDNA LYALL.
  40. _The Romance of Jenny Harlowe_, and _Sketches of Maritime Life_.
          By W. CLARK RUSSELL.
  41. _Passion's Slave._ By RICHARD ASHE-KING.
  42. _The Awakening of Mary Fenwick._ By BEATRICE WHITBY.
  43. _Countess Loretey._ Translated from the German of RUDOLF MENGER.
  44. _Blind Love._ By WILKIE COLLINS.
  45. _The Dean's Daughter._ By SOPHIE F. F. VEITCH.
  46. _Countess Irene._ A Romance of Austrian Life. By J. FOGERTY.
  47. _Robert Browning's Principal Shorter Poems._
  48. _Frozen Hearts._ By G. WEBB APPLETON.
  49. _Djambek the Georgian._ By A. G. VON SUTTNER.
  50. _The Craze of Christian Engelhart._ By HENRY FAULKNER DARNELL.
  51. _Lal._ By WILLIAM A. HAMMOND, M. D.
  52. _Aline._ A Novel. By HENRY GRÉVILLE.
  53. _Joost Avelingh._ A Dutch Story. By MAARTEN MAARTENS.
  54. _Katy of Catoctin._ By GEORGE ALFRED TOWNSEND.
  55. _Throckmorton._ A Novel. By MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL.
  56. _Expatriation._ By the author of Aristocracy.
  57. _Geoffrey Hampstead._ By T. S. JARVIS.
  58. _Dmitri._ A Romance of Old Russia. By F. W. BAIN, M. A.
  59. _Part of the Property._ By BEATRICE WHITBY.
  60. _Bismarck in Private Life._ By a Fellow-Student.
  61. _In Low Relief._ By MORLEY ROBERTS.
  62. _The Canadians of Old._ A Historical Romance. By PHILIPPE GASPÉ.
  63. _A Squire of Low Degree._ By LILY A. LONG.
  64. _A Fluttered Dovecote._ By GEORGE MANVILLE FENN.
  65. _The Nugents of Carriconna._ An Irish Story. By TIGHE HOPKINS.
  66. _A Sensitive Plant._ By E. and D. GERARD.
  67. _Doña Luz._ By JUAN VALERA. Translated by Mrs. MARY J. SERRANO.
  68. _Pepita Ximenez._ By JUAN VALERA. Translated by Mrs. MARY J. SERRANO.
  69. _The Primes and their Neighbors._ By RICHARD MALCOLM JOHNSTON.
  70. _The Iron Game._ By HENRY F. KEENAN.
  71. _Stories of Old New Spain._ By THOMAS A. JANVIER.
  72. _The Maid of Honor._ By Hon. LEWIS WINGFIELD.
  73. _In the Heart of the Storm._ By MAXWELL GRAY.
  74. _Consequences._ By EGERTON CASTLE.
  75. _The Three Miss Kings._ By ADA CAMBRIDGE.
  76. _A Matter of Skill._ By BEATRICE WHITBY.
  77. _Maid Marian, and Other Stories._ By MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL.
  78. _One Woman's Way._ By EDMUND PENDLETON.
  79. _A Merciful Divorce._ By F. W. MAUDE.
  80. _Stephen Ellicot's Daughter._ By Mrs. J. H. NEEDELL.
  81. _One Reason Why._ By BEATRICE WHITBY.
  82. _The Tragedy of Ida Noble._ By W. CLARK RUSSELL.
  83. _The Johnstown Stage, and other Stories._ By ROBERT H. FLETCHER.
  84. _A Widower Indeed._ By RHODA BROUGHTON and ELIZABETH LISLAND.
  85. _The Flight of a Shadow._ By GEORGE MACDONALD.
  86. _Love or Money._ By KATHARINE LEE.
  87. _Not All in Vain._ By ADA CAMBRIDGE.
  88. _It Happened Yesterday._ By FREDERICK MARSHALL.
  89. _My Guardian._ By ADA CAMBRIDGE.
  90. _The Story of Philip Methuen._ By Mrs. J. H. NEEDELL.
  91. _Amethyst_: The Story of a Beauty. By CHRISTABEL R. COLERIDGE.
  92. _Don Braulio._ By JUAN VALERA. Translated by CLARA BELL.
  93. _The Chronicles of Mr. Bill Williams._ By RICHARD MALCOLM JOHNSTON.
  94. _A Queen of Curds and Cream._ By DOROTHEA GERARD.
  95. _"La Bella" and Others._ By EGERTON CASTLE.
  96. "_December Roses._" By Mrs. CAMPBELL PRAED.
  97. _Jean de Kerdren._ By JEANNE SCHULTZ.
  98. _Etelka's Vow._ By DOROTHEA GERARD.
  99. _Cross Currents._ By MARY A. DICKENS.
  100. _His Life's Magnet._ By THEODORA ELMSLIE.
  101. _Passing the Love of Women._ By Mrs. J. H. NEEDELL.
  102. _In Old St. Stephen's._ By JEANIE DRAKE.
  103. _The Berkeleys and their Neighbors._ By MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL.
  104. _Mona Maclean, Medical Student._ By GRAHAM TRAVERS.
  105. _Mrs. Bligh._ By RHODA BROUGHTON.
  106. _A Stumble on the Threshold._ By JAMES PAYN.
  107. _Hanging Moss._ By PAUL LINDAU.
  108. _A Comedy of Elopement._ By CHRISTIAN REID.
  109. _In the Suntime of her Youth._ By BEATRICE WHITBY.
  110. _Stories in Black and White._ By THOMAS HARDY and Others.
  110½. _An Englishman in Paris._ Notes and Recollections.
  111. _Commander Mendoza._ By JUAN VALERA.
  112. _Dr. Paull's Theory._ By Mrs. A. M. DIEHL.
  113. _Children of Destiny._ By MOLLY ELLIOT SEAWELL.
  114. _A Little Minx._ By ADA CAMBRIDGE.
  115. _Capt'n Davy's Honeymoon._ By HALL CAINE.
  116. _The Voice of a Flower._ By E. GERARD.
  117. _Singularly Deluded._ By SARAH GRAND.
  118. _Suspected._ By LOUISA STRATENUS.
  119. _Lucia, Hugh, and Another._ By Mrs. J. H. NEEDELL.
  120. _The Tutor's Secret._ By VICTOR CHERBULIEZ.
  121. _From the Five Rivers._ By Mrs. F. A. STEEL.
  122. _An Innocent Impostor, and Other Stories._ By MAXWELL GRAY.
  123. _Ideala._ By SARAH GRAND.
  124. _A Comedy of Masks._ By ERNEST DOWSON and ARTHUR MOORE.
  125. _Relics._ By FRANCES MACNAB.
  126. _Dodo: A Detail of the Day._ By E. F. BENSON.
  127. _A Woman of Forty._ By ESMÈ STUART.
  128. _Diana Tempest._ By MARY CHOLMONDELEY.
  129. _The Recipe for Diamonds._ By C. J. CUTCLIFFE HYNE.
  130. _Christina Chard._ By Mrs. CAMPBELL-PRAED.
  131. _A Gray Eye or So._ By FRANK FRANKFORT MOORE.
  132. _Earlscourt._ By ALEXANDER ALLARDYCE.
  133. _A Marriage Ceremony._ By ADA CAMBRIDGE.
  134. _A Ward in Chancery._ By Mrs. ALEXANDER.
  135. _Lot 13._ By DOROTHEA GERARD.
  136. _Our Manifold Nature._ By SARAH GRAND.
  137. _A Costly Freak._ By MAXWELL GRAY.
  138. _A Beginner_. By RHODA BROUGHTON.
  139. _A Yellow Aster._ By Mrs. MANNINGTON CAFFYN ("IOTA").
  140. _The Rubicon._ By E. F. BENSON.
  141. _The Trespasser._ By GILBERT PARKER.
  142. _The Rich Miss Riddell._ By DOROTHEA GERARD.
  143. _Mary Fenwick's Daughter._ By BEATRICE WHITBY.
  144. _Red Diamonds._ By JUSTIN MCCARTHY.
  145. _A Daughter of Music._ By G. COLMORE.
  146. _Outlaw and Lawmaker._ By Mrs. CAMPBELL-PRAED.
  147. _Dr. Janet of Harley Street._ By ARABELLA KENEALY.
  148. _George Mandeville's Husband._ By C. E. RAIMOND.
  149. _Vashti and Esther._
  150. _Timar's Two Worlds._ By M. JOKAI.
  151. _A Victim of Good Luck._ By W. E. NORRIS.
  152. _The Trail of the Sword._ By GILBERT PARKER.
  153. _A Mild Barbarian._ By EDGAR FAWCETT.
  154. _The God in the Car._ By ANTHONY HOPE.
  155. _Children of Circumstance._ By Mrs. M. CAFFYN.
  156. _At the Gate of Samaria._ By WILLIAM J. LOCKE.
  157. _The Justification of Andrew Lebrun._ By FRANK BARRETT.
  158. _Dust and Laurels._ By MARY L. PENDERED.
  159. _The Good Ship Mohock._ By W. CLARK RUSSELL.
  160. _Noémi._ By S. BARING-GOULD.
  161. _The Honour of Savelli._ By S. LEVETT YEATS.
  162. _Kitty's Engagement._ By FLORENCE WARDEN.
  163. _The Mermaid._ By L. DOUGALL.
  164. _An Arranged Marriage._ By DOROTHEA GERARD.
  165. _Eve's Ransom._ By GEORGE GISSING.
  166. _The Marriage of Esther._ By GUY BOOTHRY.
  167. _Fidelis._ By ADA CAMBRIDGE.
  168. _Into the Highways and Hedges._ By F. F. MONTRÉSOR.
  169. _The Vengeance of James Vansittart._ By Mrs. J. H. NEEDELL.
  170. _A Study in Prejudices._ By GEORGE PASTON.
  171. _The Mistress of Quest._ By ADELINE SERGEANT.
  172. _In the Year of Jubilee._ By GEORGE GISSING.
  173. _In Old New England._ By HEZEKIAH BUTTERWORTH.
  174. _Mrs. Musgrave--and Her Husband._ By R. MARSH.
  175. _Not Counting the Cost._ By TASMA.
  176. _Out of Due Season._ By ADELINE SERGEANT.
  177. _Scylla or Charybdis?_ By RHODA BROUGHTON.
  178. _In Defiance of the King._ By C. C. HOTCHKISS.
  179. _A Bid for Fortune._ By GUY BOOTHBY.
  180. _The King of Andaman._ By J. MACLAREN COBBAN.
  181. _Mrs. Tregaskiss_. By Mrs. CAMPBELL-PRAED.
  182. _The Desire of the Moth._ By CAPEL VANE.
  183. _A Self-Denying Ordinance._ By M. HAMILTON.
  184. _Successors to the Title._ By MRS. L. B. WALFORD.
  185. _The Lost Stradivarius._ By J. MEADE FALKNER.
  186. _The Wrong Man._ By DOROTHEA GERARD.
  187. _In the Day of Adversity._ By J. BLOUNDELLE-BURTON.
  188. _Mistress Dorothy Marvin._ By J. C. SNAITH.
  189. _A Flash of Summer._ By Mrs. W. K. CLIFFORD.

Each, 12mo, paper cover, 50 cents; cloth, $1,00.


GEORG EBERS'S ROMANCES.

_Each, 16mo, paper, 40 cents per volume; cloth, 75 cents._

_Sets of 24 volumes, cloth, in box, $18.00._

  =In the Blue Pike.= A Romance of German Life in the early Sixteenth
  Century. Translated by MARY J. SAFFORD. 1 volume.

  =In the Fire of the Forge.= A Romance of Old Nuremberg. Translated by
  MARY J. SAFFORD. 2 volumes.

  =Cleopatra.= Translated by MARY J. SAFFORD. 2 volumes.

  =A Thorny Path.= (PER ASPERA.) Translated by CLARA BELL. 2 volumes.

  =An Egyptian Princess.= Translated by ELEANOR GROVE. 2 volumes.

  =Uarda.= Translated by CLARA BELL. 2 volumes.

  =Homo Sum.= Translated by CLARA BELL. 1 volume.

  =The Sisters.= Translated by CLARA BELL. 1 volume.

  =A Question.= Translated by MARY J. SAFFORD. 1 volume.

  =The Emperor.= Translated by CLARA BELL. 2 volumes.

  =The Burgomaster's Wife.= Translated by MARY J. SAFFORD. 1 volume.

  =A Word, only a Word.= Translated by MARY J. SAFFORD. 1 volume.

  =Serapie.= Translated by CLARA BELL. 1 volume.

  =The Bride of the Nile.= Translated by CLARA BELL. 2 volumes.

  =Margery.= (GRED.) Translated by CLARA BELL. 2 volumes.

  =Joshua.= Translated by MARY J. SAFFORD. 1 volume.

  =The Elixir, and Other Tales.= Translated by Mrs. EDWARD H. BELL.
  With Portrait of the Author. 1 volume.

"Dr. Ebers's romances founded on ancient history are hardly equaled by
any other living author.... He makes the men and women and the scenes
move before the reader with living reality."--_Boston Home Journal._

"Georg Ebers writes stories of ancient times with the conscientiousness
of a true investigator. His tales are so carefully told that large
portions of them might be clipped or quoted by editors of guide-books
and authors of histories intended to be popular."--_New York Herald._


_For sale by all booksellers; or sent by mail on receipt of price by the
publishers._

New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *



BY A. CONAN DOYLE.


_THE EXPLOITS OF BRIGADIER GERARD. A Romance of the Life of a Typical
Napoleonic Soldier._ Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

There is a flavor of Dumas's Musketeers in the life of the redoubtable
Brigadier Gerard, a typical Napoleonic soldier, more fortunate than many
of his compeers because some of his Homeric exploits were accomplished
under the personal observation of the Emperor. His delightfully romantic
career included an oddly characteristic glimpse of England, and his
adventures ranged from the battlefield to secret service. In picturing
the experiences of his fearless, hard-fighting and hard-drinking hero,
the author of "The White Company" has given us a book which absorbs the
interest and quickens the pulse of every reader.


_THE STARK MUNRO LETTERS._ Being a Series of Twelve Letters written by
STARK MUNRO, M. B., to his friend and former fellow-student, Herbert
Swanborough, of Lowell, Massachusetts, during the years 1881-1884.
Illustrated. 12mo. Buckram, $1.50.

"Cullingworth, ... a much more interesting creation than Sherlock
Holmes, and I pray Dr. Doyle to give us more of him."--_Richard le
Gallienne, in the London Star._

"Every one who wants a hearty laugh must make acquaintance with Dr.
James Cullingworth."--_Westminster Gazette._

"Every one must read; for not to know Cullingworth should surely argue
one's self to be unknown."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

"One of the freshest figures to be met with in any recent
fiction."--_London Daily News._

"'The Stark Munro Letters' is a bit of real literature.... Its reading
will be an epoch-making event in many a life."--_Philadelphia Evening
Telegraph._

"Positively magnetic, and written with that combined force and grace for
which the author's style is known."--_Boston Budget._


SEVENTH EDITION.

_ROUND THE RED LAMP._ Being Facts and Fancies of Medical Life. 12mo.
Cloth, $1.50.

"Too much can not be said in praise of these strong productions, that,
to read, keep one's heart leaping to the throat and the mind in a tumult
of anticipation to the end.... No series of short stories in modern
literature can approach them."--_Hartford Times._

"If Mr. A. Conan Doyle had not already placed himself in the front rank
of living English writers by 'The Refugees,' and other of his larger
stories, he would surely do so by these fifteen short tales."--_New York
Mail and Express._

"A strikingly realistic and decidedly original contribution to modern
literature."--_Boston Saturday Evening Gazette._



BY S. R. CROCKETT.


_CLEG KELLY, ARAB OF THE CITY. His Progress and Adventures._ Uniform
with "The Lilac Sunbonnet" and "Bog-Myrtle and Peat." Illustrated. 12mo.
Cloth, $1.50.

It is safe to predict for the quaint and delightful figure of Cleg Kelly
a notable place in the literature of the day. Mr. Crockett's signal
success in his new field will enlarge the wide circle of his admirers.
The lights and shadows of curious phases of Edinburgh life, and of
Scotch farm and railroad life, are pictured with an intimate sympathy,
richness of humor, and truthful pathos which make this new novel a
genuine addition to literature. It seems safe to say that at least two
characters--Cleg and Muckle Alick--are likely to lead Mr. Crockett's
heroes in popular favor. The illustrations of this fascinating novel
have been the result of most faithful and sympathetic study.


_BOG-MYRTLE AND PEAT._ Third edition. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"Here are idyls, epics, dramas of human life, written in words that
thrill and burn.... Each is a poem that has an immortal flavor. They are
fragments of the author's early dreams, too bright, too gorgeous, too
full of the blood of rubies and the life of diamonds to be caught and
held palpitating in expression's grasp."--_Boston Courier._

"Hardly a sketch among them all that will not afford pleasure to the
reader for its genial humor, artistic local coloring, and admirable
portrayal of character."--_Boston Home Journal._

"One dips into the book anywhere and reads on and on, fascinated by the
writer's charm of manner."--_Minneapolis Tribune._


_THE LILAC SUNBONNET._ Sixth edition. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"A love story pure and simple, one of the old-fashioned, wholesome,
sunshiny kind, with a pure-minded, sound-hearted hero, and a heroine who
is merely a good and beautiful woman; and if any other love story half
so sweet has been written this year, it has escaped our notice."--_New
York Times._

"The general conception of the story, the motive of which is the growth
of love between the young chief and heroine, is delineated with a
sweetness and a freshness, a naturalness and a certainty, which places
'The Lilac Sunbonnet' among the best stories of the time."--_New York
Mail and Express._

"In its own line this little love story can hardly be excelled. It is a
pastoral, an idyl--the story of love and courtship and marriage of a
fine young man and a lovely girl--no more. But it is told in so
thoroughly delightful a manner, with such playful humor, such delicate
fancy, such true and sympathetic feeling, that nothing more could be
desired."--_Boston Traveller._



GILBERT PARKER'S BEST BOOKS.


_THE SEATS OF THE MIGHTY._ Being the Memoirs of Captain ROBERT MORAY,
sometime an Officer in the Virginia Regiment, and afterward of Amherst's
Regiment. 12mo. Cloth, illustrated, $1.50.

For the time of his story Mr. Parker has chosen the most absorbing
period of the romantic eighteenth-century history of Quebec. The curtain
rises soon after General Braddock's defeat in Virginia, and the hero, a
prisoner in Quebec, curiously entangled in the intrigues of La
Pompadour, becomes a part of a strange history, full of adventure and
the stress of peril, which culminates only after Wolfe's victory over
Montcalm. The material offered by the life and history of old Quebec has
never been utilized for the purposes of fiction with the command of plot
and incident, the mastery of local color, and the splendid realization
of dramatic situations shown in this distinguished and moving romance.
The illustrations preserve the atmosphere of the text, for they present
the famous buildings, gates, and battle grounds as they appeared at the
time of the hero's imprisonment in Quebec.


_THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD._ A Novel. 12mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00.

"Mr. Parker here adds to a reputation already wide, and anew
demonstrates his power of pictorial portrayal and of strong dramatic
situation and climax."--_Philadelphia Bulletin._

"The tale holds the reader's interest from first to last, for it is full
of fire and spirit, abounding in incident, and marked by good character
drawing."--_Pittsburg Times._


_THE TRESPASSER._ 12mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00.

"Interest, pith, force and charm--Mr. Parker's new story possesses all
these qualities.... Almost bare of synthetical decoration, his
paragraphs are stirring because they are real. We read at times--as we
have read the great masters of romance--breathlessly."--_The Critic._

"Gilbert Parker writes a strong novel, but thus far this is his
masterpiece.... It is one of the great novels of the year."--_Boston
Advertiser._


_THE TRANSLATION OF A SAVAGE._ 16mo. Flexible cloth, 75 cents.

"A book which no one will be satisfied to put down until the end has
been matter of certainty and assurance."--_The Nation._

"A story of remarkable interest, originality, and ingenuity of
construction."--_Boston Home Journal._

"The perusal of this romance will repay those who care for new and
original types of character, and who are susceptible to the fascination
of a fresh and vigorous style."--_London Daily News._


"=A better book than 'The Prisoner of Zenda.'="--_London Queen._

_THE CHRONICLES OF COUNT ANTONIO._ By ANTHONY HOPE, author of "The
God in the Car," "The Prisoner of Zenda," etc. With photogravure
Frontispiece by S. W. Van Schaick. Third edition. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"No adventures were ever better worth recounting than are those of
Antonio of Monte Velluto, a very Bayard among outlaws.... To all those
whose pulses still stir at the recital of deeds of high courage, we may
recommend this book.... The chronicle conveys the emotion of heroic
adventure, and is picturesquely written."--_London Daily News._

"It has literary merits all its own, of a deliberate and rather deep
order.... In point of execution 'The Chronicles of Count Antonio' is the
best work that Mr. Hope has yet done. The design is clearer, the
workmanship more elaborate, the style more colored.... The incidents are
most ingenious, they are told quietly, but with great cunning, and the
Quixotic sentiment which pervades it all is exceedingly
pleasant."--_Westminster Gazette._

"A romance worthy of all the expectations raised by the brilliancy of
his former books, and likely to be read with a keen enjoyment and a
healthy exaltation of the spirits by every one who takes it up."--_The
Scotsman._

"A gallant tale, written with unfailing freshness and spirit."--_London
Daily Telegraph._

"One of the most fascinating romances written in English within many
days. The quaint simplicity of its style is delightful, and the
adventures recorded in these 'Chronicles of Count Antonio' are as
stirring and ingenious as any conceived even by Weyman at his
best."--_New York World._

"Romance of the real flavor, wholly and entirely romance, and narrated
in true romantic style. The characters, drawn with such masterly
handling, are not merely pictures and portraits, but statues that are
alive and step boldly forward from the canvas."--_Boston Courier._

"Told in a wonderfully simple and direct style, and with the magic
touch of a man who has the genius of narrative, making the varied
incidents flow naturally and rapidly in a stream of sparkling
discourse."--_Detroit Tribune._

"Easily ranks with, if not above, 'A Prisoner of Zenda.' ... Wonderfully
strong, graphic, and compels the interest of the most _blasé_ novel
reader."--_Boston Advertiser._

"No adventures were ever better worth telling than those of Count
Antonio.... The author knows full well how to make every pulse thrill,
and how to hold his readers under the spell of his magic."--_Boston
Herald._

"A book to make women weep proud tears, and the blood of men to tingle
with knightly fervor.... In 'Count Antonio' we think Mr. Hope surpasses
himself, as he has already surpassed all the other story-tellers of the
period."--_New York Spirit of the Times._


_THE ONE WHO LOOKED ON._ By F. F. MONTRÉSOR, author of "Into the
Highways and Hedges." 16mo. Cloth, special binding, $1.25.

"The story runs on as smoothly as a brook through lowlands; it excites
your interest at the beginning and keeps it to the end."--_New York
Herald._

"An exquisite story.... No person sensitive to the influence of what
makes for the true, the lovely, and the strong in human friendship and
the real in life's work can read this book without being benefited by
it."--_Buffalo Commercial._

"The book has universal interest and very unusual merit.... Aside from
its subtle poetic charm, the book is a noble example of the power of
keen observation."--_Boston Herald._


_CORRUPTION._ By PERCY WHITE, author of "Mr. Bailey-Martin," etc. 12mo.
Cloth, $1.25.

"There is intrigue enough in it for those who love a story of the
ordinary kind, and the political part is perhaps more attractive in its
sparkle and variety of incident than the real thing itself."--_London
Daily News._

"A drama of biting intensity, a tragedy of inflexible purpose and
relentless result."--_Pall Mall Gazette._


_A HARD WOMAN._ A Story in Scenes. By VIOLET HUNT. 12mo. Cloth, $1.25.

"An extremely clever work. Miss Hunt probably writes dialogue better
than any of our young novelists.... Not only are her conversations
wonderfully vivacious and sustained, but she contrives to assign to each
of her characters a distinct mode of speech, so that the reader easily
identifies them, and can follow the conversations without the slightest
difficulty."--_London Athenæum._

"One of the best writers of dialogue of our immediate day. The
conversations in this book will enhance her already secure
reputation."--_London Daily Chronicle._

"A creation that does Miss Hunt infinite credit, and places her in the
front rank of the younger novelists.... Brilliantly drawn, quivering
with life, adroit, quiet-witted, unfalteringly insolent, and withal
strangely magnetic."--_London Standard._


_AN IMAGINATIVE MAN._ By ROBERT S. HICHENS, author of "The Green
Carnation." 12mo. Cloth, $1.25.

"One of the brightest books of the year."--_Boston Budget._

"Altogether delightful, fascinating, unusual."--_Cleveland Amusement
Gazette._

"A study in character.... Just as entertaining as though it were the
conventional story of love and marriage. The clever hand of the author
of 'The Green Carnation' is easily detected in the caustic wit and
pointed epigram."--_Jeannette L. Gilder, in the New York World._


_A STREET IN SUBURBIA._ By EDWIN PUGH. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00.

"Simplicity of style, strength, and delicacy of character study will
mark this book as one of the most significant of the year."--_New York
Press._

"Thoroughly entertaining, and more--it shows traces of a creative genius
something akin to Dickens."--_Boston Traveller._

"In many respects the best of all the books of lighter literature
brought out this season."--_Providence News._

"Highly pleasing and gracefully recorded reminiscences of early suburban
life and youthful experience told in a congenial spirit and in very
charming prose."--_Boston Courier._


_MAJESTY._ A Novel. By LOUIS COUPERUS. Translated by A. TEIXEIRA DE
MATTOS and ERNEST DOWSON. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00.

"There have been many workers among novelists in the field of royal
portraiture, but it may be safely stated that few of those who have
essayed this dubious path have achieved more striking results than M.
Couperus. 'Majesty' is an extraordinarily vivid romance of autocratic
imperialism."--_London Academy._

"No novelist whom we can call to mind has ever given the world such a
masterpiece of royal portraiture as Louis Couperus's striking romance
entitled 'Majesty.'"--_Philadelphia Record._

"There is not an uninteresting page in the book, and it ought to be read
by all who desire to keep in line with the best that is published in
modern fiction."--_Buffalo Commercial._


_THE NEW MOON._ By C. E. RAIMOND, author of "George Mandeville's
Husband," etc. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00.

"A delicate pathos makes itself felt as the narrative progresses, whose
cadences fall on the spirit's consciousness with a sweet and soothing
influence not to be measured in words."--_Boston Courier._

"One of the most impressive of recent works of fiction, both for its
matter and especially for its presentation."--_Milwaukee Journal._

"An intensely interesting story. A curious interweaving of old
superstitions which govern a nervous woman's selfish life, and the
brisk, modern ways of a wholesome English girl."--_Philadelphia Ledger._


_THE WISH._ A Novel. By HERMANN SUDERMANN. With a Biographical
Introduction by ELIZABETH LEE. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00.

"Contains some superb specimens of original thought."--_New York World._

"The style is direct and incisive, and holds the unflagging attention of
the reader."--_Boston Journal._

"A powerful story, very simple, very direct."--_Chicago Evening Post._


_SLEEPING FIRES._ By GEORGE GISSING, author of "In the Year of Jubilee,"
"Eve's Ransom," etc. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

In this striking story the author has treated an original motive with
rare self-command and skill. His book is most interesting as a story,
and remarkable as a literary performance.


_STONEPASTURES._ By ELEANOR STUART. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

"This is a strong bit of good literary workmanship.... The book has the
value of being a real sketch of our own mining regions, and of showing
how, even in the apparently dull round of work, there is still material
for a good bit of literature."--_Philadelphia Ledger._


_COURTSHIP BY COMMAND._ By M. M. BLAKE. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

"A bright, moving study of an unusually interesting period in the life
of Napoleon,... deliciously told; the characters are clearly, strongly,
and very delicately modeled, and the touches of color most artistically
done. 'Courtship by Command' is the most satisfactory Napoleon
_bonne-bouche_ we have had."--_New York Commercial Advertiser._


_THE WATTER'S MOU'._ By BRAM STOKER. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

"Here is a tale to stir the most sluggish nature.... It is like standing
on the deck of a wave tossed ship; you feel the soul of the storm go
into your blood."--_N. Y. Home Journal._

"The characters are strongly drawn, the descriptions are intensely
dramatic, and the situations are portrayed with rare vividness of
language. It is a thrilling story, told with great power."--_Boston
Advertiser._


_MASTER AND MAN._ By Count LEO TOLSTOY. With an Introduction by W. D.
HOWELLS. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

"Crowded with these characteristic touches which mark his literary
work."--_Public Opinion._

"Reveals a wonderful knowledge of the workings of the human mind, and it
tells a tale that not only stirs the emotions, but gives us a better
insight into our own hearts."--_San Francisco Argonaut._


_THE ZEIT-GEIST._ By L. DOUGALL, author of "The Mermaid," "Beggars All,"
etc. 16mo. Cloth, 75 cents.

"One of the best of the short stories of the day."--_Boston Journal._

"One of the most remarkable novels of the year."--_New York Commercial
Advertiser._

"Powerful in conception, treatment, and influence."--_Boston Globe._



NOVELS BY HALL CAINE.


_THE MANXMAN._ 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"A story of marvelous dramatic intensity, and in its ethical meaning has
a force comparable only to Hawthorne's 'Scarlet Letter.'"--_Boston
Beacon._

"A work of power which is another stone added to the foundation of
enduring fame to which Mr. Caine is yearly adding."--_Public Opinion._

"A wonderfully strong study of character; a powerful analysis of those
elements which go to make up the strength and weakness of a man, which
are at fierce warfare within the same breast; contending against each
other, as it were, the one to raise him to fame and power, the other to
drag him down to degradation and shame. Never in the whole range of
literature have we seen the struggle between these forces for supremacy
over the man more powerfully, more realistically delineated than Mr.
Caine pictures it."--_Boston Home Journal._


_THE DEEMSTER. A Romance of the Isle of Man._ 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"Hall Caine has already given us some very strong and fine work, and
'The Deemster' is a story of unusual power.... Certain passages and
chapters have an intensely dramatic grasp, and hold the fascinated
reader with a force rarely excited nowadays in literature."--_The
Critic._

"One of the strongest novels which has appeared in many a day."--_San
Francisco Chronicle._

"Fascinates the mind like the gathering and bursting of a
storm."--_Illustrated London News._

"Deserves to be ranked among the remarkable novels of the
day."--_Chicago Times._


_THE BONDMAN._ New edition. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"The welcome given to this story has cheered and touched me, but I am
conscious that, to win a reception so warm, such a book must have had
readers who brought to it as much as they took away.... I have called my
story a saga, merely because it follows the epic method, and I must not
claim for it at any point the weighty responsibility of history, or
serious obligations to the world of fact. But it matters not to me what
Icelanders may call 'The Bondman,' if they will honor me by reading it
in the open-hearted spirit and with the free mind with which they are
content to read of Grettir and of his fights with the Troll."--_From the
Author's Preface._


_CAPT'N DAVY'S HONEYMOON. A Manx Yarn._ 12mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth,
$1.00.

"A new departure by this author. Unlike his previous works, this little
tale is almost wholly humorous, with, however, a current of pathos
underneath. It is not always that an author can succeed equally well in
tragedy and in comedy, but it looks as though Mr. Hall Caine would be
one of the exceptions."--_London Literary World._

"It is pleasant to meet the author of 'The Deemster' in a brightly
humorous little story like this.... It shows the same observation of
Manx character, and much of the same artistic skill."--_Philadelphia
Times._



NOVELS BY MAARTEN MAARTENS.


_THE GREATER GLORY. A Story of High Life._ By MAARTEN MAARTENS, author
of "God's Fool," "Joost Avelingh," etc. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"Until the Appletons discovered the merits of Maarten Maartens, the
foremost of Dutch novelists, it is doubtful if many American readers
knew that there were Dutch novelists. His 'God's Fool' and 'Joost
Avelingh' made for him an American reputation. To our mind this just
published work of his is his best.... He is a master of epigram, an
artist in description, a prophet in insight."--_Boston Advertiser._

"It would take several columns to give any adequate idea of the superb
way in which the Dutch novelist has developed his theme and wrought out
one of the most impressive stories of the period.... It belongs to the
small class of novels which one can not afford to neglect."--_San
Francisco Chronicle._

"Maarten Maartens stands head and shoulders above the average novelist
of the day in intellectual subtlety and imaginative power."--_Boston
Beacon._


_GOD'S FOOL._ By MAARTEN MAARTENS. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"Throughout there is an epigrammatic force which would make palatable a
less interesting story of human lives or one less deftly told."--_London
Saturday Review._

"Perfectly easy, graceful, humorous.... The author's skill in
character-drawing is undeniable."--_London Chronicle._

"A remarkable work."--_New York Times._

"Maarten Maartens has secured a firm footing in the eddies of current
literature.... Pathos deepens into tragedy in the thrilling story of
'God's Fool.'"--_Philadelphia Ledger._

"Its preface alone stamps the author as one of the leading English
novelists of to-day."--_Boston Daily Advertiser._

"The story is wonderfully brilliant.... The interest never lags; the
style is realistic and intense; and there is a constantly underlying
current of subtle humor.... It is, in short, a book which no student of
modern literature should fail to read."--_Boston Times._

"A story of remarkable interest and point."--_New York Observer._


_JOOST AVELINGH._ By MAARTEN MAARTENS. 12mo. Cloth, $1.50.

"So unmistakably good as to induce the hope that an acquaintance with
the Dutch literature of fiction may soon become more general among
us."--_London Morning Post._

"In scarcely any of the sensational novels of the day will the reader
find more nature or more human nature."--_London Standard._

"A novel of a very high type. At once strongly realistic and powerfully
idealistic."--_London Literary World._

"Full of local color and rich in quaint phraseology and
suggestion."--_London Telegraph._

"Maarten Maartens is a capital story-teller."--_Pall Mall Gazette._

"Our English writers of fiction will have to look to their
laurels."--_Birmingham Daily Post._



TWO REMARKABLE AMERICAN NOVELS.


_THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE. An Episode of the American Civil War._
By STEPHEN CRANE. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00.

"Mr. Stephen Crane is a great artist, with something new to say, and
consequently with a new way of saying it.... In 'The Red Badge of
Courage' Mr. Crane has surely contrived a masterpiece.... He has painted
a picture that challenges comparisons with the most vivid scenes of
Tolstoy's 'La Guerre et la Paix' or of Zola's 'La Débâcle.'"--_London
New Review._

"In its whole range of literature we can call to mind nothing so
searching in its analysis, so manifestly impressed with the stamp of
truth, as 'The Red Badge of Courage.' ... A remarkable study of the
average mind under stress of battle.... We repeat, a really fine
achievement."--_London Daily Chronicle._

"Not merely a remarkable book; it is a revelation.... One feels that,
with perhaps one or two exceptions, all previous descriptions of modern
warfare have been the merest abstractions."--_St. James Gazette._

"Holds one irrevocably. There is no possibility of resistance when once
you are in its grip, from the first of the march of the troops to the
closing scenes.... Mr. Crane, we repeat, has written a remarkable book.
His insight and his power of realization amount to genius."--_Pall Mall
Gazette._

"There is nothing in American fiction to compare with it in the vivid,
uncompromising, almost aggressive vigor with which it depicts the
strangely mingled conditions that go to make up what men call war....
Mr. Crane has added to American literature something that has never been
done before, and that is, in its own peculiar way, inimitable."--_Boston
Beacon._

"Never before have we had the seamy side of glorious war so well
depicted.... The action of the story throughout is splendid, and all
aglow with color, movement, and vim. The style is as keen and bright as
a sword blade, and a Kipling has done nothing better in this
line."--_Chicago Evening Post._


_IN DEFIANCE OF THE KING. A Romance of the American Revolution._
By CHAUNCEY C. HOTCHKISS. 12mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00.

"The whole story is so completely absorbing that you will sit far into
the night to finish it. You lay it aside with the feeling that you have
seen a gloriously true picture of the Revolution."--_Boston Herald._

"The story is a strong one--a thrilling one. It causes the true American
to flush with excitement, to devour chapter after chapter until the eyes
smart; and it fairly smokes with patriotism."--_New York Mail and
Express._

"The heart beats quickly, and we feel ourselves taking part in the
scenes described.... Altogether the book is an addition to American
literature."--_Chicago Evening Post._

"One of the most readable novels of the year.... As a love romance it is
charming, while it is filled with thrilling adventure and deeds of
patriotic daring."--_Boston Advertiser._

"This romance seems to come the nearest to a satisfactory treatment in
fiction of the Revolutionary period that we have yet had."--_Buffalo
Courier._

"A clean, wholesome story, full of romance and interesting
adventure.... Holds the interest alike by the thread of the story
and by the incidents.... A remarkably well-balanced and absorbing
novel."--_Milwaukee Journal._


New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 72 Fifth Avenue.





End of Project Gutenberg's Chronicles of Martin Hewitt, by Arthur Morrison

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF MARTIN HEWITT ***

***** This file should be named 37820-8.txt or 37820-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/8/2/37820/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Rory OConor and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by Cornell University Digital Collections)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
