The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sisters, Complete, by Georg Ebers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sisters, Complete

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: October 16, 2006 [EBook #5466]
Last Updated: August 25, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SISTERS, COMPLETE ***



Produced by David Widger





THE SISTERS, Complete

By Georg Ebers

Translated from the German by Clara Bell




DEDICATION TO HERR EDUARD von HALLBERGER

Allow me, my dear friend, to dedicate these pages to you. I present them
to you at the close of a period of twenty years during which a warm and
fast friendship has subsisted between us, unbroken by any disagreement.
Four of my works have first seen the light under your care and have
wandered all over the world under the protection of your name. This, my
fifth book, I desire to make especially your own; it was partly written
in your beautiful home at Tutzing, under your hospitable roof, and I
desire to prove to you by some visible token that I know how to value
your affection and friendship and the many happy hours we have passed
together, refreshing and encouraging each other by a full and perfect
interchange of thought and sentiment.




PREFACE.

By a marvellous combination of circumstances a number of fragments of
the Royal Archives of Memphis have been preserved from destruction with
the rest, containing petitions written on papyrus in the Greek language;
these were composed by a recluse of Macedonian birth, living in the
Serapeum, in behalf of two sisters, twins, who served the god as
“Pourers out of the libations.”

At a first glance these petitions seem scarcely worthy of serious
consideration; but a closer study of their contents shows us that
we possess in them documents of the greatest value in the history
of manners. They prove that the great Monastic Idea--which under the
influence of Christianity grew to be of such vast moral and historical
significance--first struck root in one of the centres of heathen
religious practices; besides affording us a quite unexpected insight
into the internal life of the temple of Serapis, whose ruined walls
have, in our own day, been recovered from the sand of the desert by the
indefatigable industry of the French Egyptologist Monsieur Mariette.

I have been so fortunate as to visit this spot and to search through
every part of it, and the petitions I speak of have been familiar to me
for years. When, however, quite recently, one of my pupils undertook to
study more particularly one of these documents--preserved in the Royal
Library at Dresden--I myself reinvestigated it also, and this study
impressed on my fancy a vivid picture of the Serapeum under Ptolemy
Philometor; the outlines became clear and firm, and acquired color, and
it is this picture which I have endeavored to set before the reader, so
far as words admit, in the following pages.

I did not indeed select for my hero the recluse, nor for my heroines
the twins who are spoken of in the petitions, but others who might have
lived at a somewhat earlier date under similar conditions; for it is
proved by the papyrus that it was not once only and by accident that
twins were engaged in serving in the temple of Serapis, but that, on the
contrary, pair after pair of sisters succeeded each other in the office
of pouring out libations.

I have not invested Klea and Irene with this function, but have
simply placed them as wards of the Serapeum and growing up within its
precincts. I selected this alternative partly because the existing
sources of knowledge give us very insufficient information as to the
duties that might have been required of the twins, partly for other
reasons arising out of the plan of my narrative.

Klea and Irene are purely imaginary personages, but on the other hand
I have endeavored, by working from tolerably ample sources, to give a
faithful picture of the historical physiognomy of the period in which
they live and move, and portraits of the two hostile brothers Ptolemy
Philometor and Euergetes II., the latter of whom bore the nickname of
Physkon: the Stout. The Eunuch Eulaeus and the Roman Publius Cornelius
Scipio Nasica, are also historical personages.

I chose the latter from among the many young patricians living at the
time, partly on account of the strong aristocratic feeling which he
displayed, particularly in his later life, and partly because his
nickname of Serapion struck me. This name I account for in my own way,
although I am aware that he owed it to his resemblance to a person of
inferior rank.

For the further enlightenment of the reader who is not familiar with
this period of Egyptian history I may suggest that Cleopatra, the wife
of Ptolemy Philometor--whom I propose to introduce to the reader--must
not be confounded with her famous namesake, the beloved of Julius Caesar
and Mark Antony. The name Cleopatra was a very favorite one among the
Lagides, and of the queens who bore it she who has become famous through
Shakespeare (and more lately through Makart) was the seventh, the sister
and wife of Ptolemy XIV. Her tragical death from the bite of a viper or
asp did not occur until 134 years later than the date of my narrative,
which I have placed 164 years B.C.

At that time Egypt had already been for 169 years subject to the rule
of a Greek (Macedonian) dynasty, which owed its name as that of the
Ptolemies or Lagides to its founder Ptolemy Soter, the son of Lagus.
This energetic man, a general under Alexander the Great, when his
sovereign--333 B.C.--had conquered the whole Nile Valley, was appointed
governor of the new Satrapy; after Alexander’s death in 323 B.C.,
Ptolemy mounted the throne of the Pharaohs, and he and his descendants
ruled over Egypt until after the death of the last and most famous of
the Cleopatras, when it was annexed as a province to the Roman Empire.

This is not the place for giving a history of the successive Ptolemies,
but I may remark that the assimilating faculty exercised by the Greeks
over other nations was potent in Egypt; particularly as the result of
the powerful influence of Alexandria, the capital founded by Alexander,
which developed with wonderful rapidity to be one of the most splendid
centres of Hellenic culture and of Hellenic art and science.

Long before the united rule of the hostile brothers Ptolemy Philometor
and Euergetes--whose violent end will be narrated to the reader of this
story--Greek influence was marked in every event and detail of Egyptian
life, which had remained almost unaffected by the characteristics of
former conquerors--the Hyksos, the Assyrians and the Persians; and,
under the Ptolemies, the most inhospitable and exclusive nation of early
antiquity threw open her gates to foreigners of every race.

Alexandria was a metropolis even in the modern sense; not merely an
emporium of commerce, but a focus where the intellectual and religious
treasures of various countries were concentrated and worked up, and
transmitted to all the nations that desired them. I have resisted the
temptation to lay the scene of my story there, because in Alexandria
the Egyptian element was too much overlaid by the Greek, and the
too splendid and important scenery and decorations might easily have
distracted the reader’s attention from the dramatic interest of the
persons acting.

At that period of the Hellenic dominion which I have described, the
kings of Egypt were free to command in all that concerned the internal
affairs of their kingdom, but the rapidly-growing power of the Roman
Empire enabled her to check the extension of their dominion, just as she
chose.

Philometor himself had heartily promoted the immigration of Israelites
from Palestine, and under him the important Jewish community in
Alexandria acquired an influence almost greater than the Greek; and this
not only in the city but in the kingdom and over their royal protector,
who allowed them to build a temple to Jehovah on the shores of the
Nile, and in his own person assisted at the dogmatic discussions of the
Israelites educated in the Greek schools of the city. Euergetes II., a
highly gifted but vicious and violent man, was, on the contrary, just
as inimical to them; he persecuted them cruelly as soon as his brother’s
death left him sole ruler over Egypt. His hand fell heavily even on
the members of the Great Academy--the Museum, as it was called--of
Alexandria, though he himself had been devoted to the grave labors of
science, and he compelled them to seek a new home. The exiled sons of
learning settled in various cities on the shores of the Mediterranean,
and thus contributed not a little to the diffusion of the intellectual
results of the labors in the Museum.

Aristarchus, the greatest of Philometor’s learned contemporaries, has
reported for us a conversation in the king’s palace at Memphis. The
verses about “the puny child of man,” recited by Cleopatra in chapter
X., are not genuinely antique; but Friedrich Ritschl--the Aristarchus of
our own days, now dead--thought very highly of them and gave them to
me, some years ago, with several variations which had been added by an
anonymous hand, then still in the land of the living. I have added to
the first verse two of these, which, as I learned at the eleventh hour,
were composed by Herr H. L. von Held, who is now dead, and of whom
further particulars may be learned from Varnhagen’s ‘Biographisclaen
Denkmalen’. Vol. VII. I think the reader will thank me for directing
his attention to these charming lines and to the genius displayed in the
moral application of the main idea. Verses such as these might very well
have been written by Callimachus or some other poet of the circle of the
early members of the Museum of Alexandria.

I was also obliged in this narrative to concentrate, in one limited
canvas as it were, all the features which were at once the conditions
and the characteristics of a great epoch of civilization, and to give
them form and movement by setting the history of some of the men then
living before the reader, with its complications and its denouement. All
the personages of my story grew up in my imagination from a study of the
times in which they lived, but when once I saw them clearly in outline
they soon stood before my mind in a more distinct form, like people in
a dream; I felt the poet’s pleasure in creation, and as I painted them
their blood grew warm, their pulses began to beat and their spirit to
take wings and stir, each in its appropriate nature. I gave history her
due, but the historic figures retired into the background beside the
human beings as such; the representatives of an epoch became vehicles
for a Human Ideal, holding good for all time; and thus it is that
I venture to offer this transcript of a period as really a dramatic
romance.

Leipzig November 13, 1879. GEORG EBERS.




THE SISTERS.




CHAPTER I.

On the wide, desert plain of the Necropolis of Memphis stands the
extensive and stately pile of masonry which constitutes the Greek temple
of Serapis; by its side are the smaller sanctuaries of Asclepios, of
Anubis and of Astarte, and a row of long, low houses, built of unburnt
bricks, stretches away behind them as a troop of beggar children might
follow in the train of some splendidly attired king.

The more dazzlingly brilliant the smooth, yellow sandstone walls of the
temple appear in the light of the morning sun, the more squalid and mean
do the dingy houses look as they crouch in the outskirts. When the winds
blow round them and the hot sunbeams fall upon them, the dust rises
from them in clouds as from a dry path swept by the gale. Even the rooms
inside are never plastered, and as the bricks are of dried Nile-mud
mixed with chopped straw, of which the sharp little ends stick out from
the wall in every direction, the surface is as disagreeable to touch as
it is unpleasing to look at. When they were first built on the ground
between the temple itself and the wall which encloses the precincts, and
which, on the eastern side, divides the acacia-grove of Serapis in half,
they were concealed from the votaries visiting the temple by the back
wall of a colonnade on the eastern side of the great forecourt; but a
portion of this colonnade has now fallen down, and through the breach,
part of these modest structures are plainly visible with their doors
and windows opening towards the sanctuary--or, to speak more accurately,
certain rudely constructed openings for looking out of or for entering
by. Where there is a door there is no window, and where a gap in
the wall serves for a window, a door is dispensed with; none of the
chambers, however, of this long row of low one-storied buildings
communicate with each other.

A narrow and well-trodden path leads through the breach in the wall; the
pebbles are thickly strewn with brown dust, and the footway leads past
quantities of blocks of stone and portions of columns destined for the
construction of a new building which seems only to have been intermitted
the night before, for mallets and levers lie on and near the various
materials. This path leads directly to the little brick houses, and ends
at a small closed wooden door so roughly joined and so ill-hung that
between it and the threshold, which is only raised a few inches above
the ground, a fine gray cat contrives to squeeze herself through by
putting down her head and rubbing through the dust. As soon as she
finds herself once more erect on her four legs she proceeds to clean and
smooth her ruffled fur, putting up her back, and glancing with gleaming
eyes at the house she has just left, behind which at this moment the sun
is rising; blinded by its bright rays she turns away and goes on with
cautious and silent tread into the court of the temple.

The hovel out of which pussy has crept is small and barely furnished; it
would be perfectly dark too, but that the holes in the roof and the rift
in the door admit light into this most squalid room. There is nothing
standing against its rough gray walls but a wooden chest, near this a
few earthen bowls stand on the ground with a wooden cup and a gracefully
wrought jug of pure and shining gold, which looks strangely out of place
among such humble accessories. Quite in the background lie two mats of
woven bast, each covered with a sheepskin. These are the beds of the two
girls who inhabit the room, one of whom is now sitting on a low stool
made of palm-branches, and she yawns as she begins to arrange her long
and shining brown hair. She is not particularly skilful and even less
patient over this not very easy task, and presently, when a fresh tangle
checks the horn comb with which she is dressing it, she tosses the comb
on to the couch. She has not pulled it through her hair with any haste
nor with much force, but she shuts her eyes so tightly and sets her
white teeth so firmly in her red dewy lip that it might be supposed that
she had hurt herself very much.

A shuffling step is now audible outside the door; she opens wide her
tawny-hazel eyes, that have a look of gazing on the world in surprise,
a smile parts her lips and her whole aspect is as completely changed as
that of a butterfly which escapes from the shade into the sunshine where
the bright beams are reflected in the metallic lustre of its wings.

A hasty hand knocks at the ill-hung door, so roughly that it trembles on
its hinges, and the instant after a wooden trencher is shoved in through
the wide chink by which the cat made her escape; on it are a thin
round cake of bread and a shallow earthen saucer containing a little
olive-oil; there is no more than might perhaps be contained in half an
ordinary egg-shell, but it looks fresh and sweet, and shines in clear,
golden purity. The girl goes to the door, pulls in the platter, and, as
she measures the allowance with a glance, exclaims half in lament and
half in reproach:

“So little! and is that for both of us?”

As she speaks her expressive features have changed again and her
flashing eyes are directed towards the door with a glance of as much
dismay as though the sun and stars had been suddenly extinguished; and
yet her only grief is the smallness of the loaf, which certainly is
hardly large enough to stay the hunger of one young creature--and two
must share it; what is a mere nothing in one man’s life, to another may
be of great consequence and of terrible significance.

The reproachful complaint is heard by the messenger outside the door,
for the old woman who shoved in the trencher over the threshold answers
quickly but not crossly.

“Nothing more to-day, Irene.”

“It is disgraceful,” cries the girl, her eyes filling with tears, “every
day the loaf grows smaller, and if we were sparrows we should not have
enough to satisfy us. You know what is due to us and I will never cease
to complain and petition. Serapion shall draw up a fresh address for us,
and when the king knows how shamefully we are treated--”

“Aye! when he knows,” interrupted the old woman. “But the cry of the
poor is tossed about by many winds before it reaches the king’s ear. I
might find a shorter way than that for you and your sister if fasting
comes so much amiss to you. Girls with faces like hers and yours, my
little Irene, need never come to want.”

“And pray what is my face like?” asked the girl, and her pretty features
once more seemed to catch a gleam of sunshine.

“Why, so handsome that you may always venture to show it beside your
sister’s; and yesterday, in the procession, the great Roman sitting by
the queen looked as often at her as at Cleopatra herself. If you had
been there too he would not have had a glance for the queen, for you are
a pretty thing, as I can tell you. And there are many girls would sooner
hear those words then have a whole loaf--besides you have a mirror I
suppose, look in that next time you are hungry.”

The old woman’s shuffling steps retreated again and the girl snatched up
the golden jar, opened the door a little way to let in the daylight and
looked at herself in the bright surface; but the curve of the costly
vase showed her features all distorted, and she gaily breathed on the
hideous travestie that met her eyes, so that it was all blurred out by
the moisture. Then she smilingly put down the jar, and opening the chest
took from it a small metal mirror into which she looked again and yet
again, arranging her shining hair first in one way and then in another;
and she only laid it down when she remembered a certain bunch of violets
which had attracted her attention when she first woke, and which must
have been placed in their saucer of water by her sister some time the
day before. Without pausing to consider she took up the softly scented
blossoms, dried their green stems on her dress, took up the mirror again
and stuck the flowers in her hair.

How bright her eyes were now, and how contentedly she put out her hand
for the loaf. And how fair were the visions that rose before her young
fancy as she broke off one piece after another and hastily eat them
after slightly moistening them with the fresh oil. Once, at the festival
of the New Year, she had had a glimpse into the king’s tent, and there
she had seen men and women feasting as they reclined on purple cushions.
Now she dreamed of tables covered with costly vessels, was served in
fancy by boys crowned with flowers, heard the music of flutes and harps
and--for she was no more than a child and had such a vigorous young
appetite--pictured herself as selecting the daintiest and sweetest
morsels out of dishes of solid gold and eating till she was satisfied,
aye so perfectly satisfied that the very last mouthful of bread and the
very last drop of oil had disappeared.

But so soon as her hand found nothing more on the empty trencher the
bright illusion vanished, and she looked with dismay into the empty
oil-cup and at the place where just now the bread had been.

“Ah!” she sighed from the bottom of her heart; then she turned the
platter over as though it might be possible to find some more bread
and oil on the other side of it, but finally shaking her head she sat
looking thoughtfully into her lap; only for a few minutes however,
for the door opened and the slim form of her sister Klea appeared, the
sister whose meagre rations she had dreamily eaten up, and Klea had been
sitting up half the night sewing for her, and then had gone out
before sunrise to fetch water from the Well of the Sun for the morning
sacrifice at the altar of Serapis.

Klea greeted her sister with a loving glance but without speaking; she
seemed too exhausted for words and she wiped the drops from her forehead
with the linen veil that covered the back of her head as she seated
herself on the lid of the chest. Irene immediately glanced at the empty
trencher, considering whether she had best confess her guilt to the
wearied girl and beg for forgiveness, or divert the scolding she had
deserved by some jest, as she had often succeeded in doing before. This
seemed the easier course and she adopted it at once; she went up to her
sister quickly, but not quite unconcernedly, and said with mock gravity:

“Look here, Klea, don’t you notice anything in me? I must look like
a crocodile that has eaten a whole hippopotamus, or one of the sacred
snakes after it has swallowed a rabbit. Only think when I had eaten my
own bread I found yours between my teeth--quite unexpectedly--but now--”

Klea, thus addressed, glanced at the empty platter and interrupted her
sister with a low-toned exclamation. “Oh! I was so hungry.”

The words expressed no reproof, only utter exhaustion, and as the young
criminal looked at her sister and saw her sitting there, tired and worn
out but submitting to the injury that had been done her without a word
of complaint, her heart, easily touched, was filled with compunction and
regret. She burst into tears and threw herself on the ground before her,
clasping her knees and crying, in a voice broken with sobs:

“Oh Klea! poor, dear Klea, what have I done! but indeed I did not mean
any harm. I don’t know how it happened. Whatever I feel prompted to do I
do, I can’t help doing it, and it is not till it is done that I begin to
know whether it was right or wrong. You sat up and worried yourself for
me, and this is how I repay you--I am a bad girl! But you shall not go
hungry--no, you shall not.”

“Never mind; never mind,” said the elder, and she stroked her sister’s
brown hair with a loving hand.

But as she did so she came upon the violets fastened among the shining
tresses. Her lips quivered and her weary expression changed as she
touched the flowers and glanced at the empty saucer in which she had
carefully placed them the clay before. Irene at once perceived the
change in her sister’s face, and thinking only that she was surprised at
her pretty adornment, she said gaily: “Do you think the flowers becoming
to me?”

Klea’s hand was already extended to take the violets out of the brown
plaits, for her sister was still kneeling before her, but at this
question her arm dropped, and she said more positively and distinctly
than she had yet spoken and in a voice, whose sonorous but musical tones
were almost masculine and certainly remarkable in a girl:

“The bunch of flowers belongs to me; but keep it till it is faded, by
mid-day, and then return it to me.”

“It belongs to you?” repeated the younger girl, raising her eyes in
surprise to her sister, for to this hour what had been Klea’s had been
hers also. “But I always used to take the flowers you brought home; what
is there special in these?”

“They are only violets like any other violets,” replied Klea coloring
deeply. “But the queen has worn them.”

“The queen!” cried her sister springing to her feet and clasping her
hands in astonishment. “She gave you the flowers? And you never told me
till now? To be sure when you came home from the procession yesterday
you only asked me how my foot was and whether my clothes were whole and
then not another mortal word did you utter. Did Cleopatra herself give
you this bunch?”

“How should she?” retorted Klea. “One of her escort threw them to
me; but drop the subject pray! Give me the water, please, my mouth is
parched and I can hardly speak for thirst.”

The bright color dyed her cheeks again as she spoke, but Irene did not
observe it, for--delighted to make up for her evil doings by performing
some little service--she ran to fetch the water-jar; while Klea filled
and emptied her wooden bowl she said, gracefully lifting a small foot,
to show to her sister:

“Look, the cut is almost healed and I can wear my sandal again. Now
I shall tie it on and go and ask Serapion for some bread for you and
perhaps he will give us a few dates. Please loosen the straps for me
a little, here, round the ankle, my skin is so thin and tender that a
little thing hurts me which you would hardly feel. At mid-day I will go
with you and help fill the jars for the altar, and later in the day I
can accompany you in the procession which was postponed from yesterday.
If only the queen and the great foreigner should come again to look
on at it! That would be splendid! Now, I am going, and before you have
drunk the last bowl of water you shall have some bread, for I will coax
the old man so prettily that he can’t say ‘no.’”

Irene opened the door, and as the broad sunlight fell in it lighted up
tints of gold in her chestnut hair, and her sister looking after her
could almost fancy that the sunbeams had got entangled with the waving
glory round her head. The bunch of violets was the last thing she took
note of as Irene went out into the open air; then she was alone and she
shook her head gently as she said to herself: “I give up everything to
her and what I have left she takes from me. Three times have I met the
Roman, yesterday he gave me the violets, and I did want to keep those
for myself--and now--” As she spoke she clasped the bowl she still held
in her hand closely to her and her lips trembled pitifully, but only for
an instant; she drew herself up and said firmly: “But it is all as it
should be.”

Then she was silent; she set down the water-jar on the chest by her
side, passed the back of her hand across her forehead as if her head
were aching, then, as she sat gazing down dreamily into her lap, her
weary head presently fell on her shoulder and she was asleep.




CHAPTER II.

The low brick building of which the sisters’ room formed a part, was
called the Pastophorium, and it was occupied also by other persons
attached to the service of the temple, and by numbers of pilgrims. These
assembled here from all parts of Egypt, and were glad to pass a night
under the protection of the sanctuary.

Irene, when she quitted her sister, went past many doors--which had
been thrown open after sunrise--hastily returning the greetings of many
strange as well as familiar faces, for all glanced after her kindly as
though to see her thus early were an omen of happy augury, and she soon
reached an outbuilding adjoining the northern end of the Pastophorium;
here there was no door, but at the level of about a man’s height from
the ground there were six unclosed windows opening on the road. From the
first of these the pale and much wrinkled face of an old man looked down
on the girl as she approached. She shouted up to him in cheerful accents
the greeting familiar to the Hellenes “Rejoice!” But he, without moving
his lips, gravely and significantly signed to her with his lean hand
and with a glance from his small, fixed and expressionless eyes that she
should wait, and then handed out to her a wooden trencher on which lay a
few dates and half a cake of bread.

“For the altar of the god?” asked the girl. The old man nodded assent,
and Irene went on with her small load, with the assurance of a person
who knows exactly what is required of her; but after going a few steps
and before she had reached the last of the six windows she paused, for
she plainly heard voices and steps, and presently, at the end of the
Pastophorium towards which she was proceeding and which opened into a
small grove of acacias dedicated to Serapis--which was of much greater
extent outside the enclosing wall--appeared a little group of men whose
appearance attracted her attention; but she was afraid to go on towards
the strangers, so, leaning close up to the wall of the houses, she
awaited their departure, listening the while to what they were saying.

In front of these early visitors to the temple walked a man with a long
staff in his right hand speaking to the two gentlemen who followed, with
the air of a professional guide, who is accustomed to talk as if he were
reading to his audience out of an invisible book, and whom the hearers
are unwilling to interrupt with questions, because they know that his
knowledge scarcely extends beyond exactly what he says. Of his two
remarkable-looking hearers one was wrapped in a long and splendid robe
and wore a rich display of gold chains and rings, while the other wore
nothing over his short chiton but a Roman toga thrown over his left
shoulder.

His richly attired companion was an old man with a full and beardless
face and thin grizzled hair. Irene gazed at him with admiration and
astonishment, but when she had feasted her eyes on the stuffs and
ornaments he wore, she fixed them with much greater interest and
attention on the tall and youthful figure at his side.

“Like Hui, the cook’s fat poodle, beside a young lion,” thought she to
herself, as she noted the bustling step of the one and the independent
and elastic gait of the other. She felt irresistibly tempted to mimic
the older man, but this audacious impulse was soon quelled for scarcely
had the guide explained to the Roman that it was here that those pious
recluses had their cells who served the god in voluntary captivity, as
being consecrated to Serapis, and that they received their food through
those windows--here he pointed upwards with his staff when suddenly a
shutter, which the cicerone of this ill-matched pair had touched with
his stick, flew open with as much force and haste as if a violent gust
of wind had caught it, and flung it back against the wall.--And no less
suddenly a man’s head-of ferocious aspect and surrounded by a shock of
gray hair like a lion’s mane--looked out of the window and shouted to
him who had knocked, in a deep and somewhat overloud voice.

“If my shutter had been your back, you impudent rascal, your stick would
have hit the right thing. Or if I had a cudgel between my teeth instead
of a tongue, I would exercise it on you till it was as tired as that
of a preacher who has threshed his empty straw to his congregation for
three mortal hours. Scarcely is the sun risen when we are plagued by
the parasitical and inquisitive mob. Why! they will rouse us at midnight
next, and throw stones at our rotten old shutters. The effects of my
last greeting lasted you for three weeks--to-day’s I hope may act a
little longer. You, gentlemen there, listen to me. Just as the raven
follows an army to batten on the dead, so that fellow there stalks on
in front of strangers in order to empty their pockets--and you, who call
yourself an interpreter, and in learning Greek have forgotten the little
Egyptian you ever knew, mark this: When you have to guide strangers take
them to see the Sphinx, or to consult the Apis in the temple of Ptah,
or lead them to the king’s beast-garden at Alexandria, or the taverns
at Hanopus, but don’t bring them here, for we are neither pheasants, nor
flute-playing women, nor miraculous beasts, who take a pleasure in being
stared at. You, gentlemen, ought to choose a better guide than this
chatter-mag that keeps up its perpetual rattle when once you set it
going. As to yourselves I will tell you one thing: Inquisitive eyes are
intrusive company, and every prudent house holder guards himself against
them by keeping his door shut.”

Irene shrank back and flattened herself against the pilaster which
concealed her, for the shutter closed again with a slam, the recluse
pulling it to with a rope attached to its outer edge, and he was hidden
from the gaze of the strangers; but only for an instant, for the rusty
hinges on which the shutter was hanging were not strong enough to bear
such violent treatment, and slowly giving way it was about to fall. The
blustering hermit stretched out an arm to support it and save it; but
it was heavy, and his efforts would not have succeeded had not the young
man in Roman dress given his assistance and lifted up the shutter with
his hand and shoulder, without any effort, as if it were made of willow
laths instead of strong planks.

“A little higher still,” shouted the recluse to his assistant. “Let us
set the thing on its edge! so, push away, a little more. There, I have
propped up the wretched thing and there it may lie. If the bats pay me a
visit to-night I will think of you and give them your best wishes.”

“You may save yourself that trouble,” replied the young man with cool
dignity. “I will send you a carpenter who shall refix the shutter, and
we offer you our apologies for having been the occasion of the mischief
that has happened.”

The old man did not interrupt the speaker, but, when he had stared at
him from head to foot, he said: “You are strong and you speak fairly,
and I might like you well enough if you were in other company. I don’t
want your carpenter; only send me down a hammer, a wedge, and a few
strong nails. Now, you can do nothing more for me, so pack off!”

“We are going at once,” said the more handsomely dressed visitor in a
thin and effeminate voice. “What can a man do when the boys pelt him
with dirt from a safe hiding-place, but take himself off.”

“Be off, be off,” said the person thus described, with a laugh. “As
far off as Samothrace if you like, fat Eulaeus; you can scarcely have
forgotten the way there since you advised the king to escape thither
with all his treasure. But if you cannot trust yourself to find it
alone, I recommend you your interpreter and guide there to show you the
road.”

The Eunuch Eulaeus, the favorite councillor of King Ptolemy--called
Philometor (the lover of his mother)--turned pale at these words, cast
a sinister glance at the old man and beckoned to the young Roman; he
however was not inclined to follow, for the scolding old oddity had
taken his fancy--perhaps because he was conscious that the old man,
who generally showed no reserve in his dislikes, had a liking for him.
Besides, he found nothing to object to in his opinion of his companions,
so he turned to Eulaeus and said courteously:

“Accept my best thanks for your company so far, and do not let me detain
you any longer from your more important occupations on my account.”

Eulaeus bowed and replied, “I know what my duty is. The king entrusted
me with your safe conduct; permit me therefore to wait for you under the
acacias yonder.”

When Eulaeus and the guide had reached the green grove, Irene hoped to
find an opportunity to prefer her petition, but the Roman had stopped in
front of the old man’s cell, and had begun a conversation with him which
she could not venture to interrupt. She set down the platter with the
bread and dates that had been entrusted to her on a projecting stone
by her side with a little sigh, crossed her arms and feet as she leaned
against the wall, and pricked up her ears to hear their talk.

“I am not a Greek,” said the youth, “and you are quite mistaken in
thinking that I came to Egypt and to see you out of mere curiosity.”

“But those who come only to pray in the temple,” interrupted the other,
“do not--as it seems to me--choose an Eulaeus for a companion, or any
such couple as those now waiting for you under the acacias, and invoking
anything rather than blessings on your head; at any rate, for my own
part, even if I were a thief I would not go stealing in their company.
What then brought you to Serapis?”

“It is my turn now to accuse you of curiosity!”

“By all means,” cried the old man, “I am an honest dealer and quite
willing to take back the coin I am ready to pay away. Have you come to
have a dream interpreted, or to sleep in the temple yonder and have a
face revealed to you?”

“Do I look so sleepy,” said the Roman, “as to want to go to bed again
now, only an hour after sunrise?”

“It may be,” said the recluse, “that you have not yet fairly come to the
end of yesterday, and that at the fag-end of some revelry it occurred to
you that you might visit us and sleep away your headache at Serapis.”

“A good deal of what goes on outside these walls seems to come to your
ears,” retorted the Roman, “and if I were to meet you in the street
I should take you for a ship’s captain or a master-builder who had to
manage a number of unruly workmen. According to what I heard of you and
those like you in Athens and elsewhere, I expected to find you something
quite different.”

“What did you expect?” said Serapion laughing. “I ask you
notwithstanding the risk of being again considered curious.”

“And I am very willing to answer,” retorted the other, “but if I were to
tell you the whole truth I should run into imminent danger of being sent
off as ignominiously as my unfortunate guide there.”

“Speak on,” said the old man, “I keep different garments for different
men, and the worst are not for those who treat me to that rare dish--a
little truth. But before you serve me up so bitter a meal tell me, what
is your name?”

“Shall I call the guide?” said the Roman with an ironical laugh. “He
can describe me completely, and give you the whole history of my family.
But, joking apart, my name is Publius.”

“The name of at least one out of every three of your countrymen.”

“I am of the Cornelia gens and of the family of the Scipios,” continued
the youth in a low voice, as though he would rather avoid boasting of
his illustrious name.

“Indeed, a noble gentleman, a very grand gentleman!” said the recluse,
bowing deeply out of his window. “But I knew that beforehand, for at
your age and with such slender ankles to his long legs only a nobleman
could walk as you walk. Then Publius Cornelius--”

“Nay, call me Scipio, or rather by my first name only, Publius,” the
youth begged him. “You are called Serapion, and I will tell you what you
wish to know. When I was told that in this temple there were people who
had themselves locked into their little chambers never to quit them,
taking thought about their dreams and leading a meditative life, I
thought they must be simpletons or fools or both at once.”

“Just so, just so,” interrupted Serapion. “But there is a fourth
alternative you did not think of. Suppose now among these men there
should be some shut up against their will, and what if I were one of
those prisoners? I have asked you a great many questions and you have
not hesitated to answer, and you may know how I got into this miserable
cage and why I stay in it. I am the son of a good family, for my father
was overseer of the granaries of this temple and was of Macedonian
origin, but my mother was an Egyptian. I was born in an evil hour, on
the twenty-seventh day of the month of Paophi, a day which it is said in
the sacred books that it is an evil day and that the child that is
born in it must be kept shut up or else it will die of a snake-bite. In
consequence of this luckless prediction many of those born on the same
day as myself were, like me, shut up at an early age in this cage. My
father would very willingly have left me at liberty, but my uncle, a
caster of horoscopes in the temple of Ptah, who was all in all in my
mother’s estimation, and his friends with him, found many other evil
signs about my body, read misfortune for me in the stars, declared that
the Hathors had destined me to nothing but evil, and set upon her so
persistently that at last I was destined to the cloister--we lived here
at Memphis. I owe this misery to my dear mother and it was out of pure
affection that she brought it upon me. You look enquiringly at me--aye,
boy! life will teach you too the lesson that the worst hate that can
be turned against you often entails less harm upon you than blind
tenderness which knows no reason. I learned to read and write, and all
that is usually taught to the priests’ sons, but never to accommodate
myself to my lot, and I never shall.--Well, when my beard grew I
succeeded in escaping and I lived for a time in the world. I have been
even to Rome, to Carthage, and in Syria; but at last I longed to drink
Nile-water once more and I returned to Egypt. Why? Because, fool that I
was, I fancied that bread and water with captivity tasted better in
my own country than cakes and wine with freedom in the land of the
stranger.

“In my father’s house I found only my mother still living, for my father
had died of grief. Before my flight she had been a tall, fine woman,
when I came home I found her faded and dying. Anxiety for me, a
miserable wretch, had consumed her, said the physician--that was the
hardest thing to bear. When at last the poor, good little woman, who
could so fondly persuade me--a wild scamp--implored me on her death-bed
to return to my retreat, I yielded, and swore to her that I would stay
in my prison patiently to the end, for I am as water is in northern
countries, a child may turn me with its little hand or else I am as hard
and as cold as crystal. My old mother died soon after I had taken this
oath. I kept my word as you see--and you have seen too how I endure my
fate.”

“Patiently enough,” replied Publius, “I should writhe in my chains far
more rebelliously than you, and I fancy it must do you good to rage and
storm sometimes as you did just now.”

“As much good as sweet wine from Chios!” exclaimed the anchorite,
smacking his lips as if he tasted the noble juice of the grape, and
stretching his matted head as far as possible out of the window. Thus it
happened that he saw Irene, and called out to her in a cheery voice:

“What are you doing there, child? You are standing as if you were
waiting to say good-morning to good fortune.”

The girl hastily took up the trencher, smoothed down her hair with her
other hand, and as she approached the men, coloring slightly, Publius
feasted his eyes on her in surprise and admiration.

But Serapion’s words had been heard by another person, who now emerged
from the acacia-grove and joined the young Roman, exclaiming before he
came up with them:

“Waiting for good fortune! does the old man say? And you can hear it
said, Publius, and not reply that she herself must bring good fortune
wherever she appears.”

The speaker was a young Greek, dressed with extreme care, and he now
stuck the pomegranate-blossom he carried in his hand behind his ear,
so as to shake hands with his friend Publius; then he turned his fair,
saucy, almost girlish face with its finely-cut features up to the
recluse, wishing to attract his attention to himself by his next speech.

“With Plato’s greeting ‘to deal fairly and honestly’ do I approach you!”
 he cried; and then he went on more quietly: “But indeed you can hardly
need such a warning, for you belong to those who know how to conquer
true--that is the inner--freedom; for who can be freer than he who needs
nothing? And as none can be nobler than the freest of the free, accept
the tribute of my respect, and scorn not the greeting of Lysias of
Corinth, who, like Alexander, would fain exchange lots with you, the
Diogenes of Egypt, if it were vouchsafed to him always to see out the
window of your mansion--otherwise not very desirable--the charming form
of this damsel--”

“That is enough, young man,” said Serapion, interrupting the Greek’s
flow of words. “This young girl belongs to the temple, and any one who
is tempted to speak to her as if she were a flute-player will have to
deal with me, her protector. Yes, with me; and your friend here will
bear me witness that it may not be altogether to your advantage to have
a quarrel with such as I. Now, step back, young gentlemen, and let the
girl tell me what she needs.”

When Irene stood face to face with the anchorite, and had told him
quickly and in a low voice what she had done, and that her sister Klea
was even now waiting for her return, Serapion laughed aloud, and then
said in a low tone, but gaily, as a father teases his daughter:

“She has eaten enough for two, and here she stands, on her tiptoes,
reaching up to my window, as if it were not an over-fed girl that stood
in her garments, but some airy sprite. We may laugh, but Klea, poor
thing, she must be hungry?”

Irene made no reply, but she stood taller on tiptoe than ever, put her
face up to Serapion, nodding her pretty head at him again and again, and
as she looked roguishly and yet imploringly into his eyes Serapion went
on:

“And so I am to give my breakfast to Klea, that is what you want; but
unfortunately that breakfast is a thing of the past and beyond recall;
nothing is left of it but the date-stones. But there, on the trencher in
your hand, is a nice little meal.”

“That is the offering to Serapis sent by old Phibis,” answered the girl.

“Hm, hm--oh! of course!” muttered the old man. “So long as it is for a
god--surely he might do without it better than a poor famishing girl.”

Then he went on, gravely and emphatically, as a teacher who has made an
incautious speech before his pupils endeavors to rectify it by another
of more solemn import.

“Certainly, things given into our charge should never be touched;
besides, the gods first and man afterwards. Now if only I knew what
to do. But, by the soul of my father! Serapis himself sends us what we
need. Step close up to me, noble Scipio--or Publius, if I may so call
you--and look out towards the acacias. Do you see my favorite, your
cicerone, and the bread and roast fowls that your slave has brought him
in that leathern wallet? And now he is setting a wine-jar on the carpet
he has spread at the big feet of Eulaeus--they will be calling you to
share the meal in a minute, but I know of a pretty child who is very
hungry--for a little white cat stole away her breakfast this morning.
Bring me half a loaf and the wing of a fowl, and a few pomegranates if
you like, or one of the peaches Eulaeus is so judiciously fingering.
Nay--you may bring two of them, I have a use for both.”

“Serapion!” exclaimed Irene in mild reproof and looking down at the
ground; but the Greek answered with prompt zeal, “More, much more than
that I can bring you. I hasten--”

“Stay here,” interrupted Publius with decision, holding him back by the
shoulder. “Serapion’s request was addressed to me, and I prefer to do my
friend’s pleasure in my own person.”

“Go then,” cried the Greek after Publius as he hurried away. “You will
not allow me even thanks from the sweetest lips in Memphis. Only look,
Serapion, what a hurry he is in. And now poor Eulaeus has to get up;
a hippopotamus might learn from him how to do so with due awkwardness.
Well! I call that making short work of it--a Roman never asks before he
takes; he has got all he wants and Eulaeus looks after him like a cow
whose calf has been stolen from her; to be sure I myself would rather
eat peaches than see them carried away! Oh if only the people in the
Forum could see him now! Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, own grandson
to the great Africanus, serving like a slave at a feast with a dish in
each hand! Well Publius, what has Rome the all conquering brought home
this time in token of victory?”

“Sweet peaches and a roast pheasant,” said Cornelius laughing, and he
handed two dishes into the anchorite’s window; “there is enough left
still for the old man.”

“Thanks, many thanks!” cried Serapion, beckoning to Irene, and he gave
her a golden-yellow cake of wheaten bread, half of the roast bird,
already divided by Eulaeus, and two peaches, and whispered to her: “Klea
may come for the rest herself when these men are gone. Now thank this
kind gentleman and go.”

For an instant the girl stood transfixed, her face crimson with
confusion and her glistening white teeth set in her nether lip,
speechless, face to face with the young Roman and avoiding the earnest
gaze of his black eyes. Then she collected herself and said:

“You are very kind. I cannot make any pretty speeches, but I thank you
most kindly.”

“And your very kind thanks,” replied Publius, “add to the delights of
this delightful morning. I should very much like to possess one of the
violets out of your hair in remembrance of this day--and of you.”

“Take them all,” exclaimed Irene, hastily taking the bunch from her hair
and holding them out to the Roman; but before he could take them she
drew back her hand and said with an air of importance:

“The queen has had them in her hand. My sister Klea got them yesterday
in the procession.”

Scipio’s face grew grave at these words, and he asked with commanding
brevity and sharpness:

“Has your sister black hair and is she taller than you are, and did she
wear a golden fillet in the procession? Did she give you these flowers?
Yes--do you say? Well then, she had the bunch from me, but although she
accepted them she seems to have taken very little pleasure in them, for
what we value we do not give away--so there they may go, far enough!”

With these words he flung the flowers over the house and then he went
on:

“But you, child, you shall be held guiltless of their loss. Give me your
pomegranate-flower, Lysias!”

“Certainly not,” replied the Greek. “You chose to do pleasure to your
friend Serapion in your own person when you kept me from going to fetch
the peaches, and now I desire to offer this flower to the fair Irene
with my own hand.”

“Take this flower,” said Publius, turning his back abruptly on the girl,
while Lysias laid the blossom on the trencher in the maiden’s hand; she
felt the rough manners of the young Roman as if she had been touched by
a hard hand; she bowed silently and timidly and then quickly ran home.

Publius looked thoughtfully after her till Lysias called out to him:

“What has come over me? Has saucy Eros perchance wandered by mistake
into the temple of gloomy Serapis this morning?”

“That would not be wise,” interrupted the recluse, “for Cerberus, who
lies at the foot of our God, would soon pluck the fluttering wings of
the airy youngster,” and as he spoke he looked significantly at the
Greek.

“Aye! if he let himself be caught by the three-headed monster,” laughed
Lysias. “But come away now, Publius; Eulaeus has waited long enough.”

“You go to him then,” answered the Roman, “I will follow soon; but first
I have a word to say to Serapion.”

Since Irene’s disappearance, the old man had turned his attention to the
acacia-grove where Eulaeus was still feasting. When the Roman addressed
him he said, shaking his great head with dissatisfaction:

“Your eyes of course are no worse than mine. Only look at that man
munching and moving his jaws and smacking his lips. By Serapis! you can
tell the nature of a man by watching him eat. You know I sit in my cage
unwillingly enough, but I am thankful for one thing about it, and that
is that it keeps me far from all that such a creature as Eulaeus calls
enjoyment--for such enjoyment, I tell you, degrades a man.”

“Then you are more of a philosopher than you wish to seem,” replied
Publius.

“I wish to seem nothing,” answered the anchorite.

“For it is all the same to me what others think of me. But if a man who
has nothing to do and whose quiet is rarely disturbed, and who thinks
his own thoughts about many things is a philosopher, you may call me
one if you like. If at any time you should need advice you may come
here again, for I like you, and you might be able to do me an important
service.”

“Only speak,” interrupted the Roman, “I should be glad from my heart to
be of any use to you.”

“Not now,” said Serapion softly. “But come again when you have
time--without your companions there, of course--at any rate without
Eulaeus, who of all the scoundrels I ever came across is the very worst.
It may be as well to tell you at once that what I might require of you
would concern not myself but the weal or woe of the water-bearers, the
two maidens you have seen and who much need protection.”

“I came here for my parents’ sake and for Klea’s, and not on your
account,” said Publius frankly. “There is something in her mien and in
her eyes which perhaps may repel others but which attracts me. How came
so admirable a creature in your temple?”

“When you come again,” replied the recluse, “I will tell you the history
of the sisters and what they owe to Eulaeus. Now go, and understand
me when I say the girls are well guarded. This observation is for the
benefit of the Greek who is but a heedless fellow; but you, when you
know who the girls are, will help me to protect them.”

“That I would do as it is, with real pleasure,” replied Publius; he took
leave of the recluse and called out to Eulaeus.

“What a delightful morning it has been!”

“It would have been pleasanter for me,” replied Eulaeus, “if you had not
deprived me of your company for such a long time.”

“That is to say,” answered the Roman, “that I have stayed away longer
than I ought.”

“You behave after the fashion of your race,” said the other bowing low.
“They have kept even kings waiting in their ante-chambers.”

“But you do not wear a crown,” said Publius evasively. “And if any one
should know how to wait it is an old courtier, who--”

“When it is at the command of his sovereign,” interrupted Eulaeus, “the
old courtier may submit, even when youngsters choose to treat him with
contempt.”

“That hits us both,” said Publius, turning to Lysias. “Now you may
answer him, I have heard and said enough.”




CHAPTER III.

Irene’s foot was not more susceptible to the chafing of a strap than her
spirit to a rough or an unkind word; the Roman’s words and manner had
hurt her feelings.

She went towards home with a drooping head and almost crying, but before
she had reached it her eyes fell on the peaches and the roast bird she
was carrying. Her thoughts flew to her sister and how much the famishing
girl would relish so savory a meal; she smiled again, her eyes shone
with pleasure, and she went on her way with a quickened step. It never
once occurred to her that Klea would ask for the violets, or that
the young Roman could be anything more to her sister than any other
stranger.

She had never had any other companion than Klea, and after work, when
other girls commonly discussed their longings and their agitations and
the pleasures and the torments of love, these two used to get home so
utterly wearied that they wanted nothing but peace and sleep. If they
had sometimes an hour for idle chat Klea ever and again would tell some
story of their old home, and Irene, who even within the solemn walls of
the temple of Serapis sought and found many innocent pleasures, would
listen to her willingly, and interrupt her with questions and with
anecdotes of small events or details which she fancied she remembered
of her early childhood, but which in fact she had first learnt from her
sister, though the force of a lively imagination had made them seem a
part and parcel of her own experience.

Klea had not observed Irene’s long absence since, as we know, shortly
after her sister had set out, overpowered by hunger and fatigue she had
fallen asleep. Before her nodding head had finally sunk and her drooping
eyelids had closed, her lips now and then puckered and twitched as if
with grief; then her features grew tranquil, her lips parted softly and
a smile gently lighted up her blushing cheeks, as the breath of spring
softly thaws a frozen blossom. This sleeper was certainly not born for
loneliness and privation, but to enjoy and to keep love and happiness.

It was warm and still, very still in the sisters’ little room. The buzz
of a fly was audible now and again, as it flew round the little oil-cup
Irene had left empty, and now and again the breathing of the sleeper,
coming more and more rapidly. Every trace of fatigue had vanished from
Klea’s countenance, her lips parted and pouted as if for a kiss, her
cheeks glowed, and at last she raised both hands as if to defend herself
and stammered out in her dream, “No, no, certainly not--pray, do not! my
love--” Then her arm fell again by her side, and dropping on the chest
on which she was sitting, the blow woke her. She slowly opened her eyes
with a happy smile; then she raised her long silken lashes till her eyes
were open, and she gazed fixedly on vacancy as though something strange
had met her gaze. Thus she sat for some time without moving; then she
started up, pressed her hand on her brow and eyes, and shuddering as
if she had seen something horrible or were shivering with ague, she
murmured in gasps, while she clenched her teeth:

“What does this mean? How come I by such thoughts? What demons are these
that make us do and feel things in our dreams which when we are waking
we should drive far, far from our thoughts? I could hate myself, despise
and hate myself for the sake of those dreams since, wretch that I am!
I let him put his arm round me--and no bitter rage--ah! no--something
quite different, something exquisitely sweet, thrilled through my soul.”

As she spoke, she clenched her fists and pressed them against her
temples; then again her arms dropped languidly into her lap, and shaking
her head she went on in an altered and softened voice:

“Still-it was only in a dream and--Oh! ye eternal gods--when we are
asleep--well! and what then? Has it come to this; to impure thoughts I
am adding self-deception! No, this dream was sent by no demon, it was
only a distorted reflection of what I felt yesterday and the day before,
and before that even, when the tall stranger looked straight into my
eyes--four times he has done so now--and then--how many hours ago, gave
me the violets. Did I even turn away my face or punish his boldness with
an angry look? Is it not sometimes possible to drive away an enemy with
a glance? I have often succeeded when a man has looked after us; but
yesterday I could not, and I was as wide awake then as I am at this
moment. What does the stranger want with me? What is it he asks with his
penetrating glance, which for days has followed me wherever I turn, and
robs me of peace even in my sleep? Why should I open my eyes--the gates
of the heart--to him? And now the poison poured in through them is
seething there; but I will tear it out, and when Irene comes home I will
tread the violets into the dust, or leave them with her; she will soon
pull them to pieces or leave them to wither miserably--for I will remain
pure-minded, even in my dreams--what have I besides in the world?”

At these words she broke off her soliloquy, for she heard Irene’s voice,
a sound that must have had a favorable effect on her spirit, for she
paused, and the bitter expression her beautiful features had but just
now worn disappeared as she murmured, drawing a deep breath:

“I am not utterly bereft and wretched so long as I have her, and can
hear her voice.”

Irene, on her road home, had given the modest offerings of the anchorite
Phibis into the charge of one of the temple-servants to lay before the
altar of Serapis, and now as she came into the room she hid the platter
with the Roman’s donation behind her, and while still in the doorway,
called out to her sister:

“Guess now, what have I here?”

“Bread and dates from Serapion,” replied Klea.

“Oh, dear no!” cried the other, holding out the plate to her sister,
“the very nicest dainties, fit for gods and kings. Only feel this peach,
does not it feel as soft as one of little Philo’s cheeks? If I could
always provide such a substitute you would wish I might eat up your
breakfast every day. And now do you know who gave you all this? No, that
you will never guess! The tall Roman gave them me, the same you had the
violets from yesterday.”

Klea’s face turned crimson, and she said shortly and decidedly:

“How do you know that?”

“Because he told me so himself,” replied Irene in a very altered tone,
for her sister’s eyes were fixed upon her with an expression of stern
gravity, such as Irene had never seen in her before.

“And where are the violets?” asked Klea.

“He took them, and his friend gave me this pomegranate-flower,”
 stammered Irene. “He himself wanted to give it me, but the Greek--a
handsome, merry man--would not permit it, and laid the flower there on
the platter. Take it--but do not look at me like that any longer, for I
cannot bear it!”

“I do not want it,” said her sister, but not sharply; then, looking
down, she asked in a low voice: “Did the Roman keep the violets?”

“He kept--no, Klea--I will not tell you a lie! He flung them over the
house, and said such rough things as he did it, that I was frightened
and turned my back upon him quickly, for I felt the tears coming into
my eyes. What have you to do with the Roman? I feel so anxious, so
frightened--as I do sometimes when a storm is gathering and I am afraid
of it. And how pale your lips are! that comes of long fasting, no
doubt--eat now, as much as you can. But Klea! why do you look at me
so--and look so gloomy and terrible? I cannot bear that look, I cannot
bear it!”

Irene sobbed aloud, and her sister went up to her, stroked her soft hair
from her brow, kissed her kindly, and said:

“I am not angry with you, child, and did not mean to hurt you. If only I
could cry as you do when clouds overshadow my heart, the blue sky would
shine again with me as soon as it does with you. Now dry your eyes,
go up to the temple, and enquire at what hour we are to go to the
singing-practice, and when the procession is to set out.”

Irene obeyed; she went out with downcast eyes, but once out she looked
up again brightly, for she remembered the procession, and it occurred
to her that she would then see again the Roman’s gay acquaintance,
and turning back into the room she laid her pomegranate-blossom in the
little bowl out of which she had formerly taken the violets, kissed her
sister as gaily as ever, and then reflected as to whether she would wear
the flower in her hair or in her bosom. Wear it, at any rate, she must,
for she must show plainly that she knew how to value such a gift.

As soon as Klea was alone she seized the trencher with a vehement
gesture, gave the roast bird to the gray cat, who had stolen back into
the room, turning away her head, for the mere smell of the pheasant was
like an insult. Then, while the cat bore off her welcome spoils into
a corner, she clutched a peach and raised her hand to fling it away
through a gap in the roof of the room; but she did not carry out her
purpose, for it occurred to her that Irene and little Philo, the son of
the gate-keeper, might enjoy the luscious fruit; so she laid it back on
the dish and took up the bread, for she was painfully hungry.

She was on the point of breaking the golden-brown cake, but acting on a
rapid impulse she tossed it back on the trencher saying to herself: “At
any rate I will owe him nothing; but I will not throw away the gifts of
the gods as he threw away my violets, for that would be a sin. All is
over between him and me, and if he appears to-day in the procession, and
if he chooses to look at me again I will compel my eyes to avoid meeting
his--aye, that I will, and will carry it through. But, Oh eternal gods!
and thou above all, great Serapis, whom I heartily serve, there is
another thing I cannot do without your aid. Help me, oh! help me to
forget him, that my very thoughts may remain pure.”

With these words she flung herself on her knees before the chest,
pressed her brow against the hard wood, and strove to pray.

Only for one thing did she entreat the gods; for strength to forget the
man who had betrayed her into losing her peace of mind.

But just as swift clouds float across the sky, distracting the labors
of the star-gazer, who is striving to observe some remote planet--as the
clatter of the street interrupts again and again some sweet song we fain
would hear, marring it with its harsh discords--so again and again the
image of the young Roman came across Klea’s prayers for release from
that very thought, and at last it seemed to her that she was like a
man who strives to raise a block of stone by the exertion of his utmost
strength, and who weary at last of lifting the stone is crushed to the
earth by its weight; still she felt that, in spite of all her prayers
and efforts, the enemy she strove to keep off only came nearer, and
instead of flying from her, overmastered her soul with a grasp from
which she could not escape.

Finally she gave up the unavailing struggle, cooled her burning face
with cold water, and tightened the straps of her sandals to go to the
temple; near the god himself she hoped she might in some degree recover
the peace she could not find here.

Just at the door she met Irene, who told her that the singing-practice
was put off, on account of the procession which was fixed for four hours
after noon. And as Klea went towards the temple her sister called after
her.

“Do not stay too long though, water will be wanted again directly for
the libations.”

“Then will you go alone to the work?” asked Klea; “there cannot be
very much wanted, for the temple will soon be empty on account of the
procession. A few jars-full will be enough. There is a cake of bread and
a peach in there for you; I must keep the other for little Philo.”




CHAPTER IV.

Klea went quickly on towards the temple, without listening to Irene’s
excuses. She paid no heed to the worshippers who filled the forecourt,
praying either with heads bent low or with uplifted arms or, if they
were of Egyptian extraction, kneeling on the smooth stone pavement, for,
even as she entered, she had already begun to turn in supplication to
the divinity.

She crossed the great hall of the sanctuary, which was open only to
the initiated and to the temple-servants, of whom she was one. Here all
around her stood a crowd of slender columns, their shafts crowned with
gracefully curved flower calyxes, like stems supporting lilies, over
her head she saw in the ceiling an image of the midnight sky with the
bright, unresting and ever-restful stars; the planets and fixed stars
in their golden barks looked down on her silently. Yes! here were the
twilight and stillness befitting a personal communion with the divinity.

The pillars appeared to her fancy like a forest of giant growth, and it
seemed to her that the perfume of the incense emanated from the gorgeous
floral capitals that crowned them; it penetrated her senses, which
were rendered more acute by fasting and agitation, with a sort of
intoxication. Her eyes were raised to heaven, her arms crossed over
her bosom as she traversed this vast hall, and with trembling steps
approached a smaller and lower chamber, where in the furthest and
darkest background a curtain of heavy and costly material veiled the
brazen door of the holy of holies.

Even she was forbidden to approach this sacred place; but to-day she was
so filled with longing for the inspiring assistance of the god, that she
went on to the holy of holies in spite of the injunction she had never
yet broken, not to approach it. Filled with reverent awe she sank down
close to the door of the sacred chamber, shrinking close into the angle
formed between a projecting door-post and the wall of the great hall.

The craving desire to seek and find a power outside us as guiding the
path of our destiny is common to every nation, to every man; it is as
surely innate in every being gifted with reason--many and various as
these are--as the impulse to seek a cause when we perceive an effect, to
see when light visits the earth, or to hear when swelling waves of
sound fall on our ear. Like every other gift, no doubt that of religious
sensibility is bestowed in different degrees on different natures.
In Klea it had always been strongly developed, and a pious mother had
cultivated it by precept and example, while her father always had taught
her one thing only: namely to be true, inexorably true, to others as to
herself.

Afterwards she had been daily employed in the service of the god whom
she was accustomed to regard as the greatest and most powerful of all
the immortals, for often from a distance she had seen the curtain of the
sanctuary pushed aside, and the statue of Serapis with the Kalathos
on his head, and a figure of Cerberus at his feet, visible in the
half-light of the holy of holies; and a ray of light, flashing through
the darkness as by a miracle, would fall upon his brow and kiss his lips
when his goodness was sung by the priests in hymns of praise. At other
times the tapers by the side of the god would be lighted or extinguished
spontaneously.

Then, with the other believers, she would glorify the great lord of the
other world, who caused a new sun to succeed each that was extinguished,
and made life grow up out of death; who resuscitated the dead, lifting
them up to be equal with him, if on earth they had reverenced truth and
were found faithful by the judges of the nether world.

Truth--which her father had taught her to regard as the best possession
of life--was rewarded by Serapis above all other virtues; hearts were
weighed before him in a scale against truth, and whenever Klea tried to
picture the god in human form he wore the grave and mild features of her
father, and she fancied him speaking in the words and tones of the man
to whom she owed her being, who had been too early snatched from her,
who had endured so much for righteousness’ sake, and from whose lips
she had never heard a single word that might not have beseemed the god
himself. And, as she crouched closely in the dark angle by the holy of
holies, she felt herself nearer to her father as well as to the god, and
accused herself pitilessly, in that unmaidenly longings had stirred her
heart, that she had been insincere to herself and Irene, nay in that if
she could not succeed in tearing the image of the Roman from her heart
she would be compelled either to deceive her sister or to sadden the
innocent and careless nature of the impressionable child, whom she
was accustomed to succor and cherish as a mother might. On her, even
apparently light matters weighed oppressively, while Irene could throw
off even grave and serious things, blowing them off as it were into the
air, like a feather. She was like wet clay on which even the light touch
of a butterfly leaves a mark, her sister like a mirror from which the
breath that has dimmed it instantly and entirely vanishes.

“Great God!” she murmured in her prayer, “I feel as if the Roman had
branded my very soul. Help thou me to efface the mark; help me to
become as I was before, so that I may look again in Irene’s eyes without
concealment, pure and true, and that I may be able to say to myself,
as I was wont, that I had thought and acted in such a way as my father
would approve if he could know it.”

She was still praying thus when the footsteps and voices of two men
approaching the holy of holies startled her from her devotions; she
suddenly became fully conscious of the fact that she was in a forbidden
spot, and would be severely punished if she were discovered.

“Lock that door,” cried one of the new-comers to his companion, pointing
to the door which led from the prosekos into the pillared hall, “none,
even of the initiated, need see what you are preparing here for us--”

Klea recognized the voice of the high-priest, and thought for a moment
of stepping forward and confessing her guilt; but, though she did not
usually lack courage, she did not do this, but shrank still more closely
into her hiding-place, which was perfectly dark when the brazen door of
the room; which had no windows, was closed. She now perceived that the
curtain and door were opened which closed the inmost sanctuary, she
heard one of the men twirling the stick which was to produce fire, saw
the first gleam of light from it streaming out of the holy of holies,
and then heard the blows of a hammer and the grating sound of a file.

The quiet sanctum was turned into a forge, but noisy as were the
proceedings within, it seemed to Klea that the beating of her own heart
was even louder than the brazen clatter of the tools wielded by Krates;
he was one of the oldest of the priests of Serapis, who was chief in
charge of the sacred vessels, who was wont never to speak to any one
but the high-priest, and who was famous even among his Greek
fellow-countrymen for the skill with which he could repair broken
metal-work, make the securest locks, and work in silver and gold.

When the sisters first came into the temple five years since, Irene had
been very much afraid of this man, who was so small as almost to be a
dwarf, broad shouldered and powerfully knit, while his wrinkled face
looked like a piece of rough cork-bark, and he was subject to a painful
complaint in his feet which often prevented his walking; her fears had
not vexed but only amused the priestly smith, who whenever he met the
child, then eleven years old, would turn his lips up to his big red
nose, roll his eyes, and grunt hideously to increase the terror that
came over her.

He was not ill-natured, but he had neither wife nor child, nor brother,
nor sister, nor friend, and every human being so keenly desires that
others should have some feeling about him, that many a one would rather
be feared than remain unheeded.

After Irene had got over her dread she would often entreat the old
man--who was regarded as stern and inaccessible by all the other
dwellers in the temple--in her own engaging and coaxing way to make a
face for her, and he would do it and laugh when the little one, to his
delight and her own, was terrified at it and ran away; and just lately
when Irene, having hurt her foot, was obliged to keep her room for a
few days, an unheard of thing had occurred: he had asked Klea with the
greatest sympathy how her sister was getting on, and had given her a
cake for her.

While Krates was at his work not a word passed between him and the
high-priest. At length he laid down the hammer, and said:

“I do not much like work of this kind, but this, I think, is successful
at any rate. Any temple-servant, hidden here behind the altar, can now
light or extinguish the lamps without the illusion being detected by the
sharpest. Go now and stand at the door of the great hall and speak the
word.”

Klea heard the high-priest accede to this request and cry in a
chanting voice: “Thus he commands the night and it becomes day, and the
extinguished taper and lo! it flames with brightness. If indeed thou art
nigh, Oh Serapis! manifest thyself to us.”

At these words a bright stream of light flashed from the holy of holies,
and again was suddenly extinguished when the high-priest sang: “Thus
showest thou thyself as light to the children of truth, but dost punish
with darkness the children of lies.”

“Again?” asked Krates in a voice which conveyed a desire that the answer
might be ‘No.’

“I must trouble you,” replied the high-priest. “Good! the performance
went much better this time. I was always well assured of your skill; but
consider the particular importance of this affair. The two kings and the
queen will probably be present at the solemnity, certainly Philometor
and Cleopatra will, and their eyes are wide open; then the Roman who has
already assisted four times at the procession will accompany them, and
if I judge him rightly he, like many of the nobles of his nation, is
one of those who can trust themselves when it is necessary to be content
with the old gods of their fathers; and as regards the marvels we are
able to display to them, they do not take them to heart like the poor
in spirit, but measure and weigh them with a cool and unbiassed mind.
People of that stamp, who are not ashamed to worship, who do not
philosophize but only think just so much as is necessary for acting
rightly, those are the worst contemners of every supersensual
manifestation.”

“And the students of nature in the Museum?” asked Krates. “They believe
nothing to be real that they cannot see and observe.”

“And for that very reason,” replied the high-priest, “they are often
singularly easy to deceive by your skill, since, seeing an effect
without a cause, they are inclined to regard the invisible cause as
something supersensual. Now, open the door again and let us get out by
the side door; do you, this time, undertake the task of cooperating with
Serapis yourself. Consider that Philometor will not confirm the
donation of the land unless he quits the temple deeply penetrated by the
greatness of our god. Would it be possible, do you think, to have the
new censer ready in time for the birthday of King Euergetes, which is to
be solemnly kept at Memphis?”

“We will see,” replied Krates, “I must first put together the lock
of the great door of the tomb of Apis, for so long as I have it in my
workshop any one can open it who sticks a nail into the hole above the
bar, and any one can shut it inside who pushes the iron bolt. Send to
call me before the performance with the lights begins; I will come in
spite of my wretched feet. As I have undertaken the thing I will carry
it out, but for no other reason, for it is my opinion that even without
such means of deception--”

“We use no deception,” interrupted the high-priest, sternly rebuking his
colleague. “We only present to short-sighted mortals the creative power
of the divinity in a form perceptible and intelligible to their senses.”

With these words the tall priest turned his back on the smith and
quitted the hall by a side door; Krates opened the brazen door, and as
he gathered together his tools he said to himself, but loud enough for
Klea to hear him distinctly in her hiding-place:

“It may be right for me, but deceit is deceit, whether a god deceives a
king or a child deceives a beggar.”

“Deceit is deceit,” repeated Klea after the smith when he had left the
hall and she had emerged from her corner.

She stood still for a moment and looked round her. For the first time
she observed the shabby colors on the walls, the damage the pillars had
sustained in the course of years, and the loose slabs in the pavement.

The sweetness of the incense sickened her, and as she passed by an old
man who threw up his arms in fervent supplication, she looked at him
with a glance of compassion.

When she had passed out beyond the pylons enclosing the temple she
turned round, shaking her head in a puzzled way as she gazed at it; for
she knew that not a stone had been changed within the last hour, and yet
it looked as strange in her eyes as some landscape with which we have
become familiar in all the beauty of spring, and see once more in winter
with its trees bare of leaves; or like the face of a woman which we
thought beautiful under the veil which hid it, and which, when the veil
is raised, we see to be wrinkled and devoid of charm.

When she had heard the smith’s words, “Deceit is deceit,” she felt her
heart shrink as from a stab, and could not check the tears which started
to her eyes, unused as they were to weeping; but as soon as she had
repeated the stern verdict with her own lips her tears had ceased, and
now she stood looking at the temple like a traveller who takes leave of
a dear friend; she was excited, she breathed more freely, drew herself
up taller, and then turned her back on the sanctuary of Serapis, proudly
though with a sore heart.

Close to the gate-keeper’s lodge a child came tottering towards her with
his arms stretched up to her. She lifted him up, kissed him, and then
asked the mother, who also greeted her, for a piece of bread, for her
hunger was becoming intolerable. While she ate the dry morsel the child
sat on her lap, following with his large eyes the motion of her hand and
lips. The boy was about five years old, with legs so feeble that they
could scarcely support the weight of his body, but he had a particularly
sweet little face; certainly it was quite without expression, and it was
only when he saw Klea coming that tiny Philo’s eyes had lighted up with
pleasure.

“Drink this milk,” said the child’s mother, offering the young girl an
earthen bowl. “There is not much and I could not spare it if Philo would
eat like other children, but it seems as if it hurt him to swallow. He
drinks two or three drops and eats a mouthful, and then will take no
more even if he is beaten.”

“You have not been beating him again?” said Klea reproachfully, and
drawing the child closer to her. “My husband--” said the woman, pulling
at her dress in some confusion. “The child was born on a good day and
in a lucky hour, and yet he is so puny and weak and will not learn to
speak, and that provokes Pianchi.”

“He will spoil everything again!” exclaimed Klea annoyed. “Where is he?”

“He was wanted in the temple.”

“And is he not pleased that Philo calls him ‘father,’ and you ‘mother,’
and me by my name, and that he learns to distinguish many things?” asked
the girl.

“Oh, yes of course,” said the woman. “He says you are teaching him to
speak just as if he were a starling, and we are very much obliged to
you.”

“That is not what I want,” interrupted Klea. “What I wish is that you
should not punish and scold the boy, and that you should be as glad as
I am when you see his poor little dormant soul slowly waking up. If
he goes on like this, the poor little fellow will be quite sharp and
intelligent. What is my name, my little one?”

“Ke-ea,” stammered the child, smiling at his friend. “And now taste
this that I have in my hand; what is it?--I see you know. It is
called--whisper in my ear. That’s right, mil--mil-milk! to be sure, my
tiny, it is milk. Now open your little mouth and say it prettily after
me--once more--and again--say it twelve times quite right and I will
give you a kiss--Now you have earned a pretty kiss--will you have it
here or here? Well, and what is this? your ea-? Yes, your ear. And
this?--your nose, that is right.”

The child’s eyes brightened more and more under this gentle teaching,
and neither Klea nor her pupil were weary till, about an hour later, the
re-echoing sound of a brass gong called her away. As she turned to
go the little one ran after her crying; she took him in her arms and
carried him back to his mother, and then went on to her own room to
dress herself and her sister for the procession. On the way to the
Pastophorium she recalled once more her expedition to the temple and her
prayer there.

“Even before the sanctuary,” said she to herself, “I could not succeed
in releasing my soul from its burden--it was not till I set to work to
loosen the tongue of the poor little child. Every pure spot, it seems to
me, may be the chosen sanctuary of some divinity, and is not an infant’s
soul purer than the altar where truth is mocked at?”

In their room she found Irene; she had dressed her hair carefully and
stuck the pomegranate-flower in it, and she asked Klea if she thought
she looked well.

“You look like Aphrodite herself,” replied Klea kissing her forehead.
Then she arranged the folds of her sister’s dress, fastened on the
ornaments, and proceeded to dress herself. While she was fastening
her sandals Irene asked her, “Why do you sigh so bitterly?” and Klea
replied, “I feel as if I had lost my parents a second time.”




CHAPTER V.

The procession was over.

At the great service which had been performed before him in the Greek
Serapeum, Ptolemy Philometor had endowed the priests not with the whole
but with a considerable portion of the land concerning which they
had approached him with many petitions. After the court had once more
quitted Memphis and the procession was broken up, the sisters returned
to their room, Irene with crimson cheeks and a smile on her lips, Klea
with a gloomy and almost threatening light in her eyes.

As the two were going to their room in silence a temple-servant called
to Klea, desiring her to go with him to the high-priest, who wished to
speak to her. Klea, without speaking, gave her water-jar to Irene and
was conducted into a chamber of the temple, which was used for keeping
the sacred vessels in. There she sat down on a bench to wait. The two
men who in the morning had visited the Pastophorium had also followed
in the procession with the royal family. At the close of the solemnities
Publius had parted from his companion without taking leave, and without
looking to the right or to the left, he had hastened back to the
Pastophorium and to the cell of Serapion, the recluse.

The old man heard from afar the younger man’s footstep, which fell
on the earth with a firmer and more decided tread than that of the
softly-stepping priests of Serapis, and he greeted him warmly with signs
and words.

Publius thanked him coolly and gravely, and said, dryly enough and with
incisive brevity:

“My time is limited. I propose shortly to quit Memphis, but I promised
you to hear your request, and in order to keep my word I have come to
see you; still--as I have said--only to keep my word. The water-bearers
of whom you desired to speak to me do not interest me--I care no more
about them than about the swallows flying over the house yonder.”

“And yet this morning you took a long walk for Klea’s sake,” returned
Serapion.

“I have often taken a much longer one to shoot a hare,” answered the
Roman. “We men do not pursue our game because the possession of it is
any temptation, but because we love the sport, and there are sporting
natures even among women. Instead of spears or arrows they shoot with
flashing glances, and when they think they have hit their game they
turn their back upon it. Your Klea is one of this sort, while the pretty
little one I saw this morning looks as if she were very ready to be
hunted, I however, no more wish to be the hunter of a young girl than
to be her game. I have still three days to spend in Memphis, and then I
shall turn my back forever on this stupid country.”

“This morning,” said Serapion, who began to suspect what the grievance
might be which had excited the discontent implied in the Roman’s speech,
“This morning you appeared to be in less hurry to set out than now, so
to me you seem to be in the plight of game trying to escape; however, I
know Klea better than you do. Shooting is no sport of hers, nor will she
let herself be hunted, for she has a characteristic which you, my friend
Publius Scipio, ought to recognize and value above all others--she is
proud, very proud; aye, and so she may be, scornful as you look--as if
you would like to say ‘how came a water-carrier of Serapis by her pride,
a poor creature who is ill-fed and always engaged in service, pride
which is the prescriptive right only of those, whom privilege raises
above the common herd around them?--But this girl, you may take my word
for it, has ample reason to hold her head high, not only because she
is the daughter of free and noble parents and is distinguished by rare
beauty, not because while she was still a child she undertook, with
the devotion and constancy of the best of mothers, the care of another
child--her own sister, but for a reason which, if I judge you rightly,
you will understand better than many another young man; because she
must uphold her pride in order that among the lower servants with whom
unfortunately she is forced to work, she may never forget that she is
a free and noble lady. You can set your pride aside and yet remain what
you are, but if she were to do so and to learn to feel as a servant,
she would presently become in fact what by nature she is not and by
circumstances is compelled to be. A fine horse made to carry burdens
becomes a mere cart-horse as soon as it ceases to hold up its head and
lift its feet freely. Klea is proud because she must be proud; and
if you are just you will not contemn the girl, who perhaps has cast a
kindly glance at you--since the gods have so made you that you cannot
fail to please any woman--and yet who must repel your approaches because
she feels herself above being trifled with, even by one of the Cornelia
gens, and yet too lowly to dare to hope that a man like you should ever
stoop from your height to desire her for a wife. She has vexed you, of
that there can be no doubt; how, I can only guess. If, however, it has
been through her repellent pride, that ought not to hurt you, for
a woman is like a soldier, who only puts on his armor when he is
threatened by an opponent whose weapons he fears.”

The recluse had rather whispered than spoken these words, remembering
that he had neighbors; and as he ceased the drops stood on his brow, for
whenever any thing disturbed him he was accustomed to allow his powerful
voice to be heard pretty loudly, and it cost him no small effort to
moderate it for so long.

Publius had at first looked him in the face, and then had gazed at the
ground, and he had heard Serapion to the end without interrupting him;
but the color had flamed in his cheeks as in those of a schoolboy, and
yet he was an independent and resolute youth who knew how to conduct
himself in difficult straits as well as a man in the prime of life.
In all his proceedings he was wont to know very well, exactly what he
wanted, and to do without any fuss or comment whatever he thought right
and fitting.

During the anchorite’s speech the question had occurred to him, what
did he in fact expect or wish of the water-bearer; but the answer was
wanting, he felt somewhat uncertain of himself, and his uncertainty and
dissatisfaction with himself increased as all that he heard struck him
more and more. He became less and less inclined to let himself be thrown
over by the young girl who for some days had, much against his will,
been constantly in his thoughts, whose image he would gladly have
dismissed from his mind, but who, after the recluse’s speech, seemed
more desirable than ever. “Perhaps you are right,” he replied after
a short silence, and he too lowered his voice, for a subdued tone
generally provokes an equally subdued answer. “You know the maiden
better than I, and if you describe her correctly it would be as well
that I should abide by my decision and fly from Egypt, or, at any rate,
from your protegees, since nothing lies before me but a defeat or a
victory, which could bring me nothing but repentance. Klea avoided my
eye to-day as if it shed poison like a viper’s tooth, and I can have
nothing more to do with her: still, might I be informed how she came
into this temple? and if I can be of any service to her, I will-for your
sake. Tell me now what you know of her and what you wish me to do.”

The recluse nodded assent and beckoned Publius to come closer to him,
and bowing down to speak into the Roman’s ear, he said softly: “Are you
in favor with the queen?” Publius, having said that he was, Serapion,
with an exclamation of satisfaction, began his story.

“You learned this morning how I myself came into this cage, and that
my father was overseer of the temple granaries. While I was wandering
abroad he was deposed from his office, and would probably have died in
prison, if a worthy man had not assisted him to save his honor and his
liberty. All this does not concern you, and I may therefore keep it to
myself; but this man was the father of Klea and Irene, and the enemy
by whose instrumentality my father suffered innocently was the villain
Eulaeus. You know--or perhaps indeed you may not know--that the priests
have to pay a certain tribute for the king’s maintenance; you know? To
be sure, you Romans trouble yourselves more about matters of law
and administration than the culture of the arts or the subtleties of
thought. Well, it was my father’s duty to pay these customs over to
Eulaeus, who received them; but the beardless effeminate vermin,
the glutton--may every peach he ever ate or ever is to eat turn to
poison!--kept back half of what was delivered to him, and when the
accountants found nothing but empty air in the king’s stores where
they hoped to find corn and woven goods, they raised an alarm, which of
course came to the ears of the powerful thief at court before it reached
those of my poor father. You called Egypt a marvellous country, or
something like it; and so in truth it is, not merely on account of the
great piles there that you call Pyramids and such like, but because
things happen here which in Rome would be as impossible as moonshine
at mid-day, or a horse with his tail at the end of his nose! Before a
complaint could be laid against Eulaeus he had accused my father of the
peculation, and before the Epistates and the assessor of the district
had even looked at the indictment, their judgment on the falsely accused
man was already recorded, for Eulaeus had simply bought their verdict
just as a man buys a fish or a cabbage in the market. In olden times the
goddess of justice was represented in this country with her eyes shut,
but now she looks round on the world like a squinting woman who winks
at the king with one eye, and glances with the other at the money in
the hand of the accuser or the accused. My poor father was of course
condemned and thrown into prison, where he was beginning to doubt the
justice of the gods, when for his sake the greatest wonder happened,
ever seen in this land of wonders since first the Greeks ruled in
Alexandria. An honorable man undertook without fear of persons the
lost cause of the poor condemned wretch, and never rested till he
had restored him to honor and liberty. But imprisonment, disgrace and
indignation had consumed the strength of the ill-used man as a worm eats
into cedar wood, and he fell into a decline and died. His preserver,
Klea’s father, as the reward of his courageous action fared even worse;
for here by the Nile virtues are punished in this world, as crimes are
with you. Where injustice holds sway frightful things occur, for the
gods seem to take the side of the wicked. Those who do not hope for
a reward in the next world, if they are neither fools nor
philosophers--which often comes to the same thing--try to guard
themselves against any change in this.

“Philotas, the father of the two girls, whose parents were natives of
Syracuse, was an adherent of the doctrines of Zeno--which have many
supporters among you at Rome too--and he was highly placed as an
official, for he was president of the Chrematistoi, a college of judges
which probably has no parallel out of Egypt, and which has been kept
up better than any other. It travels about from province to province
stopping in the chief towns to administer justice. When an appeal is
brought against the judgment of the court of justice belonging to any
place--over which the Epistates of the district presides--the case is
brought before the Chrematistoi, who are generally strangers alike to
the accuser and accused; by them it is tried over again, and thus
the inhabitants of the provinces are spared the journey to Alexandria
or--since the country has been divided--to Memphis, where, besides, the
supreme court is overburdened with cases.

“No former president of the Chrematistoi had ever enjoyed a higher
reputation than Philotas. Corruption no more dared approach him than a
sparrow dare go near a falcon, and he was as wise as he was just, for
he was no less deeply versed in the ancient Egyptian law than in that of
the Greeks, and many a corrupt judge reconsidered matters as soon as it
became known that he was travelling with the Chrematistoi, and passed a
just instead of an unjust sentence.

“Cleopatra, the widow of Epiphanes, while she was living and acting as
guardian of her sons Philometor and Euergetes--who now reign in Memphis
and Alexandria--held Philotas in the highest esteem and conferred on
him the rank of ‘relation to the king’; but she was just dead when this
worthy man took my father’s cause in hand, and procured his release from
prison.

“The scoundrel Eulaeus and his accomplice Lenaeus then stood at the
height of power, for the young king, who was not yet of age, let himself
be led by them like a child by his nurse.

“Now as my father was an honest man, no one but Eulaeus could be the
rascal, and as the Chrematistoi threatened to call him before their
tribunal the miserable creature stirred up the war in Caelo-Syria
against Antiochus Epiphanes, the king’s uncle.

“You know how disgraceful for us was the course of that enterprise,
how Philometor was defeated near Pelusium, and by the advice of Eulaeus
escaped with his treasure to Samothrace, how Philometor’s brother
Euergetes was set up as king in Alexandria, how Antiochus took Memphis,
and then allowed his elder nephew to continue to reign here as though he
were his vassal and ward.

“It was during this period of humiliation, that Eulaeus was able to
evade Philotas, whom he may very well have feared, as though his own
conscience walked the earth on two legs in the person of the judge, with
the sword of justice in his hand, and telling all men what a scoundrel
he was.

“Memphis had opened her gates to Antiochus without offering much
resistance, and the Syrian king, who was a strange man and was fond of
mixing among the people as if he himself were a common man, applied to
Philotas, who was as familiar with Egyptian manners and customs as with
those of Greece, in order that he might conduct him into the halls of
justice and into the market-places; and he made him presents as was his
way, sometimes of mere rubbish and sometimes of princely gifts.

“Then when Philometor was freed by the Romans from the protection of the
Syrian king, and could govern in Memphis as an independent sovereign,
Eulaeus accused the father of these two girls of having betrayed Memphis
into the hands of Antiochus, and never rested till the innocent man was
deprived of his wealth, which was considerable, and sent with his wife
to forced labor in the gold mines of Ethiopia.

“When all this occurred I had already returned to my cage here; but
I heard from my brother Glaucus--who was captain of the watch in the
palace, and who learned a good many things before other people did--what
was going on out there, and I succeeded in having the daughters of
Philotas secretly brought to this temple, and preserved from sharing
their parents’ fate. That is now five years ago, and now you know how it
happens, that the daughters of a man of rank carry water for the altar
of Serapis, and that I would rather an injury should be done to me than
to them, and that I would rather see Eulaeus eating some poisonous root
than fragrant peaches.”

“And is Philotas still working in the mines?” asked the Roman, clenching
his teeth with rage.

“Yes, Publius,” replied the anchorite. “A ‘yes’ that it is easy to say,
and it is just as easy too to clench one’s fists in indignation--but
it is hard to imagine the torments that must be endured by a man like
Philotas; and a noble and innocent woman--as beautiful as Hera and
Aphrodite in one--when they are driven to hard and unaccustomed labor
under a burning sun by the lash of the overseer. Perhaps by this time
they have been happy enough to die under their sufferings and their
daughters are already orphans, poor children! No one here but the
high-priest knows precisely who they are, for if Eulaeus were to learn
the truth he would send them after their parents as surely as my name is
Serapion.”

“Let him try it!” cried Publius, raising his right fist threateningly.

“Softly, softly, my friend,” said the recluse, “and not now only, but
about everything which you under take in behalf of the sisters, for
a man like Eulaeus hears not only with his own ears but with those of
thousand others, and almost everything that occurs at court has to go
through his hands as epistolographer. You say the queen is well-disposed
towards you. That is worth a great deal, for her husband is said to be
guided by her will, and such a thing as Eulaeus cannot seem particularly
estimable in Cleopatra’s eyes if princesses are like other women--and I
know them well.”

“And even if he were,” interrupted Publius with glowing cheeks, “I would
bring him to ruin all the same, for a man like Philotas must not perish,
and his cause henceforth is my own. Here is my hand upon it; and if I am
happy in having descended from a noble race it is above all because the
word of a son of the Cornelii is as good as the accomplished deed of any
other man.”

The recluse grasped the right hand the young man gave him and nodded
to him affectionately, his eyes radiant, though moistened with joyful
emotion. Then he hastily turned his back on the young man, and soon
reappeared with a large papyrus-roll in his hand. “Take this,” he said,
handing it to the Roman, “I have here set forth all that I have told
you, fully and truly with my own hand in the form of a petition. Such
matters, as I very well know, are never regularly conducted to an
issue at court unless they are set forth in writing. If the queen seems
disposed to grant you a wish give her this roll, and entreat her for a
letter of pardon. If you can effect this, all is won.”

Publius took the roll, and once more gave his hand to the anchorite,
who, forgetting himself for a moment, shouted out in his loud voice:

“May the gods bless thee, and by thy means work the release of the
noblest of men from his sufferings! I had quite ceased to hope, but if
you come to our aid all is not yet wholly lost.”




CHAPTER VI.

“Pardon me if I disturb you.”

With these words the anchorite’s final speech was interrupted by
Eulaeus, who had come in to the Pastophorium softly and unobserved, and
who now bowed respectfully to Publius.

“May I be permitted to enquire on what compact one of the noblest of the
sons of Rome is joining hands with this singular personage?”

“You are free to ask,” replied Publius shortly and drily, “but every one
is not disposed to answer, and on the present occasion I am not. I will
bid you farewell, Serapion, but not for long I believe.”

“Am I permitted to accompany you?” asked Eulaeus.

“You have followed me without any permission on my part.”

“I did so by order of the king, and am only fulfilling his commands in
offering you my escort now.”

“I shall go on, and I cannot prevent your following me.”

“But I beg of you,” said Eulaeus, “to consider that it would ill-become
me to walk behind you like a servant.”

“I respect the wishes of my host, the king, who commanded you to follow
me,” answered the Roman. “At the door of the temple however you can get
into your chariot, and I into mine; an old courtier must be ready to
carry out the orders of his superior.”

“And does carry them out,” answered Eulaeus with deference, but his eyes
twinkled--as the forked tongue of a serpent is rapidly put out and still
more rapidly withdrawn--with a flash first of threatening hatred, and
then another of deep suspicion cast at the roll the Roman held in his
hand.

Publius heeded not this glance, but walked quickly towards the
acacia-grove; the recluse looked after the ill-matched pair, and as he
watched the burly Eulaeus following the young man, he put both his hands
on his hips, puffed out his fat cheeks, and burst into loud laughter as
soon as the couple had vanished behind the acacias.

When once Serapion’s midriff was fairly tickled it was hard to reduce it
to calm again, and he was still laughing when Klea appeared in front of
his cell some few minutes after the departure of the Roman. He was about
to receive his young friend with a cheerful greeting, but, glancing at
her face, he cried anxiously;

“You look as if you had met with a ghost; your lips are pale instead
of red, and there are dark shades round your eyes. What has happened to
you, child? Irene went with you to the procession, that I know. Have you
had bad news of your parents? You shake your head. Come, child, perhaps
you are thinking of some one more than you ought; how the color rises
in your cheeks! Certainly handsome Publius, the Roman, must have looked
into your eyes--a splendid youth is he--a fine young man--a capital good
fellow--”

“Say no more on that subject,” Klea exclaimed, interrupting her friend
and protector, and waving her hand in the air as if to cut off the other
half of Serapion’s speech. “I can hear nothing more about him.”

“Has he addressed you unbecomingly?” asked the recluse.

“Yes!” said Klea, turning crimson, and with a vehemence quite foreign
to her usual gentle demeanor, “yes, he persecutes me incessantly with
challenging looks.”

“Only with looks?” said the anchorite. “But we may look even at the
glorious sun and at the lovely flowers as much as we please, and they
are not offended.”

“The sun is too high and the soulless flowers too humble for a man to
hurt them,” replied Klea. “But the Roman is neither higher nor lower
than I, the eye speaks as plain a language as the tongue, and what his
eyes demand of me brings the blood to my cheeks and stirs my indignation
even now when I only think of it.”

“And that is why you avoid his gaze so carefully?”

“Who told you that?”

“Publius himself; and because he is wounded by your hard-heartedness he
meant to quit Egypt; but I have persuaded him to remain, for if there is
a mortal living from whom I expect any good for you and yours--”

“It is certainly not he,” said Klea positively. “You are a man, and
perhaps you now think that so long as you were young and free to wander
about the world you would not have acted differently from him--it is
a man’s privilege; but if you could look into my soul or feel with the
heart of a woman, you would think differently. Like the sand of the
desert which is blown over the meadows and turns all the fresh verdure
to a hideous brown-like a storm that transforms the blue mirror of the
sea into a crisped chaos of black whirl pools and foaming ferment, this
man’s imperious audacity has cruelly troubled my peace of heart. Four
times his eyes pursued me in the processions; yesterday I still did not
recognize my danger, but to-day--I must tell you, for you are like a
father to me, and who else in the world can I confide in?--to-day I was
able to avoid his gaze, and yet all through long endless hours of the
festival I felt his eyes constantly seeking mine. I should have been
certain I was under no delusion, even if Publius Scipio--but what
business has his name on my lips?--even if the Roman had not boasted to
you of his attacks on a defenceless girl. And to think that you, you of
all others, should have become his ally! But you would not, no indeed
you would not, if you knew how I felt at the procession while I was
looking down at the ground, and knew that his very look desecrated me
like the rain that washed all the blossoms off the young vine-shoots
last year. It was just as if he were drawing a net round my heart--but,
oh! what a net! It was as if the flax on a distaff had been set on fire,
and the flames spun out into thin threads, and the meshes knotted of the
fiery yarn. I felt every thread and knot burning into my soul, and could
not cast it off nor even defend myself. Aye! you may look grieved and
shake your head, but so it was, and the scars hurt me still with a pain
I cannot utter.”

“But Klea,” interrupted Serapion, “you are quite beside yourself--like
one possessed. Go to the temple and pray, or, if that is of no avail, go
to Asclepios or Anubis and have the demon cast out.”

“I need none of your gods!” answered the girl in great agitation. “Oh!
I wish you had left me to my fate, and that we had shared the lot of
our parents, for what threatens us here is more frightful than having
to sift gold-dust in the scorching sun, or to crush quartz in mortars.
I did not come to you to speak about the Roman, but to tell you what the
high-priest had just disclosed to me since the procession ended.”

“Well?” asked Serapion eager and almost frightened, stretching out his
neck to put his head near to the girl’s, and opening his eyes so wide
that the loose skin below them almost disappeared.

“First he told me,” replied Klea, “how meagrely the revenues of the
temple are supplied--”

“That is quite true,” interrupted the anchorite, “for Antiochus carried
off the best part of its treasure; and the crown, which always used to
have money to spare for the sanctuaries of Egypt, now loads our estates
with heavy tribute; but you, as it seems to me, were kept scantily
enough, worse than meanly, for, as I know--since it passed through my
hands--a sum was paid to the temple for your maintenance which would
have sufficed to keep ten hungry sailors, not speak of two little
pecking birds like you, and besides that you do hard service without
any pay. Indeed it would be a more profitable speculation to steal a
beggar’s rags than to rob you! Well, what did the high-priest want?”

“He says that we have been fed and protected by the priesthood for five
years, that now some danger threatens the temple on our account, and
that we must either quit the sanctuary or else make up our minds to take
the place of the twin-sisters Arsinoe and Doris who have hitherto been
employed in singing the hymns of lamentation, as Isis and Nephthys, by
the bier of the deceased god on the occasion of the festivals of the
dead, and in pouring out the libations with wailing and outcries when
the bodies were brought into the temple to be blessed. These maidens,
Asclepiodorus says, are now too old and ugly for these duties, but
the temple is bound to maintain them all their lives. The funds of the
temple are insufficient to support two more serving maidens besides them
and us, and so Arsinoe and Doris are only to pour out the libations for
the future, and we are to sing the laments, and do the wailing.”

“But you are not twins!” cried Serapion. “And none but twins--so say the
ordinances--may mourn for Osiris as Isis and Neplithys.”

“They will make twins of us!” said Klea with a scornful turn of her
lip. “Irene’s hair is to be dyed black like mine, and the soles of her
sandals are to be made thicker to make her as tall as I am.”

“They would hardly succeed in making you smaller than you are, and it is
easier to make light hair dark than dark hair light,” said Serapion
with hardly suppressed rage. “And what answer did you give to these
exceedingly original proposals?”

“The only one I could very well give. I said no--but I declared myself
ready, not from fear, but because we owe much to the temple, to perform
any other service with Irene, only not this one.”

“And Asclepiodorus?”

“He said nothing unkind to me, and preserved his calm and polite
demeanor when I contradicted him, though he fixed his eyes on me several
times in astonishment as if he had discovered in me something quite new
and strange. At last he went on to remind me how much trouble the
temple singing-master had taken with us, how well my low voice went with
Irene’s high one, how much applause we might gain by a fine performance
of the hymns of lamentation, and how he would be willing, if we
undertook the duties of the twin-sisters, to give us a better dwelling
and more abundant food. I believe he has been trying to make us amenable
by supplying us badly with food, just as falcons are trained by hunger.
Perhaps I am doing him an injustice, but I feel only too much disposed
to-day to think the worst of him and of the other fathers. Be that as
it may; at any rate he made me no further answer when I persisted in my
refusal, but dismissed me with an injunction to present myself before
him again in three days’ time, and then to inform him definitively
whether I would conform to his wishes, or if I proposed to leave the
temple. I bowed and went towards the door, and was already on the
threshold when he called me back once more, and said: ‘Remember your
parents and their fate!’ He spoke solemnly, almost threateningly, but
he said no more and hastily turned his back on me. What could he mean
to convey by this warning? Every day and every hour I think of my father
and mother, and keep Irene in mind of them.”

The recluse at these words sat muttering thoughtfully to himself for a
few minutes with a discontented air; then he said gravely:

“Asclepiodorus meant more by his speech than you think. Every sentence
with which he dismisses a refractory subordinate is a nut of which the
shell must be cracked in order to get at the kernel. When he tells you
to remember your parents and their sad fate, such words from his lips,
and under the present circumstances, can hardly mean anything else than
this: that you should not forget how easily your father’s fate might
overtake you also, if once you withdrew yourselves from the protection
of the temple. It was not for nothing that Asclepiodorus--as
you yourself told me quite lately, not more than a week ago I am
sure--reminded you how often those condemned to forced labor in the
mines had their relations sent after them. Ah! child, the words of
Asclepiodorus have a sinister meaning. The calmness and pride, with
which you look at me make me fear for you, and yet, as you know, I am
not one of the timid and tremulous. Certainly what they propose to you
is repulsive enough, but submit to it; it is to be hoped it will not be
for long. Do it for my sake and for that of poor Irene, for though you
might know how to assert your dignity and take care of yourself outside
these walls in the rough and greedy world, little Irene never could. And
besides, Klea, my sweetheart, we have now found some one, who makes
your concerns his, and who is great and powerful--but oh! what are
three clays? To think of seeing you turned out--and then that you may be
driven with a dissolute herd in a filthy boat down to the burning south,
and dragged to work which kills first the soul and then the body! No, it
is not possible! You will never let this happen to me--and to yourself
and Irene; no, my darling, no, my pet, my sweetheart, you cannot, you
will not do so. Are you not my children, my daughters, my only joy? and
you, would you go away, and leave me alone in my cage, all because you
are so proud!”

The strong man’s voice failed him, and heavy drops fell from his eyes
one after another down his beard, and on to Klea’s arm, which he had
grasped with both hands.

The girl’s eyes too were dim with a mist of warm tears when she saw her
rough friend weeping, but she remained firm and said, as she tried to
free her hand from his:

“You know very well, father Serapion, that there is much to tie me to
this temple; my sister, and you, and the door-keeper’s child, little
Philo. It would be cruel, dreadful to have to leave you; but I would
rather endure that and every other grief than allow Irene to take the
place of Arsinoe or the black Doris as wailing woman. Think of that
bright child, painted and kneeling at the foot of a bier and groaning
and wailing in mock sorrow! She would become a living lie in human form,
an object of loathing to herself, and to me--who stand in the place of a
mother to her--from morning till night a martyrizing reproach! But what
do I care about myself--I would disguise myself as the goddess without
even making a wry face, and be led to the bier, and wail and groan so
that every hearer would be cut to the heart, for my soul is already
possessed by sorrow; it is like the eyes of a man, who has gone blind
from the constant flow of salt tears. Perhaps singing the hymns of
lamentation might relieve my soul, which is as full of sorrow as an
overbrimming cup; but I would rather that a cloud should for ever darken
the sun, that mists should hide every star from my eyes, and the air
I breathe be poisoned by black smoke than disguise her identity,
and darken her soul, or let her clear laugh be turned to shrieks of
lamentation, and her fresh and childlike spirit be buried in gloomy
mourning. Sooner will I go way with her and leave even you, to perish
with my parents in misery and anguish than see that happen, or suffer it
for a moment.”

As she spoke Serapion covered his face with his hands, and Klea, hastily
turning away from him, with a deep sigh returned to her room.

Irene was accustomed when she heard her step to hasten to meet her,
but to-day no one came to welcome her, and in their room, which was
beginning to be dark as twilight fell, she did not immediately catch
sight of her sister, for she was sitting all in a heap in a corner of
the room, her face hidden, in her hands and weeping quietly.

“What is the matter?” asked Klea, going tenderly up to the weeping
child, over whom she bent, endeavoring to raise her.

“Leave me,” said Irene sobbing; she turned away from her sister with an
impatient gesture, repelling her caress like a perverse child; and then,
when Klea tried to soothe her by affectionately stroking her hair, she
sprang up passionately exclaiming through her tears:

“I could not help crying--and, from this hour, I must always have to
cry. The Corinthian Lysias spoke to me so kindly after the procession,
and you--you don’t care about me at all and leave me alone all this time
in this nasty dusty hole! I declare I will not endure it any longer,
and if you try to keep me shut up, I will run away from this temple, for
outside it is all bright and pleasant, and here it is dingy and horrid!”




CHAPTER VII.

In the very midst of the white wall with its bastions and ramparts,
which formed the fortifications of Memphis, stood the old palace of the
kings, a stately structure built of bricks, recently plastered, and with
courts, corridors, chambers and halls without number, and veranda-like
out-buildings of gayly-painted wood, and a magnificent pillared
banqueting-hall in the Greek style. It was surrounded by verdurous
gardens, and a whole host of laborers tended the flower-beds and shady
alleys, the shrubs and the trees; kept the tanks clean and fed the fish
in them; guarded the beast-garden, in which quadrupeds of every kind,
from the heavy-treading elephant to the light-footed antelope, were to
be seen, associated with birds innumerable of every country and climate.

A light white vapor rose from the splendidly fitted bath-house, loud
barkings resounded from the dog-kennels, and from the long array of open
stables came the neighing of horses with the clatter and stamp of hoofs,
and the rattle of harness and chains. A semicircular building of new
construction adjoining the old palace was the theatre, and many large
tents for the bodyguard, for ambassadors and scribes, as well as others,
serving as banqueting-halls for the various court-officials, stood both
within the garden and outside its enclosing walls. A large space leading
from the city itself to the royal citadel was given up to the soldiers,
and there, by the side of the shady court-yards, were the houses of the
police-guard and the prisons. Other soldiers were quartered in tents
close to the walls of the palace itself. The clatter of their arms and
the words of command, given in Greek, by their captain, sounded out at
this particular instant, and up into the part of the buildings occupied
by the queen; and her apartments were high up, for in summer time
Cleopatra preferred to live in airy tents, which stood among the
broad-leaved trees of the south and whole groves of flowering shrubs,
on the level roof of the palace, which was also lavishly decorated with
marble statues. There was only one way of access to this retreat,
which was fitted up with regal splendor; day and night it was fanned by
currents of soft air, and no one could penetrate uninvited to disturb
the queen’s retirement, for veteran guards watched at the foot of the
broad stair that led to the roof, chosen from the Macedonian “Garde
noble,” and owing as implicit obedience to Cleopatra as to the king
himself. This select corps was now, at sunset, relieving guard, and the
queen could hear the words spoken by the officers in command and
the clatter of the shields against the swords as they rattled on the
pavement, for she had come out of her tent into the open air, and stood
gazing towards the west, where the glorious hues of the sinking sun
flooded the bare, yellow limestone range of the Libyan hills, with
their innumerable tombs and the separate groups of pyramids; while the
wonderful coloring gradually tinged with rose-color the light silvery
clouds that hovered in the clear sky over the valley of Memphis, and
edged them as with a rile of living gold.

The queen stepped out of her tent, accompanied by a young Greek
girl--the fair Zoe, daughter of her master of the hunt Zenodotus, and
Cleopatra’s favorite lady-in-waiting--but though she looked towards the
west, she stood unmoved by the magic of the glorious scene before her;
she screened her eyes with her hand to shade them from the blinding
rays, and said:

“Where can Cornelius be staying! When we mounted our chariots before the
temple he had vanished, and as far as I can see the road in the quarters
of Sokari and Serapis I cannot discover his vehicle, nor that of Eulaeus
who was to accompany him. It is not very polite of him to go off in this
way without taking leave; nay, I could call it ungrateful, since I had
proposed to tell him on our way home all about my brother Euergetes, who
has arrived to-day with his friends. They are not yet acquainted, for
Euergetes was living in Cyrene when Publius Cornelius Scipio landed in
Alexandria. Stay! do you see a black shadow out there by the vineyard
at Kakem; That is very likely he; but no--you are right, it is only some
birds, flying in a close mass above the road. Can you see nothing more?
No!--and yet we both have sharp young eyes. I am very curious to know
whether Publius Scipio will like Euergetes. There can hardly be two
beings more unlike, and yet they have some very essential points in
common.”

“They are both men,” interrupted Zoe, looking at the queen as if she
expected cordial assent to this proposition.

“So they are,” said Cleopatra proudly. “My brother is still so young
that, if he were not a king’s son, he would hardly have outgrown the
stage of boyhood, and would be a lad among other Epheboi,--[Youths above
18 were so called]--and yet among the oldest there is hardly a man who
is his superior in strength of will and determined energy. Already,
before I married Philometor, he had clutched Alexandria and Cyrene,
which by right should belong to my husband, who is the eldest of us
three, and that was not very brotherly conduct--and indeed we had other
grounds for being angry with him; but when I saw him again for the first
time after nine months of separation I was obliged to forget them all,
and welcome him as though he had done nothing but good to me and his
brother--who is my husband, as is the custom of the families of Pharaohs
and the usage of our race. He is a young Titan, and no one would be
astonished if he one day succeeded in piling Pelion upon Ossa. I know
well enough how wild he can often be, how unbridled and recalcitrant
beyond all bounds; but I can easily pardon him, for the same bold blood
flows in my own veins, and at the root of all his excesses lies power,
genuine and vigorous power. And this innate pith and power are just the
very thing we most admire in men, for it is the one gift which the gods
have dealt out to us with a less liberal hand than to men. Life indeed
generally dams its overflowing current, but I doubt whether this will be
the case with the stormy torrent of his energy; at any rate men such as
he is rush swiftly onwards, and are strong to the end, which sooner
or later is sure to overtake them; and I infinitely prefer such a wild
torrent to a shallow brook flowing over a plain, which hurts no one, and
which in order to prolong its life loses itself in a misty bog. He, if
any one, may be forgiven for his tumultuous career; for when he pleases
my brother’s great qualities charm old and young alike, and are as
conspicuous and as remarkable as his faults--nay, I will frankly say his
crimes. And who in Greece or Egypt surpasses him in grasp and elevation
of mind?”

“You may well be proud of him,” replied Zoe. “Not even Publius Scipio
himself can soar to the height reached by Euergetes.”

“But, on the other hand, Euergetes is not gifted with the steady, calm
self-reliance of Cornelius. The man who should unite in one person the
good qualities of those two, need yield the palm, as it seems to me, not
even to a god!”

“Among us imperfect mortals he would indeed be the only perfect one,”
 replied Zoe. “But the gods could not endure the existence of a perfect
man, for then they would have to undertake the undignified task of
competing with one of their own creatures.”

“Here, however, comes one whom no one can accuse!” cried the young
queen, as she hastened to meet a richly dressed woman, older than
herself, who came towards her leading her son, a pale child of two
years old. She bent down to the little one, tenderly but with impetuous
eagerness, and was about to clasp him in her arms, but the fragile
child, which at first had smiled at her, was startled; he turned away
from her and tried to hide his little face in the dress of his nurse--a
lady of rank-to whom he clung with both hands. The queen threw herself
on her knees before him, took hold of his shoulder, and partly by
coaxing and partly by insistence strove to induce him to quit the
sheltering gown and to turn to her; but although the lady, his
wet-nurse, seconded her with kind words of encouragement, the terrified
child began to cry, and resisted his mother’s caresses with more and
more vehemence the more passionately she tried to attract and conciliate
him. At last the nurse lifted him up, and was about to hand him to his
mother, but the wilful little boy cried more than before, and throwing
his arms convulsively round his nurse’s neck he broke into loud cries.

In the midst of this rather unbecoming struggle of the mother against
the child’s obstinacy, the clatter of wheels and of horses’ hoofs rang
through the court-yard of the palace, and hardly had the sound reached
the queen’s ears than she turned away from the screaming child, hurried
to the parapet of the roof, and called out to Zoe:

“Publius Scipio is here; it is high time that I should dress for the
banquet. Will that naughty child not listen to me at all? Take him away,
Praxinoa, and understand distinctly that I am much dissatisfied with
you. You estrange my own child from me to curry favor with the future
king. That is base, or else it proves that you have no tact, and are
incompetent for the office entrusted to you. The office of wet-nurse you
duly fulfilled, but I shall now look out for another attendant for the
boy. Do not answer me! no tears! I have had enough of that with the
child’s screaming.” With these words, spoken loudly and passionately,
she turned her back on Praxinoa--the wife of a distinguished Macedonian
noble, who stood as if petrified--and retired into her tent, where
branched lamps had just been placed on little tables of elegant
workmanship. Like all the other furniture in the queen’s dressing-tent
these were made of gleaming ivory, standing out in fine relief from the
tent-cloth which was sky-blue woven with silver lilies and ears of corn,
and from the tiger-skins which covered all the cushions, while white
woollen carpets, bordered with a waving scroll in blue, were spread on
the ground.

The queen threw herself on a seat in front of her dressing-table, and
sat staring at herself in a mirror, as if she now saw her face and her
abundant, reddish-fair hair for the first time; then she said, half
turning to Zoe and half to her favorite Athenian waiting-maid, who stood
behind her with her other women:

“It was folly to dye my dark hair light; but now it may remain so, for
Publius Scipio, who has no suspicion of our arts, thought this color
pretty and uncommon, and never will know its origin. That Egyptian
headdress with the vulture’s head which the king likes best to see me
in, the young Greek Lysias and the Roman too, call barbaric, and so
every one must call it who is not interested in the Egyptians. But
to-night we are only ourselves, so I will wear the chaplet of golden
corn with sapphire grapes. Do you think, Zoe, that with that I could
wear the dress of transparent bombyx silk that came yesterday from Cos?
But no, I will not wear that, for it is too slight a tissue, it hides
nothing and I am now too thin for it to become me. All the lines in
my throat show, and my elbows are quite sharp--altogether I am much
thinner. That comes of incessant worry, annoyance, and anxiety. How
angry I was yesterday at the council, because my husband will always
give way and agree and try to be pleasant; whenever a refusal is
necessary I have to interfere, unwilling as I am to do it, and odious
as it is to me always to have to stir up discontent, disappointment, and
disaffection, to take things on myself and to be regarded as hard
and heartless in order that my husband may preserve undiminished the
doubtful glory of being the gentlest and kindest of men and princes. My
son’s having a will of his own leads to agitating scenes, but even that
is better than that Philopator should rush into everybody’s arms. The
first thing in bringing up a boy should be to teach him to say ‘no.’ I
often say ‘yes’ myself when I should not, but I am a woman, and yielding
becomes us better than refusal--and what is there of greater importance
to a woman than to do what becomes her best, and to seem beautiful?

“I will decide on this pale dress, and put over it the net-work of gold
thread with sapphire knots; that will go well with the head-dress. Take
care with your comb, Thais, you are hurting me! Now--I must not chatter
any more. Zoe, give me the roll yonder; I must collect my thoughts a
little before I go down to talk among men at the banquet. When we have
just come from visiting the realm of death and of Serapis, and have
been reminded of the immortality of the soul and of our lot in the next
world, we are glad to read through what the most estimable of human
thinkers has said concerning such things. Begin here, Zoe.”

Cleopatra’s companion, thus addressed, signed to the unoccupied
waiting-women to withdraw, seated herself on a low cushion opposite the
queen, and began to read with an intelligent and practised intonation;
the reading went on for some time uninterrupted by any sound but the
clink of metal ornaments, the rustle of rich stuffs, the trickle of oils
or perfumes as they were dropped into the crystal bowls, the short
and whispered questions of the women who were attiring the queen, or
Cleopatra’s no less low and rapid answers.

All the waiting-women not immediately occupied about the queen’s
person--perhaps twenty in all, young and old-ranged themselves along the
sides of the great tent, either standing or sitting on the ground or
on cushions, and awaiting the moment when it should be their turn to
perform some service, as motionless as though spellbound by the mystical
words of a magician. They only made signs to each other with their eyes
and fingers, for they knew that the queen did not choose to be disturbed
when she was being read to, and that she never hesitated to cast aside
anything or anybody that crossed her wishes or inclinations, like a
tight shoe or a broken lutestring.

Her features were irregular and sharp, her cheekbones too strongly
developed, and the lips, behind which her teeth gleamed pearly
white-though too widely set--were too full; still, so long as she
exerted her great powers of concentration, and listened with flashing
eyes, like those of a prophetess, and parted lips to the words of Plato,
her face had worn an indescribable glow of feeling, which seemed to have
come upon her from a higher and better world, and she had looked far
more beautiful than now when she was fully dressed, and when her women
crowded round leer--Zoe having laid aside the Plato--with loud and
unmeasured flattery.

Cleopatra delighted in being thus feted, and, in order to enjoy the
adulation of a throng, she would always when dressing have a great
number of women to attend her toilet; mirrors were held up to her on
every side, a fold set right, and the jewelled straps of her sandals
adjusted.

One praised the abundance of her hair, another the slenderness of her
form, the slimness of her ankles, and the smallness of her tiny
hands and feet. One maiden remarked to another--but loud enough to
be heard--on the brightness of her eyes which were clearer than the
sapphires on her brow, while the Athenian waiting-woman, Thais, declared
that Cleopatra had grown fatter, for her golden belt was less easy to
clasp than it had been ten days previously.

The queen presently signed to Zoe, who threw a little silver ball into a
bowl of the same metal, elaborately wrought and decorated, and in a few
minutes the tramp of the body-guard was audible outside the door of the
tent.

Cleopatra went out, casting a rapid glance over the roof--now brightly
illuminated with cressets and torches--and the white marble statues
that gleamed out in relief against the dark clumps of shrubs; and then,
without even looking at the tent where her children were asleep, she
approached the litter, which had been brought up to the roof for her by
the young Macedonian nobles. Zoe and Thais assisted her to mount into
it, and her ladies, waiting-women, and others who had hurried out of
the other tents, formed a row on each side of the way, and hailed their
mistress with loud cries of admiration and delight as she passed by,
lifted high above them all on the shoulders of her bearers. The diamonds
in the handle of her feather-fan sparkled brightly as Cleopatra waved a
gracious adieu to her women, an adieu which did not fail to remind them
how infinitely beneath her were those she greeted. Every movement of
her hand was full of regal pride, and her eyes, unveiled and untempered,
were radiant with a young woman’s pleasure in a perfect toilet, with
satisfaction in her own person, and with the anticipation of the festive
hours before her.

The litter disappeared behind the door of the broad steps that led up to
the roof, and Thais, sighing softly, said to herself, “If only for once
I could ride through the air in just such a pretty shell of colored and
shining mother-of-pearl, like a goddess! carried aloft by young men, and
hailed and admired by all around me! High up there the growing Selene
floats calmly and silently by the tiny stars, and just so did she
ride past in her purple robe with her torch-bearers and flames
and lights-past us humble creatures, and between the tents to the
banquet--and to what a banquet, and what guests! Everything up here
greets her with rejoicing, and I could almost fancy that among those
still marble statues even the stern face of Zeno had parted its lips,
and spoken flattering words to her. And yet poor little Zoe, and the
fair-haired Lysippa, and the black-haired daughter of Demetrius, and
even I, poor wretch, should be handsomer, far handsomer than she, if we
could dress ourselves with fine clothes and jewels for which kings would
sell their kingdoms; if we could play Aphrodite as she does, and ride
off in a shell borne aloft on emerald-green glass to look as if it were
floating on the waves; if dolphins set with pearls and turquoises served
us for a footstool, and white ostrich-plumes floated over our heads,
like the silvery clouds that float over Athens in the sky of a fine
spring day. The transparent tissue that she dared not put on would well
become me! If only that were true which Zoe was reading yesterday, that
the souls of men were destined to visit the earth again and again in new
forms! Then perhaps mine might some day come into the world in that of
a king’s child. I should not care to be a prince, so much is expected of
him, but a princess indeed! That would be lovely!”

These and such like were Thais’ dreams, while Zoe stood outside the tent
of the royal children with her cousin, the chief-attendant of prince
Philopator, carrying on an eager conversation in a low tone. The child’s
nurse from time to time dried her eyes and sobbed bitterly as she said:
“My own baby, my other children, my husband and our beautiful house
in Alexandria--I left them all to suckle and rear a prince. I have
sacrificed happiness, freedom, and my nights’-sleep for the sake of the
queen and of this child, and how am I repaid for all this? As if I were
a lowborn wench instead of the daughter and wife of noble men; this
woman, half a child still, scarcely yet nineteen, dismisses me from her
service before you and all her ladies every ten days! And why? Because
the ungoverned blood of her race flows in her son’s veins, and because
he does not rush into the arms of a mother who for days does not ask for
him at all, and never troubles herself about him but in some idle moment
when she has gratified every other whim. Princes distribute favor or
disgrace with justice only so long as they are children. The little one
understands very well what I am to him, and sees what Cleopatra is. If I
could find it in my heart to ill-use him in secret, this mother--who is
not fit to be a mother--would soon have her way. Hard as it would be to
me so soon to leave the poor feeble little child, who has grown as
dear to my soul as my own--aye and closer, even closer, as I may well
say--this time I will do it, even at the risk of Cleopatra’s plunging us
into ruin, my husband and me, as she has done to so many who have dared
to contravene her will.”

The wet-nurse wept aloud, but Zoe laid her hand on the distressed
woman’s shoulder, and said soothingly: “I know you have more to submit
to from Cleopatra’s humors than any of us all, but do not be overhasty.
Tomorrow she will send you a handsome present, as she so often has done
after being unkind; and though she vexes and hurts you again and again,
she will try to make up for it again and again till, when this year is
over, your attendance on the prince will be at an end, and you can go
home again to your own family. We all have to practise patience; we
live like people dwelling in a ruinous house with to-day a stone and
to-morrow a beam threatening to fall upon our heads. If we each take
calmly whatever befalls us our masters try to heal our wounds, but if
we resist may the gods have mercy on us! for Cleopatra is like a strung
bow, which sets the arrow flying as soon as a child, a mouse, a breath
of air even touches it--like an over-full cup which brims over if a
leaf, another drop, a single tear falls into it. We should, any one of
us, soon be worn out by such a life, but she needs excitement, turmoil
and amusement at every hour. She comes home late from a feast, spends
barely six hours in disturbed slumber, and has hardly rested so long as
it takes a pebble to fall to the ground from a crane’s claw before we
have to dress her again for another meal. From the council-board she
goes to hear some learned discourse, from her books in the temple to
sacrifice and prayer, from the sanctuary to the workshops of artists,
from pictures and statues to the audience-chamber, from a reception
of her subjects and of foreigners to her writing-room, from answering
letters to a procession and worship once more, from the sacred services
back again to her dressing-tent, and there, while she is being attired
she listens to me while I read the most profound works--and how she
listens! not a word escapes her, and her memory retains whole sentences.
Amid all this hurry and scurry her spirit must need be like a limb that
is sore from violent exertion, and that is painfully tender to every
rough touch. We are to her neither more nor less than the wretched flies
which we hit at when they trouble us, and may the gods be merciful to
those on whom this queen’s hand may fall! Euergetes cleaves with the
sword all that comes in his way. Cleopatra stabs with the dagger, and
her hand wields the united power of her own might and of her yielding
husband’s. Do not provoke her. Submit to what you cannot avert; just as
I never complain when, if I make a mistake in reading, she snatches the
book from my hand, or flings it at my feet. But I, of course, have only
myself to fear for, and you have your husband and children as well.”

Praxinoa bowed her head at these words in sad assent, and said:

“Thank you for those words! I always think only from my heart, and you
mostly from your head. You are right, this time again there is nothing
for me to do but to be patient; but when I have fulfilled the duties
here, which I undertook, and am at home again, I will offer a great
sacrifice to Asclepias and Hygiea, like a person recovered from a severe
illness; and one thing I know: that I would rather be a poor girl,
grinding at a mill, than change with this rich and adored queen who, in
order to enjoy her life to the utmost, carelessly and restlessly hurries
past all that our mortal lot has best to offer. Terrible, hideous to me
seems such an existence with no rest in it! and the heart of a mother
which is so much occupied with other things that she cannot win the love
of her child, which blossoms for every hired nurse, must be as waste as
the desert! Rather would I endure anything--everything--with patience
than be such a queen!”




CHAPTER VIII.

“What! No one to come to meet me?” asked the queen, as she reached the
foot of the last flight of porphyry steps that led into the ante-chamber
to the banqueting-hall, and, looking round, with an ominous glance, at
the chamberlains who had accompanied her, she clinched her small fist.
“I arrive and find no one here!”

The “No one” certainly was a figure of speech, since more than a hundred
body-guards-Macedonians in rich array of arms-and an equal number of
distinguished court-officials were standing on the marble flags of the
vast hall, which was surrounded by colonnades, while the star-spangled
night-sky was all its roof; and the court-attendants were all men of
rank, dignified by the titles of fathers, brothers, relatives, friends
and chief-friends of the king.

These all received the queen with a many-voiced “Hail!” but not one of
them seemed worthy of Cleopatra’s notice. This crowd was less to her
than the air we breathe in order to live--a mere obnoxious vapor, a
whirl of dust which the traveller would gladly avoid, but which he must
nevertheless encounter in order to proceed on his way.

The queen had expected that the few guests, invited by her selection
and that of her brother Euergetes to the evening’s feast, would have
welcomed her here at the steps; she thought they would have seen her--as
she felt herself--like a goddess borne aloft in her shell, and that
she might have exulted in the admiring astonishment of the Roman and of
Lysias, the Corinthian: and now the most critical instant in the part
she meant to play that evening had proved a failure, and it suggested
itself to her mind that she might be borne back to her roof-tent, and be
floated down once more when she was sure of the presence of the company.
But there was one thing she dreaded more even than pain and remorse,
and that was any appearance of the ridiculous; so she only commanded the
bearers to stand still, and while the master of the ceremonies, waiving
his dignity, hurried off to announce to her husband that she was
approaching, she signed to the nobles highest in rank to approach, that
she might address a few gracious words to them, with distant amiability.
Only a few however, for the doors of thyia wood leading into the
banqueting hall itself, presently opened, and the king with his friends
came forward to meet Cleopatra.

“How were we to expect you so early?” cried Philometor to his wife.

“Is it really still early?” asked the queen, “or have I only taken you
by surprise, because you had forgotten to expect me?”

“How unjust you are!” replied the king. “Must you now be told that, come
as early as you will, you always come too late for my desires.”

“But for ours,” cried Lysias, “neither too early nor too late, but
at the very right time--like returning health and happiness, or the
victor’s crown.”

“Health as taking the place of sickness?” asked Cleopatra, and her
eyes sparkled keenly and merrily. “I perfectly understand Lysias,” said
Publius, intercepting the Greek. “Once, on the field of Mars, I was
flung from my horse, and had to lie for weeks on my couch, and I know
that there is no more delightful sensation than that of feeling our
departed strength returning as we recover. He means to say that in your
presence we must feel exceptionally well.”

“Nay rather,” interrupted Lysias, “our queen seems to come to us like
returning health, since so long as she was not in our midst we felt
suffering and sick for longing. Thy presence, Cleopatra, is the most
effectual remedy, and restores us to our lost health.”

Cleopatra politely lowered her fan, as if in thanks, thus rapidly
turning the stick of it in her hand, so as to make the diamonds that
were set in it sparkle and flash. Then she turned to the friends, and
said:

“Your words are most amiable, and your different ways of expressing
your meaning remind me of two gems set in a jewel, one of which
sparkles because it is skilfully cut, and reflects every light from its
mirrorlike facets, while the other shines by its genuine and intrinsic
fire. The genuine and the true are one, and the Egyptians have but one
word for both, and your kind speech, my Scipio--but I may surely venture
to call you Publius--your kind speech, my Publius seems to me to be
truer than that of your accomplished friend, which is better adapted to
vainer ears than mine. Pray, give me your hand.”

The shell in which she was sitting was gently lowered, and, supported
by Publius and her husband, the queen alighted and entered the
banqueting-hall, accompanied by her guests.

As soon as the curtains were closed, and when Cleopatra had exchanged a
few whispered words with her husband, she turned again to the Roman, who
had just been joined by Eulaeus, and said:

“You have come from Athens, Publius, but you do not seem to have
followed very closely the courses of logic there, else how could it be
that you, who regard health as the highest good--that you, who declared
that you never felt so well as in my presence--should have quitted me so
promptly after the procession, and in spite of our appointment? May I be
allowed to ask what business--”

“Our noble friend,” answered Eulaeus, bowing low, but not allowing the
queen to finish her speech, “would seem to have found some particular
charm in the bearded recluses of Serapis, and to be seeking among them
the key-stone of his studies at Athens.”

“In that he is very right,” said the queen. “For from them he can
learn to direct his attention to that third division of our existence,
concerning which least is taught in Athens--I mean the future--”

“That is in the hands of the gods,” replied the Roman. “It will come
soon enough, and I did not discuss it with the anchorite. Eulaeus may be
informed that, on the contrary, everything I learned from that singular
man in the Serapeum bore reference to the things of the past.”

“But how can it be possible,” said Eulaeus, “that any one to whom
Cleopatra had offered her society should think so long of anything else
than the beautiful present?”

“You indeed have good reason,” retorted Publius quickly, “to enter the
lists in behalf of the present, and never willingly to recall the past.”

“It was full of anxiety and care,” replied Eulaeus with perfect
self-possession. “That my sovereign lady must know from her illustrious
mother, and from her own experience; and she will also protect me from
the undeserved hatred with which certain powerful enemies seem minded
to pursue me. Permit me, your majesty, not to make my appearance at the
banquet until later. This noble gentleman kept me waiting for hours
in the Serapeum, and the proposals concerning the new building in the
temple of Isis at Philae must be drawn up and engrossed to-day, in order
that they may be brought to-morrow before your royal husband in council
and your illustrious brother Euergetes--”

“You have leave, interrupted Cleopatra.”

As soon as Eulaeus had disappeared, the queen went closer up to Publius,
and said:

“You are annoyed with this man--well, he is not pleasant, but at any
rate he is useful and worthy. May I ask whether you only feel his
personality repugnant to you, or whether actual circumstances have given
rise to your aversion--nay, if I have judged rightly, to a very bitterly
hostile feeling against him?”

“Both,” replied Publius. “In this unmanly man, from the very first, I
expected to find nothing good, and I now know that, if I erred at all,
it was in his favor. To-morrow I will ask you to spare me an hour when
I can communicate to your majesty something concerning him, but which is
too repulsive and sad to be suitable for telling in an evening devoted
to enjoyment. You need not be inquisitive, for they are matters that
belong to the past, and which concern neither you nor me.”

The high-steward and the cup-bearer here interrupted this conversation
by calling them to table, and the royal pair were soon reclining with
their guests at the festal board.

Oriental splendor and Greek elegance were combined in the decorations
of the saloon of moderate size, in which Ptolemy Philometor was wont to
prefer to hold high-festival with a few chosen friends. Like the great
reception-hall and the men’s hall-with its twenty doors and lofty
porphyry columns--in which the king’s guests assembled, it was lighted
from above, since it was only at the sides that the walls--which had
no windows--and a row of graceful alabaster columns with Corinthian
acanthus-capitals supported a narrow roof; the centre of the hall was
quite uncovered. At this hour, when it was blazing with hundreds of
lights, the large opening, which by day admitted the bright sunshine,
was closed over by a gold net-work, decorated with stars and a crescent
moon of rock-crystal, and the meshes were close enough to exclude
the bats and moths which at night always fly to the light. But the
illumination of the king’s banqueting-hall made it almost as light as
day, consisting of numerous lamps with many branches held up by lovely
little figures of children in bronze and marble. Every joint was plainly
visible in the mosaic of the pavement, which represented the reception
of Heracles into Olympus, the feast of the gods, and the astonishment of
the amazed hero at the splendor of the celestial banquet; and hundreds
of torches were reflected in the walls of polished yellow marble,
brought from Hippo Regius; these were inlaid by skilled artists
with costly stones, such as lapis lazuli and malachite, crystals,
blood-stone, jasper, agates and chalcedony, to represent fruit-pieces
and magnificent groups of game or of musical instruments; while the
pilasters were decorated with masks of the tragic and comic Muses,
torches, thyrsi wreathed with ivy and vine, and pan-pipes. These were
wrought in silver and gold, and set with costly marbles, and they stood
out from the marble background like metal work on a leather shield, or
the rich ornamentation on a sword-sheath. The figures of a Dionysiac
procession, forming the frieze, looked down upon the feasters--a fine
relievo that had been designed and modelled for Ptolemy Soter by the
sculptor Bryaxis, and then executed in ivory and gold.

Everything that met the eye in this hall was splendid, costly, and above
all of a genial aspect, even before Cleopatra had come to the throne;
and she--here as in her own apartments--had added the busts of the
greatest Greek philosophers and poets, from Thales of Miletus down to
Strato, who raised chance to fill the throne of God, and from Hesiod to
Callimachus; she too had placed the tragic mask side by side with the
comic, for at her table--she was wont to say--she desired to see no one
who could not enjoy grave and wise discourse more than eating, drinking,
and laughter.

Instead of assisting at the banquet, as other ladies used, seated on a
chair or at the foot of her husband’s couch, she reclined on a couch of
her own, behind which stood busts of Sappho the poetess, and Aspasia the
friend of Pericles.

Though she made no pretensions to be regarded as a philosopher nor
even as a poetess, she asserted her right to be considered a finished
connoisseur in the arts of poetry and music; and if she preferred
reclining to sitting how should she have done otherwise, since she was
fully aware how well it became her to extend herself in a picturesque
attitude on her cushions, and to support her head on her arm as it
rested on the back of her couch; for that arm, though not strictly
speaking beautiful, always displayed the finest specimens of Alexandrian
workmanship in gem-cutting and goldsmiths’ work.

But, in fact, she selected a reclining posture particularly for the sake
of showing her feet; not a woman in Egypt or Greece had a smaller or
more finely formed foot than she. For this reason her sandals were so
made that when she stood or walked they protected only the soles of
her feet, and her slender white toes with the roseate nails and their
polished white half-moons were left uncovered.

At the banquet she put off her shoes altogether, as the men did; hiding
her feet at first however, and not displaying them till she thought
the marks left on her tender skin by the straps of the sandals had
completely disappeared.

Eulaeus was the greatest admirer of these feet; not, as he averred, on
account of their beauty, but because the play of the queen’s toes showed
him exactly what was passing in her mind, when he was quite unable to
detect what was agitating her soul in the expression of her mouth and
eyes, well practised in the arts of dissimulation.

Nine couches, arranged three and three in a horseshoe, invited the
guests to repose, with their arms of ebony and cushions of dull
olive-green brocade, on which a delicate pattern of gold and silver
seemed just to have been breathed.

The queen, shrugging her shoulders, and, as it would seem, by no means
agreeably surprised at something, whispered to the chamberlain, who then
indicated to each guest the place he was to occupy. To the right of the
central group reclined the queen, and her husband took his place to
the left; the couch between the royal pair, destined for their brother
Euergetes, remained unoccupied.

On one of the three couches which formed the right-hand angle with those
of the royal family, Publius found a place next to Cleopatra; opposite
to him, and next the king, was Lysias the Corinthian. Two places next to
him remained vacant, while on the side by the Roman reclined the
brave and prudent Hierax, the friend of Ptolemy Euergetes and his most
faithful follower.

While the servants strewed the couches with rose leaves, sprinkled
perfumed waters, and placed by the couch of each guest a small
table-made of silver and of a slab of fine, reddish-brown porphyry,
veined with white-the king addressed a pleasant greeting to each guest,
apologizing for the smallness of the number.

“Eulaeus,” he said, “has been forced to leave us on business, and our
royal brother is still sitting over his books with Aristarchus, who came
with him from Alexandria; but he promised certainly to come.”

“The fewer we are,” replied Lysias, bowing low, “the more honorable is
the distinction of belonging to so limited a number of your majesty’s
most select associates.”

“I certainly think we have chosen the best from among the good,” said
the queen. “But even the small number of friends I had invited must have
seemed too large to my brother Euergetes, for he--who is accustomed
to command in other folks’ houses as he does in his own--forbid the
chamberlain to invite our learned friends--among whom Agatharchides, my
brothers’ and my own most worthy tutor, is known to you--as well as our
Jewish friends who were present yesterday at our table, and whom I had
set down on my list. I am very well satisfied however, for I like
the number of the Muses; and perhaps he desired to do you, Publius,
particular honor, since we are assembled here in the Roman fashion. It
is in your honor, and not in his, that we have no music this evening;
you said that you did not particularly like it at a banquet. Euergetes
himself plays the harp admirably. However, it is well that he is late in
coming as usual, for the day after tomorrow is his birthday, and he is
to spend it here with us and not in Alexandria; the priestly delegates
assembled in the Bruchion are to come from thence to Memphis to wish him
joy, and we must endeavor to get up some brilliant festival. You have no
love for Eulaeus, Publius, but he is extremely skilled in such matters,
and I hope he will presently return to give us his advice.”

“For the morning we will have a grand procession,” cried the king.
“Euergetes delights in a splendid spectacle, and I should be glad to
show him how much pleasure his visit has given us.”

The king’s fine features wore a most winning expression as he spoke
these words with heart-felt warmth, but his consort said thoughtfully:
“Aye! if only we were in Alexandria--but here, among all the Egyptian
people--”




CHAPTER IX.

A loud laugh re-echoing from the marble walls of the state-room
interrupted the queen’s speech; at first she started, but then smiled
with pleasure as she recognized her brother Euergetes, who, pushing
aside the chamberlains, approached the company with an elderly Greek,
who walked by his side.

“By all the dwellers on Olympus! By the whole rabble of gods and beasts
that live in the temples by the Nile!” cried the new-comer, again
laughing so heartily that not only his fat cheeks but his whole
immensely stout young frame swayed and shook. “By your pretty little
feet, Cleopatra, which could so easily be hidden, and yet are always
to be seen--by all your gentle virtues, Philometor, I believe you are
trying to outdo the great Philadelphus or our Syrian uncle Antiochus,
and to get up a most unique procession; and in my honor! Just so! I
myself will take a part in the wonderful affair, and my sturdy person
shall represent Eros with his quiver and bow. Some Ethiopian dame
must play the part of my mother Aphrodite; she will look the part to
perfection, rising from the white sea-foam with her black skin. And what
do you think of a Pallas with short woolly hair; of the Charities
with broad, flat Ethiopian feet; and an Egyptian, with his shaven head
mirroring the sun, as Phoebus Apollo?”

With these words the young giant of twenty years threw himself on the
vacant couch between his brother and sister, and, after bowing, not
without dignity, to the Roman, whom his brother named to him, he called
one of the young Macedonians of noble birth who served at the feast as
cup-bearers, had his cup filled once and again and yet a third time,
drinking it off quickly and without setting it down; then he said in
a loud tone, while he pushed his hands through his tossed, light brown
hair, till it stood straight up in the air from his broad temples and
high brow:

“I must make up for what you have had before I came.--Another cup-full
Diocleides.”

“Wild boy!” said Cleopatra, holding up her finger at him half in jest
and half in grave warning. “How strange you look!”

“Like Silenus without the goat’s hoofs,” answered Euergetes. “Hand me a
mirror here, Diocleides; follow the eyes of her majesty the queen,
and you will be sure to find one. There is the thing! And in fact the
picture it shows me does not displease me. I see there a head on which
besides the two crowns of Egypt a third might well find room, and in
which there is so much brains that they might suffice to fill the skulls
of four kings to the brim. I see two vulture’s eyes which are always
keen of sight even when their owner is drunk, and that are in danger
of no peril save from the flesh of these jolly cheeks, which, if they
continue to increase so fast, must presently exclude the light, as the
growth of the wood encloses a piece of money stuck into a rift in a
tree-or as a shutter, when it is pushed to, closes up a window. With
these hands and arms the fellow I see in the mirror there could, at
need, choke a hippopotamus; the chain that is to deck this neck must be
twice as long as that worn by a well-fed Egyptian priest. In this mirror
I see a man, who is moulded out of a sturdy clay, baked out of more
unctuous and solid stuff than other folks; and if the fine creature
there on the bright surface wears a transparent robe, what have you to
say against it, Cleopatra? The Ptolemaic princes must protect the import
trade of Alexandria, that fact was patent even to the great son of
Lagus; and what would become of our commerce with Cos if I did not
purchase the finest bombyx stuffs, since those who sell it make no
profits out of you, the queen--and you cover yourself, like a vestal
virgin, in garments of tapestry. Give me a wreath for my head--aye and
another to that, and new wine in the cup! To the glory of Rome and
to your health, Publius Cornelius Scipio, and to our last critical
conjecture, my Aristarchus--to subtle thinking and deep drinking!”

“To deep thinking and subtle drinking!” retorted the person thus
addressed, while he raised the cup, looked into the wine with his
twinkling eyes and lifted it slowly to his nose--a long, well-formed and
slightly aquiline nose--and to his thin lips.

“Oh! Aristarchus,” exclaimed Euergetes, and he frowned. “You please me
better when you clear up the meaning of your poets and historians than
when you criticise the drinking-maxims of a king. Subtle drinking is
mere sipping, and sipping I leave to the bitterns and other birds that
live content among the reeds. Do you understand me? Among reeds, I
say--whether cut for writing, or no.”

“By subtle drinking,” replied the great critic with perfect
indifference, as he pushed the thin, gray hair from his high brow with
his slender hand. “By subtle drinking I mean the drinking of choice
wine, and did you ever taste anything more delicate than this juice of
the vines of Anthylla that your illustrious brother has set before us?
Your paradoxical axiom commends you at once as a powerful thinker and as
the benevolent giver of the best of drinks.”

“Happily turned,” exclaimed Cleopatra, clapping her hands, “you here
see, Publius, a proof of the promptness of an Alexandrian tongue.”

“Yes!” said Euergetes, “if men could go forth to battle with words
instead of spears the masters of the Museum in Alexander’s city, with
Aristarchus at their head, they might rout the united armies of Rome and
Carthage in a couple of hours.”

“But we are not now in the battle-field but at a peaceful meal,” said
the king, with suave amiability. “You did in fact overhear our secret
Euergetes, and mocked at my faithful Egyptians, in whose place I would
gladly set fair Greeks if only Alexandria still belonged to me instead
of to you.--However, a splendid procession shall not be wanting at your
birthday festival.”

“And do you really still take pleasure in these eternal goose-step
performances?” asked Euergetes, stretching himself out on his couch,
and folding his hands to support the back of his head. “Sooner could
I accustom myself to the delicate drinking of Aristarchus than sit
for hours watching these empty pageants. On two conditions only can
I declare myself ready and willing to remain quiet, and patiently to
dawdle through almost half a day, like an ape in a cage: First, if it
will give our Roman friend Publius Cornelius Scipio any pleasure to
witness such a performance--though, since our uncle Antiochus pillaged
our wealth, and since we brothers shared Egypt between us, our
processions are not to be even remotely compared to the triumphs of
Roman victors--or, secondly, if I am allowed to take an active part in
the affair.”

“On my account, Sire,” replied Publius, “no procession need be arranged,
particularly not such a one as I should here be obliged to look on at.”

“Well! I still enjoy such things,” said Cleopatra’s husband.
“Well-arranged groups, and the populace pleased and excited are a sight
I am never tired of.”

“As for me,” cried Cleopatra, “I often turn hot and cold, and the tears
even spring to my eyes, when the shouting is loudest. A great mass of
men all uniting in a common emotion always has a great effect. A drop, a
grain of sand, a block of stone are insignificant objects, but
millions of them together, forming the sea, the desert or the pyramids,
constitute a sublime whole. One man alone, shouting for joy, is like
a madman escaped from an asylum, but when thousands of men rejoice
together it must have a powerful effect on the coldest heart. How is
it that you, Publius Scipio, in whom a strong will seems to me to have
found a peculiarly happy development, can remain unmoved by a scene in
which the great collective will of a people finds its utterance?”

“Is there then any expression of will, think you,” said the Roman, “in
this popular rejoicing? It is just in such circumstances that each man
becomes the involuntary mimic and duplicate of his neighbor; while I
love to make my own way, and to be independent of everything but the
laws and duties laid upon me by the state to which I belong.”

“And I,” said Euergetes, “from my childhood have always looked on
at processions from the very best places, and so it is that fortune
punishes me now with indifference to them and to everything of the kind;
while the poor miserable devil who can never catch sight of anything
more than the nose or the tip of a hair or the broad back of those who
take part in them, always longs for fresh pageants. As you hear, I need
have no consideration for Publius Scipio in this, willing as I should be
to do so. Now what would you say, Cleopatra, if I myself took a part in
my procession--I say mine, since it is to be in my honor; that really
would be for once something new and amusing.”

“More new and amusing than creditable, I think,” replied Cleopatra
dryly.

“And yet even that ought to please you,” laughed Euergetes. “Since,
besides being your brother, I am your rival, and we would sooner see our
rivals lower themselves than rise.”

“Do not try to justify yourself by such words,” interrupted the king
evasively, and with a tone of regret in his soft voice. “We love you
truly; we are ready to yield you your dominion side by side with ours,
and I beg you to avoid such speeches even in jest, so that bygones may
be bygones.”

“And,” added Cleopatra, “not to detract from your dignity as a king and
your fame as a sage by any such fool’s pranks.”

“Madam teacher, do you know then what I had in my mind? I would
appear as Alcibiades, followed by a train of flute-playing women, with
Aristarchus to play the part of Socrates. I have often been told that
he and I resemble each other--in many points, say the more sincere; in
every point, say the more polite of my friends.”

At these words Publius measured with his eye the frame of the royal
young libertine, enveloped in transparent robes; and recalling to
himself, as he gazed, a glorious statue of that favorite of the
Athenians, which he had seen in the Ilissus, an ironical smile passed
over his lips. It was not unobserved by Euergetes and it offended him,
for there was nothing he liked better than to be compared to the nephew
of Pericles; but he suppressed his annoyance, for Publius Cornelius
Scipio was the nearest relative of the most influential men of Rome,
and, though he himself wielded royal power, Rome exercised over him the
sovereign will of a divinity.

Cleopatra noticed what was passing in her brother’s mind, and in
order to interrupt his further speech and to divert his mind to fresh
thoughts, she said cheerfully:

“Let us then give up the procession, and think of some other mode of
celebrating your birthday. You, Lysias, must be experienced in such
matters, for Publius tells me that you were the leader in all the games
of Corinth. What can we devise to entertain Euergetes and ourselves?”

The Corinthian looked for a moment into his cup, moving it slowly about
on the marble slab of the little table at his side, between an oyster
pasty and a dish of fresh asparagus; and then he said, glancing round to
win the suffrages of the company:

“At the great procession which took place under Ptolemy
Philadelphus--Agatharchides gave me the description of it, written by
the eye-witness Kallixenus, to read only yesterday--all kinds of scenes
from the lives of the gods were represented before the people. Suppose
we were to remain in this magnificent palace, and to represent ourselves
the beautiful groups which the great artists of the past have produced
in painting or sculpture; but let us choose those only that are least
known.”

“Splendid,” cried Cleopatra in great excitement, “who can be more like
Heracles than my mighty brother there--the very son of Alcmene, as
Lysippus has conceived and represented him? Let us then represent
the life of Heracles from grand models, and in every case assign to
Euergetes the part of the hero.”

“Oh! I will undertake it,” said the young king, feeling the mighty
muscles of his breast and arms, “and you may give me great credit for
assuming the part, for the demi-god who strangled the snakes was lacking
in the most important point, and it was not without due consideration
that Lysippus represented him with a small head on his mighty body; but
I shall not have to say anything.”

“If I play Omphale will you sit at my feet?” asked Cleopatra.

“Who would not be willing to sit at those feet?” answered Euergetes.
“Let us at once make further choice among the abundance of subjects
offered to us, but, like Lysias, I would warn you against those that are
too well-known.”

“There are no doubt things commonplace to the eye as well as to the
ear,” said Cleopatra. “But what is recognized as good is commonly
regarded as most beautiful.”

“Permit me,” said Lysias, “to direct your attention to a piece of
sculpture in marble of the noblest workmanship, which is both old and
beautiful, and yet which may be known to few among you. It exists on the
cistern of my father’s house at Corinth, and was executed many centuries
since by a great artist of the Peloponnesus. Publius was delighted
with the work, and it is in fact beautiful beyond description. It is an
exquisite representation of the marriage of Heracles and Hebe--of the
hero, raised to divinity, with sempiternal youth. Will Your Majesty
allow yourself to be led by Pallas Athene and your mother Alcmene to
your nuptials with Hebe?”

“Why not?” said Euergetes. “Only the Hebe must be beautiful. But one
thing must be considered; how are we to get the cistern from your
father’s house at Corinth to this place by to-morrow or next day? Such a
group cannot be posed from memory without the original to guide us; and
though the story runs that the statue of Serapis flew from Sinope to
Alexandria, and though there are magicians still at Memphis--”

“We shall not need them,” interrupted Publius, “while I was staying as
a guest in the house of my friend’s parents--which is altogether more
magnificent than the old castle of King Gyges at Sardis--I had some gems
engraved after this lovely group, as a wedding-present for my sister.
They are extremely successful, and I have them with me in my tent.”

“Have you a sister?” asked the queen, leaning over towards the Roman.
“You must tell me all about her.”

“She is a girl like all other girls,” replied Publius, looking down at
the ground, for it was most repugnant to his feelings to speak of his
sister in the presence of Euergetes.

“And you are unjust like all other brothers,” said Cleopatra smiling,
“and I must hear more about her, for”--and she whispered the words and
looked meaningly at Publius--“all that concerns you must interest me.”

During this dialogue the royal brothers had addressed themselves to
Lysias with questions as to the marriage of Heracles and Hebe, and all
the company were attentive to the Greek as he went on: “This fine work
does not represent the marriage properly speaking, but the moment when
the bridegroom is led to the bride. The hero, with his club on his
shoulder, and wearing the lion’s skin, is led by Pallas Athene, who, in
performing this office of peace, has dropped her spear and carries her
helmet in her hand; they are accompanied by his mother Alcmene, and
are advancing towards the bride’s train. This is headed by no less a
personage than Apollo himself, singing the praises of Hymenaeus to a
lute. With him walks his sister Artemis and behind them the mother of
Hebe, accompanied by Hermes, the messenger of the gods, as the envoy of
Zeus. Then follows the principal group, which is one of the most lovely
works of Greek art that I am acquainted with. Hebe comes forward to meet
her bridegroom, gently led on by Aphrodite, the queen of love.
Peitho, the goddess of persuasion, lays her hand on the bride’s arm,
imperceptibly urging her forward and turning away her face; for what she
had to say has been said, and she smiles to herself, for Hebe has not
turned a deaf ear to her voice, and he who has once listened to Peitho
must do what she desires.”

“And Hebe?” asked Cleopatra.

“She casts down her eyes, but lifts up the arm on which the hand of
Peitho rests with a warning movement of her fingers, in which she holds
an unopened rose, as though she would say; ‘Ah! let me be--I tremble at
the man’--or ask: ‘Would it not be better that I should remain as I am
and not yield to your temptations and to Aphrodite’s power?’ Oh! Hebe is
exquisite, and you, O Queen! must represent her!”

“I!” exclaimed Cleopatra. “But you said her eyes were cast down.”

“That is from modesty and timidity, and her gait must also be bashful
and maidenly. Her long robe falls to her feet in simple folds, while
Peitho holds hers up saucily, between her forefinger and thumb, as if
stealthily dancing with triumph over her recent victory. Indeed the
figure of Peitho would become you admirably.”

“I think I will represent Peitho,” said the queen interrupting the
Corinthian. “Hebe is but a bud, an unopened blossom, while I am a
mother, and I flatter myself I am something of a philosopher--”

“And can with justice assure yourself,” interrupted Aristarchus, “that
with every charm of youth you also possess the characters attributed to
Peitho, the goddess, who can work her spells not only on the heart but
on the intellect also. The maiden bud is as sweet to look upon as
the rose, but he who loves not merely color but perfume too--I mean
refreshment, emotion and edification of spirit--must turn to the
full-blown flower; as the rose--growers of lake Moeris twine only the
buds of their favorite flower into wreaths and bunches, but cannot use
them for extracting the oil of imperishable fragrance; for that they
need the expanded blossom. Represent Peitho, my Queen! the goddess
herself might be proud of such a representative.”

“And if she were so indeed,” cried Cleopatra, “how happy am I to hear
such words from the lips of Aristarchus. It is settled--I play Peitho.
My companion Zoe may take the part of Artemis, and her grave sister
that of Pallas Athene. For the mother’s part we have several matrons to
choose from; the eldest daughter of Epitropes appears to me fitted for
the part of Aphrodite; she is wonderfully lovely.”

“Is she stupid too?” asked Euergetes. “That is also an attribute of the
ever-smiling Cypria.”

“Enough so, I think, for our purpose,” laughed Cleopatra. “But where are
we to find such a Hebe as you have described, Lysias? The daughter of
Alimes the Arabarch is a charming child.”

“But she is brown, as brown as this excellent wine, and too thoroughly
Egyptian,” said the high-steward, who superintended the young Macedonian
cup-bearers; he bowed deeply as he spoke, and modestly drew the queen’s
attention to his own daughter, a maiden of sixteen. But Cleopatra
objected, that she was much taller than herself, and that she would have
to stand by the Hebe, and lay her hand on her arm.

Other maidens were rejected on various grounds, and Euergetes had
already proposed to send off a carrier-pigeon to Alexandria to command
that some fair Greek girl should be sent by an express quadriga to
Memphis--where the dark Egyptian gods and men flourish, and are more
numerous than the fair race of Greeks--when Lysias exclaimed:

“I saw to-day the very girl we want, a Hebe that might have stepped out
from the marble group at my father’s, and have been endued with life and
warmth and color by some god. Young, modest, rose and white, and just
about as tall as Your Majesty. If you will allow me, I will not tell you
who she is, till after I have been to our tent to fetch the gems with
the copies of the marble.”

“You will find them in an ivory casket at the bottom of my
clothes-chest,” said Publius; “here is the key.”

“Make haste,” cried the queen, “for we are all curious to hear where in
Memphis you discovered your modest, rose and white Hebe.”




CHAPTER X.

An hour had slipped by with the royal party, since Lysias had quitted
the company; the wine-cups had been filled and emptied many times;
Eulaeus had rejoined the feasters, and the conversation had taken
quite another turn, since the whole of the company were not now equally
interested in the same subject; on the contrary, the two kings were
discussing with Aristarchus the manuscripts of former poets and of the
works of the sages, scattered throughout Greece, and the ways and means
of obtaining them or of acquiring exact transcripts of them for the
library of the Museum. Hierax was telling Eulaeus of the last Dionysiac
festival, and of the representation of the newest comedy in Alexandria,
and Eulaeus assumed the appearance--not unsuccessfully--of listening
with both ears, interrupting him several times with intelligent
questions, bearing directly on what he had said, while in fact his
attention was exclusively directed to the queen, who had taken entire
possession of the Roman Publius, telling him in a low tone of her
life--which was consuming her strength--of her unsatisfied affections,
and her enthusiasm for Rome and for manly vigor. As she spoke her cheeks
glowed and her eyes sparkled, for the more exclusively she kept the
conversation in her own hands the better she thought she was being
entertained; and Publius, who was nothing less than talkative, seldom
interrupted her, only insinuating a flattering word now and then when
it seemed appropriate; for he remembered the advice given him by the
anchorite, and was desirous of winning the good graces of Cleopatra.

In spite of his sharp ears Eulaeus could understand but little of their
whispered discourse, for King Euergetes’ powerful voice sounded loud
above the rest of the conversation; but Eulaeus was able swiftly to
supply the links between the disjointed sentences, and to grasp the
general sense, at any rate, of what she was saying. The queen avoided
wine, but she had the power of intoxicating herself, so to speak, with
her own words, and now just as her brothers and Aristarchus were at the
height of their excited and eager question and answer--she raised her
cup, touched it with her lips and handed it to Publius, while at the
same time she took hold of his.

The young Roman knew well enough all the significance of this hasty
action; it was thus that in his own country a woman when in love was
wont to exchange her cup with her lover, or an apple already bitten by
her white teeth.

Publius was seized with a cold shudder--like a wanderer who carelessly
pursues his way gazing up at the moon and stars, and suddenly perceives
an abyss yawning; at his feet. Recollections of his mother and of
her warnings against the seductive wiles of the Egyptian women,
and particularly of this very woman, flashed through his mind like
lightning; she was looking at him--not royally by any means, but with
anxious and languishing gaze, and he would gladly have kept his eyes
fixed on the ground, and have left the cup untouched; but her eye held
his fast as though fettering it with ties and bonds; and to put aside
the cup seemed to the most fearless son of an unconquered nation a deed
too bold to be attempted. Besides, how could he possibly repay this
highest favor with an affront that no woman could ever forgive--least of
all a Cleopatra?

Aye, many a life’s happiness is tossed away and many a sin committed,
because the favor of women is a grace that does honor to every man, and
that flatters him even when it is bestowed by the unloved and unworthy.
For flattery is a key to the heart, and when the heart stands half open
the voice of the tempter is never wanting to whisper: “You will hurt her
feelings if you refuse.”

These were the deliberations which passed rapidly and confusedly through
the young Roman’s agitated brain, as he took the queen’s cup and set his
lips to the same spot that hers had touched. Then, while he emptied the
cup in long draughts, he felt suddenly seized by a deep aversion to the
over-talkative, overdressed and capricious woman before him, who thus
forced upon him favors for which he had not sued; and suddenly there
rose before his soul the image, almost tangibly distinct, of the humble
water-bearer; he saw Klea standing before him and looking far more
queenly as, proud and repellent, she avoided his gaze, than the
sovereign by his side could ever have done, though crowned with a
diadem.

Cleopatra rejoiced to mark his long slow draught, for she thought the
Roman meant to imply by it that he could not cease to esteem himself
happy in the favor she had shown him. She did not take her eyes off him,
and observed with pleasure that his color changed to red and white; nor
did she notice that Eulaeus was watching, with a twinkle in his eyes,
all that was going on between her and Publius. At last the Roman set
down the cup, and tried with some confusion to reply to her question as
to how he had liked the flavor of the wine.

“Very fine--excellent--” at last he stammered out, but he was no longer
looking at Cleopatra but at Euergetes, who just then cried out loudly:

“I have thought over that passage for hours, I have given you all my
reasons and have let you speak, Aristarchus, but I maintain my opinion,
and whoever denies it does Homer an injustice; in this place ‘siu’ must
be read instead of ‘iu’.”

Euergetes spoke so vehemently that his voice outshouted all the other
guests; Publius however snatched at his words, to escape the necessity
for feigning sentiments he could not feel; so he said, addressing
himself half to the speaker and half to Cleopatra:

“Of what use can it be to decide whether it is one or the other--‘iu’ or
‘siu’. I find many things justifiable in other men that are foreign
to my own nature, but I never could understand how an energetic and
vigorous man, a prudent sovereign and stalwart drinker--like you,
Euergetes--can sit for hours over flimsy papyrus-rolls, and rack his
brains to decide whether this or that in Homer should be read in one way
or another.”

“You exercise yourself in other things,” replied Euergetes. “I consider
that part of me which lies within this golden fillet as the best that I
have, and I exercise my wits on the minutest and subtlest questions just
as I would try the strength of my arms against the sturdiest athletes. I
flung five into the sand the last time I did so, and they quake now when
they see me enter the gymnasium of Timagetes. There would be no strength
in the world if there were no obstacles, and no man would know that he
was strong if he could meet with no resistance to overcome. I for my
part seek such exercises as suit my idiosyncrasy, and if they are not
to your taste I cannot help it. If you were to set these excellently
dressed crayfish before a fine horse he would disdain them, and could
not understand how foolish men could find anything palatable that tasted
so salt. Salt, in fact, is not suited to all creatures! Men born far
from the sea do not relish oysters, while I, being a gourmand, even
prefer to open them myself so that they may be perfectly fresh, and mix
their liquor with my wine.”

“I do not like any very salt dish, and am glad to leave the opening of
all marine produce to my servants,” answered Publius. “Thereby I save
both time and unnecessary trouble.”

“Oh! I know!” cried Euergetes. “You keep Greek slaves, who must even
read and write for you. Pray is there a market where I may purchase men,
who, after a night of carousing, will bear our headache for us? By the
shores of the Tiber you love many things better than learning.”

“And thereby,” added Aristarchus, “deprive yourselves of the noblest and
subtlest of pleasures, for the purest enjoyment is ever that which we
earn at the cost of some pains and effort.”

“But all that you earn by this kind of labor,” returned Publius, “is
petty and unimportant. It puts me in mind of a man who removes a block
of stone in the sweat of his brow only to lay it on a sparrow’s feather
in order that it may not be carried away by the wind.”

“And what is great--and what is small?” asked Aristarchus. “Very
opposite opinions on that subject may be equally true, since it depends
solely on us and our feelings how things appear to us--whether cold or
warm; lovely or repulsive--and when Protagoras says that ‘man is the
measure of all things,’ that is the most acceptable of all the maxims
of the Sophists; moreover the smallest matter--as you will fully
appreciate--acquires an importance all the greater in proportion as the
thing is perfect, of which it forms a part. If you slit the ear of a
cart-horse, what does it signify? but suppose the same thing were to
happen to a thoroughbred horse, a charger that you ride on to battle!

“A wrinkle or a tooth more or less in the face of a peasant woman
matters little, or not at all, but it is quite different in a celebrated
beauty. If you scrawl all over the face with which the coarse finger of
the potter has decorated a water-jar, the injury to the wretched pot is
but small, but if you scratch, only with a needle’s point, that gem
with the portraits of Ptolemy and Arsinoe, which clasps Cleopatra’s robe
round her fair throat, the richest queen will grieve as though she had
suffered some serious loss.

“Now, what is there more perfect or more worthy to be treasured than the
noblest works of great thinkers and great poets.

“To preserve them from injury, to purge them from the errors which, in
the course of time, may have spotted their immaculate purity, this is
our task; and if we do indeed raise blocks of stone it is not to weight
a sparrow’s feather that it may not be blown away, but to seal the door
which guards a precious possession, and to preserve a gem from injury.

“The chatter of girls at a fountain is worth nothing but to be wafted
away on the winds, and to be remembered by none; but can a son ever
deem that one single word is unimportant which his dying father has
bequeathed to him as a clue to his path in life? If you yourself were
such a son, and your ear had not perfectly caught the parting counsels
of the dying-how many talents of silver would you not pay to be able to
supply the missing words? And what are immortal works of the great poets
and thinkers but such sacred words of warning addressed, not to a single
individual, but to all that are not barbarians, however many they maybe.
They will elevate, instruct, and delight our descendants a thousand
years hence as they do us at this day, and they, if they are not
degenerate and ungrateful will be thankful to those who have devoted
the best powers of their life to completing and restoring all that our
mighty forefathers have said, as it must have originally stood before it
was mutilated, and spoiled by carelessness and folly.

“He who, like King Euergetes, puts one syllable in Homer right, in
place of a wrong one, in my opinion has done a service to succeeding
generations--aye and a great service.”

“What you say,” replied Publius, “sounds convincing, but it is still
not perfectly clear to me; no doubt because I learned at an early age to
prefer deeds to words. I find it more easy to reconcile my mind to your
painful and minute labors when I reflect that to you is entrusted the
restoration of the literal tenor of laws, whose full meaning might be
lost by a verbal error; or that wrong information might be laid
before me as to one single transaction in the life of a friend or of a
blood-relation, and it might lie with me to clear him of mistakes and
misinterpretation.”

“And what are the works of the great singers of the deeds of the
heroes-of the writers of past history, but the lives of our fathers
related either with veracious exactness or with poetic adornments?”
 cried Aristarchus. “It is to these that my king and companion in study
devotes himself with particular zeal.”

“When he is neither drinking, nor raving, nor governing, nor wasting his
time in sacrificing and processions,” interpolated Euergetes. “If I had
not been a king perhaps I might have been an Aristarchus; as it is I
am but half a king--since half of my kingdom belongs to you,
Philometor--and but half a student; for when am I to find perfect quiet
for thinking and writing? Everything, everything in me is by halves, for
I, if the scale were to turn in my favor”--and here he struck his chest
and his forehead, “I should be twice the man I am. I am my whole real
self nowhere but at high festivals, when the wine sparkles in the cup,
and bright eyes flash from beneath the brows of the flute-players of
Alexandria or Cyrene--sometimes too perhaps in council when the risk is
great, or when there is something vast and portentous to be done from
which my brother and you others, all of you, would shrink--nay perhaps
even the Roman. Aye! so it is--and you will learn to know it.”

Euergetes had roared rather than spoken the last words; his cheeks were
flushed, his eyes rolled, while he took from his head both the garland
of flowers and the golden fillet, and once more pushed his fingers
through his hair.

His sister covered her ears with her hands, and said: “You positively
hurt me! As no one is contradicting you, and you, as a man of culture,
are not accustomed to add force to your assertions, like the Scythians,
by speaking in a loud tone, you would do well to save your metallic
voice for the further speech with which it is to be hoped you will
presently favor us. We have had to bow more than once already to the
strength of which you boast--but now, at a merry feast, we will not
think of that, but rather continue the conversation which entertained
us, and which had begun so well. This eager defence of the interests
which most delight the best of the Hellenes in Alexandria may perhaps
result in infusing into the mind of our friend Publius Scipio--and
through him into that of many young Romans--a proper esteem for a line
of intellectual effort which he could not have condemned had he not
failed to understand it perfectly.

“Very often some striking poetical turn given to a subject makes it,
all at once, clear to our comprehension, even when long and learned
disquisitions have failed; and I am acquainted with such an one,
written by an anonymous author, and which may please you--and you too,
Aristarchus. It epitomizes very happily the subject of our discussion.
The lines run as follows:

          “Behold, the puny Child of Man
          Sits by Time’s boundless sea,
          And gathers in his feeble hand
          Drops of Eternity.

          “He overhears some broken words
          Of whispered mystery
          He writes them in a tiny book
          And calls it ‘History!’

“We owe these verses to an accomplished friend; another has amplified
the idea by adding the two that follow:

          “If indeed the puny Child of Man
          Had not gathered drops from that wide sea,
          Those small deeds that fill his little span
          Had been lost in dumb Eternity.

          “Feeble is his hand, and yet it dare
          Seize some drops of that perennial stream;
          As they fall they catch a transient gleam--
          Lo! Eternity is mirrored there!

“What are we all but puny children? And those of us who gather up the
drops surely deserve our esteem no less than those who spend their lives
on the shore of that great ocean in mere play and strife--”

“And love,” threw in Eulaeus in a low voice, as he glanced towards
Publius.

“Your poet’s verses are pretty and appropriate,” Aristarchus now said,
“and I am very happy to find myself compared to the children who catch
the falling drops. There was a time--which came to an end, alas! with
the great Aristotle--when there were men among the Greeks, who fed the
ocean of which you speak with new tributaries; for the gods had bestowed
on them the power of opening new sources, like the magician Moses, of
whom Onias, the Jew, was lately telling us, and whose history I have
read in the sacred books of the Hebrews. He, it is true--Moses I
mean--only struck water from the rock for the use of the body, while to
our philosophers and poets we owe inexhaustible springs to refresh the
mind and soul. The time is now past which gave birth to such divine and
creative spirits; as your majesties’ forefathers recognized full well
when they founded the Museum of Alexandria and the Library, of which I
am one of the guardians, and which I may boast of having completed with
your gracious assistance. When Ptolemy Soter first created the Museum in
Alexandria the works of the greatest period could receive no additions
in the form of modern writings of the highest class; but he set
us--children of man, gathering the drops--the task of collecting and of
sifting them, of eliminating errors in them--and I think we have proved
ourselves equal to this task.

“It has been said that it is no less difficult to keep a fortune than to
deserve it; and so perhaps we, who are merely ‘keepers’ may nevertheless
make some credit--all the more because we have been able to arrange the
wealth we found under hand, to work it profitably, to apply it well, to
elucidate it, and to make it available. When anything new is created
by one of our circle we always link it on to the old; and in many
departments we have indeed even succeeded in soaring above the
ancients, particularly in that of the experimental sciences. The sublime
intelligence of our forefathers commanded a broad horizon--our narrower
vision sees more clearly the objects that lie close to us. We have
discovered the sure path for all intellectual labor, the true scientific
method; and an observant study of things as they are, succeeds better
with us than it did with our predecessors. Hence it follows that in the
provinces of the natural sciences, in mathematics, astronomy,
mechanics and geography the sages of our college have produced works of
unsurpassed merit. Indeed the industry of my associates--”

“Is very great,” cried Euergetes. “But they stir up such a dust that all
free-thought is choked, and because they value quantity above all things
in the results they obtain, they neglect to sift what is great from what
is small; and so Publius Scipio and others like him, who shrug their
shoulders over the labors of the learned, find cause enough to laugh in
their faces. Out of every four of you I should dearly like to set three
to some handicraft, and I shall do it too, one of these days--I shall
do it, and turn them and all their miserable paraphernalia out of
the Museum, and out of my capital. They may take refuge with you,
Philometor, you who marvel at everything you cannot do yourself, who
are always delighted to possess what I reject, and to make much of those
whom I condemn--and Cleopatra I dare say will play the harp, in honor of
their entering Memphis.”

“I dare say!” answered the queen, laughing bitterly. “Still, it is to be
expected that your wrath may fall even on worthy men. Until then I will
practise my music, and study the treatise on harmony that you have begun
writing. You are giving us proof to-day of how far you have succeeded in
attaining unison in your own soul.”

“I like you in this mood!” cried Euergetes. “I love you, sister, when
you are like this! It ill becomes the eagle’s brood to coo like the
dove, and you have sharp talons though you hide them never so well under
your soft feathers. It is true that I am writing a treatise on harmony,
and I am doing it with delight; still it is one of those phenomena
which, though accessible to our perception, are imperishable, for no
god even could discover it entire and unmixed in the world of realities.
Where is harmony to be found in the struggles and rapacious strife of
the life of the Cosmos? And our human existence is but the diminished
reflection of that process of birth and decease, of evolution and
annihilation, which is going on in all that is perceptible to our
senses; now gradually and invisibly, now violently and convulsively, but
never harmonyously.

“Harmony is at home only in the ideal world--harmony which is unknown
even among the gods harmony, whom I may know, and yet may never
comprehend--whom I love, and may never possess--whom I long for, and who
flies from me.

“I am as one that thirsteth, and harmony as the remote, unattainable
well--I am as one swimming in a wide sea, and she is the land which
recedes as I deem myself near to it.

“Who will tell me the name of the country where she rules as queen,
undisturbed and untroubled? And which is most in earnest in his pursuit
of the fair one: He who lies sleeping in her arms, or he who is consumed
by his passion for her?

“I am seeking what you deem that you possess.--Possess--!

“Look round you on the world and on life--look round, as I do, on this
hall of which you are so proud! It was built by a Greek; but, because
the simple melody of beautiful forms in perfect concord no longer
satisfies you, and your taste requires the eastern magnificence in which
you were born, because this flatters your vanity and reminds you, each
time you gaze upon it, that you are wealthy and powerful--you commanded
your architect to set aside simple grandeur, and to build this gaudy
monstrosity, which is no more like the banqueting-hall of a Pericles
than I or you, Cleopatra, in all our finery, are like the simply clad
gods and goddesses of Phidias. I mean not to offend you, Cleopatra, but
I must say this; I am writing now on the subject of harmony, and perhaps
I shall afterwards treat of justice, truth, virtue; although I know full
well that they are pure abstractions which occur neither in nature nor
in human life, and which in my dealings I wholly set aside; nevertheless
they seem to me worthy of investigation, like any other delusion, if by
resolving it we may arrive at conditional truth. It is because one man
is afraid of another that these restraints--justice, truth, and what
else you will--have received these high-sounding names, have been
stamped as characteristics of the gods, and placed under the protection
of the immortals; nay, our anxious care has gone so far that it has been
taught as a doctrine that it is beautiful and good to cloud our free
enjoyment of existence for the sake of these illusions. Think of
Antisthenes and his disciples, the dog-like Cynics--think of the fools
shut up in the temple of Serapis! Nothing is beautiful but what is
free, and he only is not free who is forever striving to check his
inclinations--for the most part in vain--in order to live, as feeble
cowards deem virtuously, justly and truthfully.

“One animal eats another when he has succeeded in capturing it, either
in open fight or by cunning and treachery; the climbing plant strangles
the tree, the desert-sand chokes the meadows, stars fall from heaven,
and earthquakes swallow up cities. You believe in the gods--and so do
I after my own fashion--and if they have so ordered the course of this
life in every class of existence that the strong triumph over the
weak, why should not I use my strength, why let it be fettered by those
much-belauded soporifics which our prudent ancestors concocted to cool
the hot blood of such men as I, and to paralyze our sinewy fists.

“Euergetes--the well-doer--I was named at my birth; but if men choose to
call me Kakergetes--the evil-doer--I do not mind it, since what you call
good I call narrow and petty, and what you call evil is the free and
unbridled exercise of power. I would be anything rather than lazy
and idle, for everything in nature is active and busy; and as, with
Aristippus, I hold pleasure to be the highest good, I would fain earn
the name of having enjoyed more than all other men; in the first place
in my mind, but no less in my body which I admire and cherish.”

During this speech many signs of disagreement had found expression,
and Publius, who for the first time in his life heard such vicious
sentiments spoken, followed the words of the headstrong youth
with consternation and surprise. He felt himself no match for this
overbearing spirit, trained too in all the arts of argument and
eloquence; but he could not leave all he had heard uncontroverted, and
so, as Euergetes paused in order to empty his refilled cup, he began:

“If we were all to act on your principles, in a few centuries, it seems
to me, there would be no one left to subscribe to them; for the earth
would be depopulated; and the manuscripts, in which you are so careful
to substitute ‘siu’ for ‘iu’, would be used by strong-handed mothers,
if any were left, to boil the pot for their children--in this country of
yours where there is no wood to burn. Just now you were boasting of your
resemblance to Alcibiades, but that very gift which distinguished
him, and made him dear to the Athenians--I mean his beauty--is hardly
possible in connection with your doctrines, which would turn men into
ravening beasts. He who would be beautiful must before all things be
able to control himself and to be moderate--as I learnt in Rome before
I ever saw Athens, and have remembered well. A Titan may perhaps have
thought and talked as you do, but an Alcibiades--hardly!”

At these words the blood flew to Euergetes’ face; but he suppressed the
keen and insulting reply that rose to his lips, and this little victory
over his wrathful impulse was made the more easy as Lysias, at this
moment, rejoined the feasters; he excused himself for his long absence,
and then laid before Cleopatra and her husband the gems belonging to
Publius.

They were warmly admired; even Euergetes was not grudging of his praise,
and each of the company admitted that he had rarely seen anything more
beautiful and graceful than the bashful Hebe with downcast eyes, and the
goddess of persuasion with her hand resting on the bride’s arm.

“Yes, I will take the part of Peitho,” said Cleopatra with decision.

“And I that of Heracles,” cried Euergetes.

“But who is the fair one,” asked King Philometor of Lysias, “whom you
have in your eye, as fulfilling this incomparably lovely conception of
Hebe? While you were away I recalled to memory the aspect of every woman
and girl who frequents our festivals, but only to reject them all, one
after the other.”

“The fair girl whom I mean,” replied Lysias, “has never entered this
or any other palace; indeed I am almost afraid of being too bold in
suggesting to our illustrious queen so humble a child as fit to stand
beside her, though only in sport.”

“I shall even have to touch her arm with my hand!” said the queen
anxiously, and she drew up her fingers as if she had to touch some
unclean thing. “If you mean a flower-seller or a flute-player or
something of that kind--”

“How could I dare to suggest anything so improper?” Lysias hastily
interposed. “The girl of whom I speak may be sixteen years old; she
is innocence itself incarnate, and she looks like a bud ready to open
perhaps in the morning dew that may succeed this very night, but which
as yet is still enfolded in its cup. She is of Greek race, about as tall
as you are, Cleopatra; she has wonderful gazelle-like eyes, her little
head is covered by a mass of abundant brown hair, when she smiles she
has delicious dimples in her cheeks--and she will be sure to smile when
such a Peitho speaks to her!”

“You are rousing our curiosity,” cried Philometor. “In what garden,
pray, does this blossom grow?”

“And how is it,” added Cleopatra, “that my husband has not discovered it
long since, and transplanted it to our palace.”

“Probably,” answered Lysias, “because he who possesses Cleopatra,
the fairest rose of Egypt, regards the violets by the roadside as too
insignificant to be worth glancing at. Besides, the hedge that fences
round my bud grows in a gloomy spot; it is difficult of access and
suspiciously watched. To be brief: our Hebe is a water-bearer in the
temple of Serapis, and her name is Irene.”




CHAPTER XI.

Lysias was one of those men from whose lips nothing ever sounds as if it
were meant seriously. His statement that he regarded a serving girl from
the temple of Serapis as fit to personate Hebe, was spoken as naturally
and simply as if he were telling a tale for children; but his words
produced an effect on his hearers like the sound of waters rushing into
a leaky ship.

Publius had turned perfectly white, and it was not till his friend
had uttered the name of Irene that he in some degree recovered his
composure; Philometor had struck his cup on the table, and called out in
much excitement:

“A water-bearer of Serapis to play Hebe in a gay festal performance! Do
you conceive it possible, Cleopatra?”

“Impossible--it is absolutely out of the question,” replied the
queen, decidedly. Euergetes, who also had opened his eyes wide at the
Corinthian’s proposition, sat for a long time gazing into his cup
in silence; while his brother and sister continued to express
their surprise and disapprobation and to speak of the respect and
consideration which even kings must pay to the priests and servants of
Serapis.

At length, once more lifting his wreath and crown, he raised his curls
with both hands, and said, quite calmly and decisively;

“We must have a Hebe, and must take her where we find her. If you
hesitate to allow the girl to be fetched it shall be done by my orders.
The priests of Serapis are for the most part Greeks, and the high-priest
is a Hellene. He will not trouble himself much about a half-grown-up
girl if he can thereby oblige you or me. He knows as well as the rest of
us that one hand washes the other! The only question now is--for I would
rather avoid all woman’s outcries--whether the girl will come willingly
or unwillingly if we send for her. What do you think, Lysias?”

“I believe she would sooner get out of prison to-day than to-morrow,”
 replied Lysias. “Irene is a lighthearted creature, and laughs as clearly
and merrily as a child at play--and besides that they starve her in her
cage.”

“Then I will have her fetched to-morrow!” said Euergetes.

“But,” interrupted Cleopatra, “Asclepiodorus must obey us and not you;
and we, my husband and I--”

“You cannot spoil sport with the priests,” laughed Euergetes. “If they
were Egyptians, then indeed! They are not to be taken in their nests
without getting pecked; but here, as I have said, we have to deal with
Greeks. What have you to fear from them? For aught I care you may
leave our Hebe where she is, but I was once much pleased with these
representations, and to-morrow morning, as soon as I have slept, I
shall return to Alexandria, if you do not carry them into effect, and
so deprive me, Heracles, of the bride chosen for me by the gods. I have
said what I have said, and I am not given to changing my mind. Besides,
it is time that we should show ourselves to our friends feasting here in
the next room. They are already merry, and it must be getting late.”

With these words Euergetes rose from his couch, and beckoned to Hierax
and a chamberlain, who arranged the folds of his transparent robe, while
Philometor and Cleopatra whispered together, shrugging their shoulders
and shaking their heads; and Publius, pressing his hand on the
Corinthian’s wrist, said in his ear: “You will not give them any help
if you value our friendship; we will leave as soon as we can do so with
propriety.”

Euergetes did not like to be kept waiting. He was already going towards
the door, when Cleopatra called him back, and said pleasantly, but with
gentle reproachfulness:

“You know that we are willing to follow the Egyptian custom of carrying
out as far as possible the wishes of a friend and brother for his
birthday festival; but for that very reason it is not right in you to
try to force us into a proceeding which we refuse with difficulty, and
yet cannot carry out without exposing ourselves to the most unpleasant
consequences. We beg you to make some other demand on us, and we will
certainly grant it if it lies in our power.”

The young colossus responded to his sister’s appeal with a loud shout
of laughter, waved his arm with a flourish of his hand expressive of
haughty indifference; and then he exclaimed:

“The only thing I really had a fancy for out of all your possessions you
are not willing to concede, and so I must abide by my word--or I go on
my way.”

Again Cleopatra and her husband exchanged a few muttered words and rapid
glances, Euergetes watching them the while; his legs straddled apart,
his huge body bent forward, and his hands resting on his hips. His
attitude expressed so much arrogance and puerile, defiant, unruly
audacity, that Cleopatra found it difficult to suppress an exclamation
of disgust before she spoke.

“We are indeed brethren,” she said, “and so, for the sake of the peace
which has been restored and preserved with so much difficulty, we give
in. The best way will be to request Asclepiodorus--”

But here Euergetes interrupted the queen, clapping his hands loudly and
laughing:

“That is right, sister! only find me my Hebe! How you do it is your
affair, and is all the same to me. To-morrow evening we will have a
rehearsal, and the day after we will give a representation of which our
grandchildren shall repeat the fame. Nor shall a brilliant audience be
lacking, for my complimentary visitors with their priestly splendor
and array of arms will, it is to be hoped, arrive punctually. Come, my
lords, we will go, and see what there is good to drink or to listen to
at the table in the next room.”

The doors were opened; music, loud talking, the jingle of cups, and the
noise of laughter sounded through them into the room where the princes
had been supping, and all the king’s guests followed Euergetes, with the
exception of Eulaeus. Cleopatra allowed them to depart without speaking
a word; only to Publius she said: “Till we meet again!” but she detained
the Corinthian, saying:

“You, Lysias, are the cause of this provoking business. Try now to
repair the mischief by bringing the girl to us. Do not hesitate! I will
guard her, protect her with the greatest care, rely upon me.”

“She is a modest maiden,” replied Lysias, “and will not accompany
me willingly, I am sure. When I proposed her for the part of Hebe I
certainly supposed that a word from you, the king and queen, would
suffice to induce the head of the temple to entrust her to you for a few
hours of harmless amusement. Pardon me if I too quit you now; I have the
key of my friend’s chest still in my possession, and must restore it to
him.”

“Shall we have her carried off secretly?” asked Cleopatra of her
husband, when the Corinthian had followed the other guests.

“Only let us have no scandal, no violence,” cried Philometor anxiously.
“The best way would be for me to write to Asclepiodorus, and beg him in
a friendly manner to entrust this girl--Ismene or Irene, or whatever the
ill-starred child’s name is--for a few days to you, Cleopatra, for your
pleasure. I can offer him a prospect of an addition to the gift of land
I made today, and which fell far short of his demands.”

“Let me entreat your majesty,” interposed Eulaeus, who was now alone
with the royal couple, “let me entreat you not to make any great
promises on this occasion, for the moment you do so Asclepiodorus will
attribute an importance to your desire--”

“Which it is far from having, and must not seem to have,” interrupted
the queen. “It is preposterous to waste so many words about a
miserable creature, a water-carrying girl, and to go through so much
disturbance--but how are we to put an end to it all? What is your
advice, Eulaeus?”

“I thank you for that enquiry, noble princess,” replied Eulaeus. “My
lord, the king, in my opinion, should have the girl carried off, but
not with any violence, nor by a man--whom she would hardly follow so
immediately as is necessary--but by a woman.

“I am thinking of the old Egyptian tale of ‘The Two Brothers,’ which you
are acquainted with. The Pharaoh desired to possess himself of the wife
of the younger one, who lived on the Mount of Cedars, and he sent armed
men to fetch her away; but only one of them came back to him, for Batau
had slain all the others. Then a woman was sent with splendid ornaments,
such as women love, and the fair one followed her unresistingly to the
palace.

“We may spare the ambassadors, and send only the woman; your lady in
waiting, Zoe, will execute this commission admirably. Who can blame us
in any way if a girl, who loves finery, runs away from her keepers?”

“But all the world will see her as Hebe,” sighed Philometor, “and
proclaim us--the sovereign protectors of the worship of Serapis--as
violators of the temple, if Asclepiodorus leads the cry. No, no, the
high-priest must first be courteously applied to. In the case of
his raising any difficulties, but not otherwise, shall Zoe make the
attempt.”

“So be it then,” said the queen, as if it were her part to express her
confirmation of her husband’s proposition.

“Let your lady accompany me,” begged Eulaeus, “and prefer your request
to Asclepiodorus. While I am speaking with the high-priest, Zoe can at
any rate win over the girl, and whatever we do must be done to-morrow,
or the Roman will be beforehand with us. I know that he has cast an eye
on Irene, who is in fact most lovely. He gives her flowers, feeds his
pet bird with pheasants and peaches and other sweetmeats, lets himself
be lured into the Serapeum by his lady-love as often as possible, stays
there whole hours, and piously follows the processions, in order to
present the violets with which you graciously honored him by giving them
to his fair one--who no doubt would rather wear royal flowers than any
others--”

“Liar!” cried the queen, interrupting the courtier in such violent
excitement and such ungoverned rage, so completely beside herself, that
her husband drew back startled.

“You are a slanderer! a base calumniator! The Roman attacks you with
naked weapons, but you slink in the dark, like a scorpion, and try
to sting your enemy in the heel. Apelles, the painter, warns us--the
grandchildren of Lagus--against folks of your kidney in the picture he
painted against Antiphilus; as I look at you I am reminded of his Demon
of Calumny. The same spite and malice gleam in your eyes as in hers, and
the same fury and greed for some victim, fire your flushed face! How
you would rejoice if the youth whom Apelles has represented Calumny as
clutching by the hair, could but be Publius! and if only the lean and
hollow-eyed form of Envy, and the loathsome female figures of Cunning
and Treachery would come to your did as they have to hers! But I
remember too the steadfast and truthful glance of the boy she has flung
to the ground, his arms thrown up to heaven, appealing for protection
to the goddess and the king--and though Publius Scipio is man enough
to guard himself against open attack, I will protect him against being
surprised from an ambush! Leave this room! Go, I say, and you shall see
how we punish slanderers!”

At these words Eulaeus flung himself at the queen’s feet, but she,
breathing hurriedly and with quivering nostrils, looked away over his
head as if she did not even see him, till her husband came towards her,
and said in a voice of most winning gentleness:

“Do not condemn him unheard, and raise him from his abasement. At least
give him the opportunity of softening your indignation by bringing the
water-bearer here without angering Asclepiodorus. Carry out this affair
well, Eulaeus, and you will find in me an advocate with Cleopatra.”

The king pointed to the door, and Eulaeus retired, bowing deeply and
finding his way out backwards. Philometer, now alone with his wife, said
with mild reproach:

“How could you abandon yourself to such unmeasured anger? So faithful
and prudent a servant--and one of the few still living of those to
whom our mother was attached--cannot be sent away like a mere clumsy
attendant. Besides, what is the great crime he has committed? Is it a
slander which need rouse you to such fury when a cautious old man says
in all innocence of a young one--a man belonging to a world which knows
nothing of the mysterious sanctity of Serapis--that he has taken a fancy
to a girl, who is admired by all who see her, that he seeks her out, and
gives her flowers--”

“Gives her flowers?” exclaimed Cleopatra, breaking out afresh. “No, he
is accused of persecuting a maiden attached to Serapis--to Serapis I
say. But it is simply false, and you would be as angry as I am if you
were ever capable of feeling manly indignation, and if you did not want
to make use of Eulaeus for many things, some of which I know, and others
which you choose to conceal from me. Only let him fetch the girl; and
when once we have her here, and if I find that the Roman’s indictment
against Eulaeus--which I will hear to-morrow morning--is well founded,
you shall see that I have manly vigor enough for both of us. Come away
now; they are waiting for us in the other room.”

The queen gave a call, and chamberlains and servants hurried in; her
shell-shaped litter was brought, and in a few minutes, with her husband
by her side, she was borne into the great peristyle where the grandees
of the court, the commanders of the troops, the most prominent of the
officials of the Egyptian provinces, many artists and savants, and the
ambassadors from foreign powers, were reclining on long rows of couches,
and talking over their wine, the feast itself being ended.

The Greeks and the dark-hued Egyptians were about equally represented in
this motley assembly; but among them, and particularly among the learned
and the fighting men, there were also several Israelites and Syrians.

The royal pair were received by the company with acclamations and marks
of respect; Cleopatra smiled as sweetly as ever, and waved her fan
graciously as she descended from her litter; still she vouchsafed not
the slightest attention to any one present, for she was seeking Publius,
at first among those who were nearest to the couch prepared for her,
and then among the other Hellenes, the Egyptians, the Jews, the
ambassadors--still she found him not, and when at last she enquired for
the Roman of the chief chamberlain at her side, the official was sent
for who had charge of the foreign envoys. This was an officer of very
high rank, whose duty it was to provide for the representatives of
foreign powers, and he was now near at hand, for he had long been
waiting for an opportunity to offer to the queen a message of
leave-taking from Publius Cornelius Scipio, and to tell her from him,
that he had retired to his tent because a letter had come to him from
Rome.

“Is that true?” asked the queen letting her feather fan droop, and
looking her interlocutor severely in the face.

“The trireme Proteus, coming from Brundisium, entered the harbor
of Eunostus only yesterday,” he replied; “and an hour ago a mounted
messenger brought the letter. Nor was it an ordinary letter but a
despatch from the Senate--I know the form and seal.”

“And Lysias, the Corinthian?”

“He accompanied the Roman.”

“Has the Senate written to him too?” asked the queen annoyed, and
ironically. She turned her back on the officer without any kind of
courtesy, and turning again to the chamberlain she went on, in incisive
tones, as if she were presiding at a trial:

“King Euergetes sits there among the Egyptians near the envoys from
the temples of the Upper Country. He looks as if he were giving them a
discourse, and they hang on his lips. What is he saying, and what does
all this mean?”

“Before you came in, he was sitting with the Syrians and Jews, and
telling them what the merchants and scribes, whom he sent to the South,
have reported of the lands lying near the lakes through which the Nile
is said to flow. He thinks that new sources of wealth have revealed
themselves not far from the head of the sacred river which can hardly
flow in from the ocean, as the ancients supposed.”

“And now?” asked Cleopatra. “What information is he giving to the
Egyptians?”

The chamberlain hastened towards Euergetes’ couch, and soon returned to
the queen--who meanwhile had exchanged a few friendly words with Onias,
the Hebrew commander--and informed her in a low tone that the king
was interpreting a passage from the Timaeus of Plato, in which Solon
celebrates the lofty wisdom of the priests of Sais; he was speaking with
much spirit, and the Egyptians received it with loud applause.

Cleopatra’s countenance darkened more and more, but she concealed it
behind her fan, signed to Philometor to approach, and whispered to him:

“Keep near Euergetes; he has a great deal too much to say to the
Egyptians. He is extremely anxious to stand well with them, and those
whom he really desires to please are completely entrapped by his
portentous amiability. He has spoiled my evening, and I shall leave you
to yourselves.”

“Till to-morrow, then.”

“I shall hear the Roman’s complaint up on my roof-terrace; there is
always a fresh air up there. If you wish to be present I will send for
you, but first I would speak to him alone, for he has received letters
from the Senate which may contain something of importance. So, till
to-morrow.”




CHAPTER XII.

While, in the vast peristyle, many a cup was still being emptied, and
the carousers were growing merrier and noisier--while Cleopatra
was abusing the maids and ladies who were undressing her for their
clumsiness and unreadiness, because every touch hurt her, and every
pin taken out of her dress pricked her--the Roman and his friend Lysias
walked up and down in their tent in violent agitation.

“Speak lower,” said the Greek, “for the very griffins woven into
the tissue of these thin walls seem to me to be lying in wait, and
listening.

“I certainly was not mistaken. When I came to fetch the gems I saw a
light gleaming in the doorway as I approached it; but the intruder must
have been warned, for just as I got up to the lantern in front of
the servants’ tent, it disappeared, and the torch which usually burns
outside our tent had not been lighted at all; but a beam of light fell
on the road, and a man’s figure slipped across in a black robe sprinkled
with gold ornaments which I saw glitter as the pale light of the lantern
fell upon them--just as a slimy, black newt glides through a pool. I
have good eyes as you know, and I will give one of them at this moment,
if I am mistaken, and if the cat that stole into our tent was not
Eulaeus.”

“And why did you not have him caught?” asked Publius, provoked.

“Because our tent was pitch-dark,” replied Lysias, “and that stout
villain is as slippery as a badger with the dogs at his heels, Owls,
bats and such vermin which seek their prey by night are all hideous to
me, and this Eulaeus, who grins like a hyaena when he laughs--”

“This Eulaeus,” said Publius, interrupting his friend, “shall learn to
know me, and know too by experience that a man comes to no good, who
picks a quarrel with my father’s son.”

“But, in the first instance, you treated him with disdain and
discourtesy,” said Lysias, “and that was not wise.”

“Wise, and wise, and wise!” the Roman broke out. “He is a scoundrel. It
makes no difference to me so long as he keeps out of my way; but when,
as has been the case for several days now, he constantly sticks close to
me to spy upon me, and treats me as if he were my equal, I will show
him that he is mistaken. He has no reason to complain of my want of
frankness; he knows my opinion of him, and that I am quite inclined to
give him a thrashing. If I wanted to meet his cunning with cunning I
should get the worst of it, for he is far superior to me in intrigue. I
shall fare better with him by my own unconcealed mode of fighting, which
is new to him and puzzles him; besides it is better suited to my own
nature, and more consonant to me than any other. He is not only sly, but
is keen-witted, and he has at once connected the complaint which I have
threatened to bring against him with the manuscript which Serapion, the
recluse, gave me in his presence. There it lies--only look.

“Now, being not merely crafty, but a daring rascal too--two qualities
which generally contradict each other, for no one who is really prudent
lives in disobedience to the laws--he has secretly untied the strings
which fastened it. But, you see, he had not time enough to tie the
roll up again! He has read it all or in part, and I wish him joy of
the picture of himself he will have found painted there. The anchorite
wields a powerful pen, and paints with a firm outline and strongly
marked coloring. If he has read the roll to the end it will spare me the
trouble of explaining to him what I purpose to charge him with; if
you disturbed him too soon I shall have to be more explicit in my
accusation. Be that as it may, it is all the same to me.”

“Nay, certainly not,” cried Lysias, “for in the first case Eulaeus will
have time to meditate his lies, and bribe witnesses for his defence. If
any one entrusted me with such important papers--and if it had not been
you who neglected to do it--I would carefully seal or lock them up.
Where have you put the despatch from the Senate which the messenger
brought you just now?”

“That is locked up in this casket,” replied Publius, moving his hand to
press it more closely over his robe, under which he had carefully hidden
it.

“May I not know what it contain?” asked the Corinthian.

“No, there is not time for that now, for we must first, and at once,
consider what can be done to repair the last mischief which you have
done. Is it not a disgraceful thing that you should betray the sweet
creature whose childlike embarrassment charmed us this morning--of whom
you yourself said, as we came home, that she reminded you of your lovely
sister--that you should betray her, I say, into the power of the wildest
of all the profligates I ever met--to this monster, whose pleasures are
the unspeakable, whose boast is vice? What has Euergetes--”

“By great Poseidon!” cried Lysias, eagerly interrupting his friend. “I
never once thought of this second Alcibiades when I mentioned her. What
can the manager of a performance do, but all in his power to secure the
applause of the audience? and, by my honor! it was for my own sake that
I wanted to bring Irene into the palace--I am mad with love for her--she
has undone me.”

“Aye! like Callista, and Phryne, and the flute-player Stephanion,”
 interrupted the Roman, shrugging his shoulders.

“How should it be different?” asked the Corinthian, looking at his
friend in astonishment. “Eros has many arrows in his quiver; one
strikes deeply, another less deeply; and I believe that the wound I
have received to-day will ache for many a week if I have to give up
this child, who is even more charming than the much-admired Hebe on our
cistern.”

“I advise you however to accustom yourself to the idea, and the sooner
the better,” said Publius gravely, as he set himself with his arms
crossed, directly in front of the Greek. “What would you feel inclined
to do to me if I took a fancy to lure your pretty sister--whom Irene, I
repeat it, is said to resemble--to tempt her with base cunning from your
parents’ house?”

“I protest against any such comparison,” cried the Corinthian very
positively, and more genuinely exasperated than the Roman had ever seen
him.

“You are angry without cause,” replied Publius calmly and gravely. “Your
sister is a charming girl, the ornament of your illustrious house, and
yet I dare compare the humble Irene--”

“With her! do you mean to say?” Lysias shouted again. “That is a poor
return for the hospitality which was shown to you by my parents and of
which you formally sang the praises. I am a good-natured fellow and
will submit to more from you than from any other man--I know not why,
myself;--but in a matter like this I do not understand a joke! My sister
is the only daughter of the noblest and richest house in Corinth and
has many suitors. She is in no respect inferior to the child of your own
parents, and I should like to know what you would say if I made so
bold as to compare the proud Lucretia with this poor little thing, who
carries water like a serving-maid.”

“Do so, by all means!” interrupted Publius coolly, “I do not take your
rage amiss, for you do not know who these two sisters are, in the temple
of Serapis. Besides, they do not fill their jars for men but in the
service of a god. Here--take this roll and read it through while I
answer the despatch from Rome. Here! Spartacus, come and light a few
more lamps.”

In a few minutes the two young men were sitting opposite each other at
the table which stood in the middle of their tent. Publius wrote busily,
and only looked up when his friend, who was reading the anchorite’s
document, struck his hand on the table in disgust or sprang from his
seat ejaculating bitter words of indignation. Both had finished at the
same moment, and when Publius had folded and sealed his letter, and
Lysias had flung the roll on to the table, the Roman said slowly, as he
looked his friend steadily in the face: “Well?”

“Well!” repeated Lysias. I now find myself in the humiliating position
of being obliged to deem myself more stupid than you--I must own you
in the right, and beg your pardon for having thought you insolent and
arrogant! Never, no never did I hear a story so infernally scandalous as
that in that roll, and such a thing could never have occurred but among
these accursed Egyptians! Poor little Irene! And how can the dear little
girl have kept such a sunny look through it all! I could thrash myself
like any school-boy to think that I--a fool among fools--should have
directed the attention of Euergetes to this girl, and he, the most
powerful and profligate man in the whole country. What can now be
done to save Irene from him? I cannot endure the thought of seeing her
abandoned to his clutches, and I will not permit it to happen.

“Do not you think that we ought to take the water-bearers under our
charge?”

“Not only we ought but we must,” said Publius decisively; “and if we did
not we should be contemptible wretches. Since the recluse took me into
his confidence I feel as if it were my duty to watch over these
girls whose parents have been stolen from them, as if I were their
guardian--and you, my Lysias, shall help me. The elder sister is not now
very friendly towards me, but I do not esteem her the less for that;
the younger one seems less grave and reserved than Klea; I saw how she
responded to your smile when the procession broke up. Afterwards, you
did not come home immediately any more than I did, and I suspect that it
was Irene who detained you. Be frank, I earnestly beseech you, and tell
me all; for we must act in unison, and with thorough deliberation, if we
hope to succeed in spoiling Euergetes’ game.”

“I have not much to tell you,” replied the Corinthian. “After the
procession I went to the Pastophorium--naturally it was to see Irene,
and in order not to fail in this I allowed the pilgrims to tell me what
visions the god had sent them in their dreams, and what advice had been
given them in the temple of Asclepius as to what to do for their own
complaints, and those of their cousins, male and female.

“Quite half an hour had passed so before Irene came. She carried a
little basket in which lay the gold ornaments she had worn at
the festival, and which she had to restore to the keeper of the
temple-treasure. My pomegranate-flower, which she had accepted in the
morning, shone upon me from afar, and then, when she caught sight of me
and blushed all over, casting down her eyes, then it was that it first
struck me ‘just like the Hebe on our cistern.’

“She wanted to pass me, but I detained her, begging her to show me the
ornaments in her hand; I said a number of things such as girls like to
hear, and then I asked her if she were strictly watched, and whether
they gave her delicate little hands and feet--which were worthy of
better occupation than water-carrying--a great deal to do. She did not
hesitate to answer, but with all she said she rarely raised her eyes.
The longer you look at her the lovelier she is--and yet she is still a
mere child-though a child certainly who no longer loves staying at home,
who has dreams of splendor, and enjoyment, and freedom while she is kept
shut up in a dismal, dark place, and left to starve.

“The poor creatures may never quit the temple excepting for a
procession, or before sunrise. It sounded too delightful when she said
that she was always so horribly tired, and so glad to go to sleep again
after she was waked, and had to go out at once just when it is coldest,
in the twilight before sunrise. Then she has to draw water from a
cistern called the Well of the Sun.”

“Do you know where that cistern lies?” asked Publius.

“Behind the acacia-grove,” answered Lysias. “The guide pointed it out to
me. It is said to hold particularly sacred water, which must be poured
as a libation to the god at sunrise, unmixed with any other. The girls
must get up so early, that as soon as dawn breaks water from this
cistern shall not be lacking at the altar of Serapis. It is poured out
on the earth by the priests as a drink-offering.”

Publius had listened attentively, and had not lost a word of his
friend’s narrative. He now quitted him hastily, opened the tent-door,
and went out into the night, looking up to discover the hour from
the stars which were silently pursuing their everlasting courses in
countless thousands, and sparkling with extraordinary brilliancy in the
deep blue sky. The moon was already set, and the morning-star was slowly
rising--every night since the Roman had been in the land of the Pyramids
he had admired its magnificent size and brightness.

A cold breeze fanned the young man’s brow, and as he drew his robe
across his breast with a shiver, he thought of the sisters, who, before
long, would have to go out in the fresh morning air. Once more he raised
his eyes from the earth to the firmament over his head, and it seemed to
him that he saw before his very eyes the proud form of Klea, enveloped
in a mantle sown over with stars. His heart throbbed high, and he felt
as if the breeze that his heaving breast inhaled in deep breaths was as
fresh and pure as the ether that floats over Elysium, and of a strange
potency withal, as if too rare to breathe. Still he fancied he saw
before him the image of Klea, but as he stretched out his hand towards
the beautiful vision it vanished--a sound of hoofs and wheels fell upon
his ear. Publius was not accustomed to abandon himself to dreaming when
action was needed, and this reminded him of the purpose for which he had
come out into the open air. Chariot after chariot came driving past
as he returned into his tent. Lysias, who during his absence had been
pacing up and down and reflecting, met him with the question:

“How long is it yet till sunrise?”

“Hardly two hours,” replied the Roman. “And we must make good use of
them if we would not arrive too late.”

“So I think too,” said the Corinthian. “The sisters will soon be at the
Well of the Sun outside the temple walls, and I will persuade Irene to
follow me. You think I shall not be successful? Nor do I myself--but
still perhaps she will if I promise to show her something very pretty,
and if she does not suspect that she is to be parted from her sister,
for she is like a child.”

“But Klea,” interrupted Publius thoughtfully, “is grave and prudent; and
the light tone which you are so ready to adopt will be very little to
her taste, Consider that, and dare the attempt--no, you dare not deceive
her. Tell her the whole truth, out of Irene’s hearing, with the gravity
the matter deserves, and she will not hinder her sister when she knows
how great and how imminent is the danger that threatens her.”

“Good!” said the Corinthian. “I will be so solemnly earnest that the
most wrinkled and furrowed graybeard among the censors of your native
city shall seem a Dionysiac dancer compared with me. I will speak like
your Cato when he so bitterly complained that the epicures of Rome paid
more now for a barrel of fresh herrings than for a yoke of oxen. You
shall be perfectly satisfied with me!--But whither am I to conduct
Irene? I might perhaps make use of one of the king’s chariots which are
passing now by dozens to carry the guests home.”

“I also had thought of that,” replied Publius. “Go with the chief of the
Diadoches, whose splendid house was shown to us yesterday. It is on the
way to the Serapeum, and just now at the feast you were talking with
him incessantly. When there, indemnify the driver by the gift of a gold
piece, so that he may not betray us, and do not return here but proceed
to the harbor. I will await you near the little temple of Isis with our
travelling chariot and my own horses, will receive Irene, and conduct
her to some new refuge while you drive back Fuergetes’ chariot, and
restore it to the driver.”

“That will not satisfy me by any means,” said Lysias very gravely; “I
was ready to give up my pomegranate-flower to you yesterday for Irene,
but herself--”

“I want nothing of her,” exclaimed Publius annoyed. “But you might--it
seems to me--be rather more zealous in helping me to preserve her from
the misfortune which threatens her through your own blunder. We cannot
bring her here, but I think that I have thought of a safe hiding-place
for her.

“Do you remember Apollodorus, the sculptor, to whom we were recommended
by my father, and his kind and friendly wife who set before us
that capital Chios wine? The man owes me a service, for my father
commissioned him and his assistants to execute the mosaic pavement in
the new arcade he was having built in the capitol; and subsequently,
when the envy of rival artists threatened his life, my father saved him.
You yourself heard him say that he and his were all at my disposal.”

“Certainly, certainly,” said Lysias. “But say, does it not strike you
as most extraordinary that artists, the very men, that is to say, who
beyond all others devote themselves to ideal aims and efforts, are
particularly ready to yield to the basest impulses; envy, detraction,
and--”

“Man!” exclaimed Publius, angrily interrupting the Greek, “can you never
for ten seconds keep on the same subject, and never keep anything to
yourself that comes into your head? We have just now, as it seems to me,
more important matters to discuss than the jealousy of each other
shown by artists--and in my opinion, by learned men too. The sculptor
Apollodorus, who is thus beholden to me, has been living here for the
last six months with his wife and daughters, for he has been executing
for Philometor the busts of the philosophers, and the animal groups
to decorate the open space in front of the tomb of Apis. His sons are
managers of his large factory in Alexandria, and when he next goes
there, down the Nile in his boat, as often happens, he can take Irene
with him, and put her on board a ship.

“As to where we can have her taken to keep her safe from Euergetes, we
will talk that over afterwards with Apollodorus.”

“Good, very good,” agreed the Corinthian. “By Heracles! I am not
suspicious--still it does not altogether please me that you should
yourself conduct Irene to Apollodorus, for if you are seen in her
company our whole project may be shipwrecked. Send the sculptor’s wife,
who is little known in Memphis, to the temple of Isis, and request her
to bring a veil and cloak to conceal the girl. Greet the gay Milesian
from me too, and tell her--no, tell her nothing--I shall see her myself
afterwards at the temple of Isis.”

During the last words of this conversation, slaves had been enveloping
the two young men in their mantles. They now quitted the tent together,
wished each other success, and set out at a brisk pace; the Roman to
have his horses harnessed, and Lysias to accompany the chief of the
Diadoches in one of the king’s chariots, and then to act on the plan he
had agreed upon with Publius.




CHAPTER XIII.

Chariot after chariot hurried out of the great gate of the king’s palace
and into the city, now sunk in slumber. All was still in the great
banqueting-hall, and dark-hued slaves began with brooms and sponges to
clean the mosaic pavement, which was strewed with rose leaves and with
those that had fallen from the faded garlands of ivy and poplar; while
here and there the spilt wine shone with a dark gleam in the dim light
of the few lamps that had not been extinguished.

A young flute-player, overcome with sleep and wine, still sat in one
corner. The poplar wreath that had crowned his curls had slipped over
his pretty face, but even in sleep he still held his flute clasped fast
in his fingers. The servants let him sleep on, and bustled about without
noticing him; only an overseer pointed to him, and said laughing:

“His companions went home no more sober than that one. He is a pretty
boy, and pretty Chloes lover besides--she will look for him in vain this
morning.”

“And to-morrow too perhaps,” answered another; “for if the fat king sees
her, poor Damon will have seen the last of her.”

But the fat king, as Euergetes was called by the Alexandrians, and,
following their example, by all the rest of Egypt, was not just then
thinking of Chloe, nor of any such person; he was in the bath attached
to his splendidly fitted residence. Divested of all clothing, he was
standing in the tepid fluid which completely filled a huge basin of
white marble. The clear surface of the perfumed water mirrored statues
of nymphs fleeing from the pursuit of satyrs, and reflected the
shimmering light of numbers of lamps suspended from the ceiling. At the
upper end of the bath reclined the bearded and stalwart statue of the
Nile, over whom the sixteen infant figures--representing the number of
ells to which the great Egyptian stream must rise to secure a favorable
inundation--clambered and played to the delight of their noble father
Nile and of themselves. From the vase which supported the arm of the
venerable god flowed an abundant stream of cold water, which five pretty
lads received in slender alabaster vases, and poured over the head and
the enormously prominent muscles of the breast, the back and the arms of
the young king who was taking his bath.

“More, more--again and again,” cried Euergetes, as the boys began to
pause in bringing and pouring the water; and then, when they threw a
fresh stream over him, he snorted and plunged with satisfaction, and
a perfect shower of jets splashed off him as the blast of his breath
sputtered away the water that fell over his face.

At last he shouted out: “Enough!” flung himself with all his force into
the water, that spurted up as if a huge block of stone had been thrown
into it, held his head for a long time under water, and then went up the
marble steps of the bath shaking his head violently and mischievously in
his boyish insolence, so as thoroughly to wet his friends and servants
who were standing round the margin of the basin; he suffered himself to
be wrapped in snowy-white sheets of the thinnest and finest linen, to
be sprinkled with costly essences of delicate odor, and then he withdrew
into a small room hung all round with gaudy hangings.

There he flung himself on a mound of soft cushions, and said with a
deep-drawn breath: “Now I am happy; and I am as sober again as a baby
that has never tasted anything but its mother’s milk. Pindar is right!
there is nothing better than water! and it slakes that raging fire which
wine lights up in our brain and blood. Did I talk much nonsense just
now, Hierax?”

The man thus addressed, the commander-in-chief of the royal troops,
and the king’s particular friend, cast a hesitating glance at the
bystanders; but, Euergetes desiring him to speak without reserve, he
replied:

“Wine never weakens the mind of such as you are to the point of folly,
but you were imprudent. It would be little short of a miracle if
Philometor did not remark--”

“Capital!” interrupted the king sitting up on his cushions. “You,
Hierax, and you, Komanus, remain here--you others may go. But do not
go too far off, so as to be close at hand in case I should need you. In
these days as much happens in a few hours as usually takes place in as
many years.”

Those who were thus dismissed withdrew, only the king’s dresser, a
Macedonian of rank, paused doubtfully at the door, but Euergetes signed
to him to retire immediately, calling after him:

“I am very merry and shall not go to bed. At three hours after sunrise
I expect Aristarchus--and for work too. Put out the manuscripts that I
brought. Is the Eunuch Eulaeus waiting in the anteroom? Yes--so much the
better!

“Now we are alone, my wise friends Hierax and Komanus, and I must
explain to you that on this occasion, out of pure prudence, you seem to
me to have been anything rather than prudent. To be prudent is to have
the command of a wide circle of thought, so that what is close at hand
is no more an obstacle than what is remote. The narrow mind can command
only that which lies close under observation; the fool and visionary
only that which is far off. I will not blame you, for even the wisest
has his hours of folly, but on this occasion you have certainly
overlooked that which is at hand, in gazing at the distance, and I see
you stumble in consequence. If you had not fallen into that error you
would hardly have looked so bewildered when, just now, I exclaimed
‘Capital!’

“Now, attend to me. Philometor and my sister know very well what my
humor is, and what to expect of me. If I had put on the mask of a
satisfied man they would have been surprised, and have scented mischief,
but as it was I showed myself to them exactly what I always am and even
more reckless than usual, and talked of what I wanted so openly that
they may indeed look forward to some deed of violence at my hands but
hardly to a treacherous surprise, and that tomorrow; for he who falls on
his enemy in the rear makes no noise about it.

“If I believed in your casuistry, I might think that to attack the enemy
from behind was not a particularly fine thing to do, for even I would
rather see a man’s face than his rear--particularly in the case of my
brother and sister, who are both handsome to look upon. But what can
a man do? After all, the best thing to do is what wins the victory and
makes the game. Indeed, my mode of warfare has found supporters among
the wise. If you want to catch mice you must waste bacon, and if we are
to tempt men into a snare we must know what their notions and ideas are,
and begin by endeavoring to confuse them.

“A bull is least dangerous when he runs straight ahead in his fury;
while his two-legged opponent is least dangerous when he does not know
what he is about and runs feeling his way first to the right and then to
the left. Thanks to your approval--for I have deserved it, and I hope to
be able to return it, my friend Hierax. I am curious as to your report.
Shake up the cushion here under my head--and now you may begin.”

“All appears admirably arranged,” answered the general. “The flower of
our troops, the Diadoches and Hetairoi, two thousand-five hundred men,
are on their way hither, and by to-morrow will encamp north of Memphis.
Five hundred will find their way into the citadel, with the priests
and other visitors to congratulate you on your birthday, the other two
thousand will remain concealed in the tents. The captain of your brother
Philometor’s Philobasilistes is bought over, and will stand by us;
but his price was high--Komanus was forced to offer him twenty talents
before he would bite.”

“He shall have them,” said the king laughing, “and he shall keep them
too, till it suits me to regard him as suspicious, and to reward him
according to his deserts by confiscating his estates. Well! proceed.”

“In order to quench the rising in Thebes, the day before yesterday
Philometor sent the best of the mercenaries with the standards of
Desilaus and Arsinoe to the South. Certainly it cost not a little to
bribe the ringleaders, and to stir up the discontent to an outbreak.”

“My brother will repay us for this outlay,” interrupted the king, “when
we pour his treasure into our own coffers. Go on.”

“We shall have most difficulty with the priests and the Jews. The former
cling to Philometor, because he is the eldest son of his father, and has
given large bounties to the temples, particularly of Apollinopolis and
Philae; the Jews are attached to him, because he favors them more than
the Greeks, and he, and his wife--your illustrious sister--trouble
themselves with their vain religious squabbles; he disputes with them
about the doctrines contained in their book, and at table too prefers
conversing with them to any one else.”

“I will salt the wine and meat for them that they fatten on here,” cried
Euergetes vehemently, “I forbade to-day their presence at my table, for
they have good eyes and wits as sharp as their noses. And they are most
dangerous when they are in fear, or can reckon on any gains.

“At the same time it cannot be denied that they are honest and
tenacious, and as most of them are possessed of some property they
rarely make common cause with the shrieking mob--particularly here in
Alexandria.

“Envy alone can reproach them for their industry and enterprise, for the
activity of the Hellenes has improved upon the example set by them and
their Phoenician kindred.

“They thrive best in peaceful times, and since the world runs more
quietly here, under my brother and sister, than under me, they attach
themselves to them, lend my brother money, and supply my sister with cut
stones, sapphires and emeralds, selling fine stuffs and other woman’s
gear for a scrap of written papyrus, which will soon be of no more value
than the feather which falls from the wing of that green screaming bird
on the perch yonder.

“It is incomprehensible to me that so keen a people cannot perceive
that there is nothing permanent but change, nothing so certain as that
nothing is certain; and that they therefore should regard their god as
the one only god, their own doctrine as absolutely and eternally true,
and that they contemn what other peoples believe.

“These darkened views make fools of them, but certainly good soldiers
too--perhaps by reason indeed of this very exalted self-consciousness
and their firm reliance on their supreme god.”

“Yes, they certainly are,” assented Hierax. “But they serve your brother
more willingly, and at a lower price, than us.”

“I will show them,” cried the king, “that their taste is a perverted and
obnoxious one. I require of the priests that they should instruct the
people to be obedient, and to bear their privations patiently; but the
Jews,” and at these words his eyes rolled with an ominous glare, “the
Jews I will exterminate, when the time comes.”

“That will be good for our treasury too,” laughed Komanus.

“And for the temples in the country,” added Euergetes, “for though I
seek to extirpate other foes I would rather win over the priests; and
I must try to win them if Philometor’s kingdom falls into my hands,
for the Egyptians require that their king should be a god; and I cannot
arrive at the dignity of a real god, to whom my swarthy subjects will
pray with thorough satisfaction, and without making my life a burden to
me by continual revolts, unless I am raised to it by the suffrages of
the priests.”

“And nevertheless,” replied Hierax, who was the only one of Euergetes’
dependents, who dared to contradict him on important questions,
“nevertheless this very day a grave demand is to be preferred on your
account to the high-priest of Serapis. You press for the surrender of a
servant of the god, and Philometor will not neglect--”

“Will not neglect,” interrupted Euergetes, “to inform the mighty
Asclepiodorus that he wants the sweet creature for me, and not for
himself. Do you know that Eros has pierced my heart, and that I burn for
the fair Irene, although these eyes have not yet been blessed with the
sight of her?

“I see you believe me, and I am speaking the exact truth, for I vow I
will possess myself of this infantine Hebe as surely as I hope to win my
brother’s throne; but when I plant a tree, it is not merely to ornament
my garden but to get some use of it. You will see how I will win over
both the prettiest of little lady-loves and the high-priest who, to be
sure, is a Greek, but still a man hard to bend. My tools are all ready
outside there.

“Now, leave me, and order Eulaeus to join me here.”

“You are as a divinity,” said Komanus, bowing deeply, “and we but as
frail mortals. Your proceedings often seem dark and incomprehensible to
our weak intellect, but when a course, which to us seems to lead to no
good issue, turns out well, we are forced to admit with astonishment
that you always choose the best way, though often a tortuous one.”

For a short time the king was alone, sitting with his black brows knit,
and gazing meditatively at the floor. But as soon as he heard the soft
foot-fall of Eulaeus, and the louder step of his guide, he once more
assumed the aspect of a careless and reckless man of the world, shouted
a jolly welcome to Eulaeus, reminded him of his, the king’s, boyhood,
and of how often he, Eulaeus, had helped him to persuade his mother to
grant him some wish she had previously refused him.

“But now, old boy,” continued the king, “the times are changed, and
with you now-a-days it is everything for Philometor and nothing for poor
Euergetes, who, being the younger, is just the one who most needs your
assistance.”

Eulaeus bowed with a smile which conveyed that he understood perfectly
how little the king’s last words were spoken in earnest, and he said:

“I purposed always to assist the weaker of you two, and that is what I
believe myself to be doing now.”

“You mean my sister?”

“Our sovereign lady Cleopatra is of the sex which is often unjustly
called the weaker. Though you no doubt were pleased to speak in jest
when you asked that question, I feel bound to answer you distinctly that
it was not Cleopatra that I meant, but King Philometor.”

“Philometor? Then you have no faith in his strength, you regard me as
stronger than he; and yet, at the banquet to-day, you offered me your
services, and told me that the task had devolved upon you of demanding
the surrender of the little serving-maiden of Serapis, in the king’s
name, of Asclepiodorus, the high-priest. Do you call that aiding the
weaker? But perhaps you were drunk when you told me that?

“No? You were more moderate than I? Then some other change of views must
have taken place in you; and yet that would very much surprise me, since
your principles require you to aid the weaker son of my mother--”

“You are laughing at me,” interrupted the courtier with gentle
reproachfulness, and yet in a tone of entreaty. “If I took your side it
was not from caprice, but simply and expressly from a desire to remain
faithful to the one aim and end of my life.”

“And that is?”

“To provide for the welfare of this country in the same sense as did
your illustrious mother, whose counsellor I was.”

“But you forget to mention the other--to place yourself to the best
possible advantage.”

“I did not forget it, but I did not mention it, for I know how closely
measured out are the moments of a king; and besides, it seems to me as
self-evident that we think of our personal advantage as that when we buy
a horse we also buy his shadow.”

“How subtle! But I no more blame you than I should a girl who stands
before her mirror to deck herself for her lover, and who takes the same
opportunity of rejoicing in her own beauty.

“However, to return to your first speech. It is for the sake of Egypt
as you think--if I understand you rightly--that you now offer me the
services you have hitherto devoted to my brother’s interests?”

“As you say; in these difficult times the country needs the will and the
hand of a powerful leader.”

“And such a leader you think I am?”

“Aye, a giant in strength of will, body and intellect--whose desire to
unite the two parts of Egypt in your sole possession cannot fail, if you
strike and grasp boldly, and if--”

“If?” repeated the king, looking at the speaker so keenly that his eyes
fell, and he answered softly:

“If Rome should raise no objection.”

Euergetes shrugged his shoulders, and replied gravely:

“Rome indeed is like Fate, which always must give the final decision
in everything we do. I have certainly not been behindhand in enormous
sacrifices to mollify that inexorable power, and my representative,
through whose hands pass far greater sums than through those of the
paymasters of the troops, writes me word that they are not unfavorably
disposed towards me in the Senate.”

“We have learned that from ours also. You have more friends by the Tiber
than Philometor, my own king, has; but our last despatch is already
several weeks old, and in the last few days things have occurred--”

“Speak!” cried Euergetes, sitting bolt upright on his cushions. “But
if you are laying a trap for me, and if you are speaking now as my
brother’s tool, I will punish you--aye! and if you fled to the uttermost
cave of the Troglodytes I would have you followed up, and you should be
torn in pieces alive, as surely as I believe myself to be the true son
of my father.”

“And I should deserve the punishment,” replied Eulaeus humbly. Then he
went on: “If I see clearly, great events lie before us in the next few
days.”

“Yes--truly,” said Euergetes firmly.

“But just at present Philometor is better represented in Rome than he
has ever been. You made acquaintance with young Publius Scipio at the
king’s table, and showed little zeal in endeavoring to win his good
graces.”

“He is one of the Cornelii,” interrupted the king, “a distinguished
young man, and related to all the noblest blood of Rome; but he is not
an ambassador; he has travelled from Athens to Alexandria, in order to
learn more than he need; and he carries his head higher and speaks more
freely than becomes him before kings, because the young fellows fancy it
looks well to behave like their elders.”

“He is of more importance than you imagine.”

“Then I will invite him to Alexandria, and there will win him over in
three days, as surely as my name is Euergetes.”

“It will then be too late, for he has to-day received, as I know for
certain, plenipotentiary powers from the Senate to act in their name in
case of need, until the envoy who is to be sent here again arrives.”

“And I only now learn this for the first time!” cried the king springing
up from his couch, “my friends must be deaf, and blind and dull indeed,
if still I have any, and my servants and emissaries too! I cannot
bear this haughty ungracious fellow, but I will invite him tomorrow
morning--nay I will invite him to-day, to a festive entertainment, and
send him the four handsomest horses that I have brought with me from
Cyrene. I will--”

“It will all be in vain,” said Eulaeus calmly and dispassionately. “For
he is master, in the fullest and widest meaning of the word, of the
queen’s favor--nay--if I may permit myself to speak out freely--of
Cleopatra’s more than warm liking, and he enjoys this sweetest of gifts
with a thankful heart. Philometor--as he always does--lets matters go as
they may, and Cleopatra and Publius--Publius and Cleopatra triumph even
publicly in their love; gaze into each other’s eyes like any pair of
pastoral Arcadians, exchange cups and kiss the rim on the spot where the
lips of the other have touched it. Promise and grant what you will to
this man, he will stand by your sister; and if you should succeed in
expelling her from the throne he would boldly treat you as Popilius
Laenas did your uncle Antiochus: he would draw a circle round your
person, and say that if you dared to step beyond it Rome would march
against you.”

Euergetes listened in silence, then, flinging away the draperies that
wrapped his body, he paced up and down in stormy agitation, groaning
from time to time, and roaring like a wild bull that feels itself
confined with cords and bands, and that exerts all its strength in vain
to rend them.

Finally he stood still in front of Eulaeus and asked him:

“What more do you know of the Roman?”

“He, who would not allow you to compare yourself to Alcibiades, is
endeavoring to out-do that darling of the Athenian maidens; for he
is not content with having stolen the heart of the king’s wife, he is
putting out his hand to reach the fairest virgin who serves the
highest of the gods. The water-bearer whom Lysias, the Roman’s friend,
recommended for a Hebe is beloved by Publius, and he hopes to enjoy her
favors more easily in your gay palace than he can in the gloomy temple
of Serapis.”

At these words the king struck his forehead with his hand, exclaiming:
“Oh! to be a king--a man who is a match for any ten! and to be obliged
to submit with a patient shrug like a peasant whose grain my horsemen
crush into the ground!

“He can spoil everything; mar all my plans and thwart all my
desires--and I can do nothing but clench my fist, and suffocate with
rage. But this fuming and groaning are just as unavailing as my raging
and cursing by the death-bed of my mother, who was dead all the same and
never got up again.

“If this Publius were a Greek, a Syrian, an Egyptian--nay, were he my
own brother--I tell you, Eulaeus, he should not long stand in my way;
but he is plenipotentiary from Rome, and Rome is Fate--Rome is Fate.”

The king flung himself back on to his cushions with a deep sigh, and
as if crushed with despair, hiding his face in the soft pillows; but
Eulaeus crept noiselessly up to the young giant, and whispered in his
ear with solemn deliberateness:

“Rome is Fate, but even Rome can do nothing against Fate. Publius Scipio
must die because he is ruining your mother’s daughter, and stands in the
way of your saving Egypt. The Senate would take a terrible revenge if
he were murdered, but what can they do if wild beasts fall on their
plenipotentiary, and tear him to pieces?”

“Grand! splendid!” cried Euergetes, springing again to his feet, and
opening his large eyes with radiant surprise and delight, as if heaven
itself had opened before them, revealing the sublime host of the gods
feasting at golden tables.

“You are a great man, Eulaeus, and I shall know how to reward you; but
do you know of such wild beasts as we require, and do they know how to
conduct themselves so that no one shall dare to harbor even the shadow
of a suspicion that the wounds torn by their teeth and claws were
inflicted by daggers, pikes or spearheads?”

“Be perfectly easy,” replied Eulaeus. “These beasts of prey have already
had work to do here in Memphis, and are in the service of the king--”

“Aha! of my gentle brother!” laughed Euergetes. “And he boasts of never
having killed any one excepting in battle--and now--”

“But Philometor has a wife,” interposed Eulaeus; and Euergetes went on.

“Aye, woman, woman! what is there that a man may not learn from a
woman?”

Then he added in a lower tone: “When can your wild beasts do their
work?”

“The sun has long since risen; before it sets I will have made my
preparations, and by about midnight, I should think, the deed may be
done. We will promise the Roman a secret meeting, lure him out to the
temple of Serapis, and on his way home through the desert--”

“Aye, then,--” cried the king, making a thrust at his own breast as
though his hand held a dagger, and he added in warning: “But your beasts
must be as powerful as lions, and as cautious-as cautious, as cats. If
you want gold apply to Komanus, or, better still, take this purse. Is
it enough? Still I must ask you; have you any personal ground of hatred
against the Roman?”

“Yes,” answered Eulaeus decisively. “He guesses that I know all about
him and his doings, and he has attacked me with false accusations which
may bring me into peril this very day. If you should hear that the queen
has decided on throwing me into prison, take immediate steps for my
liberation.”

“No one shall touch a hair of your head; depend upon that. I see that it
is to your interest to play my game, and I am heartily glad of it, for
a man works with all his might for no one but himself. And now for the
last thing: When will you fetch my little Hebe?”

“In an hour’s time I am going to Asclepiodorus; but we must not demand
the girl till to-morrow, for today she must remain in the temple as a
decoy-bird for Publius Scipio.”

“I will take patience; still I have yet another charge to give you.
Represent the matter to the high-priest in such a way that he
shall think my brother wishes to gratify one of my fancies by
demanding--absolutely demanding--the water-bearer on my behalf. Provoke
the man as far as is possible without exciting suspicion, and if I know
him rightly, he will stand upon his rights, and refuse you persistently.
Then, after you, will come Komanus from me with greetings and gifts and
promises.

“To-morrow, when we have done what must be done to the Roman, you shall
fetch the girl in my brother’s name either by cunning or by force; and
the day after, if the gods graciously lend me their aid in uniting the
two realms of Egypt under my own hand, I will explain to Asclepiodorus
that I have punished Philometor for his sacrilege against his temple,
and have deposed him from the throne. Serapis shall see which of us is
his friend.

“If all goes well, as I mean that it shall, I will appoint you Epitropon
of the re-united kingdom--that I swear to you by the souls of my
deceased ancestors. I will speak with you to-day at any hour you may
demand it.”

Eulaeus departed with a step as light as if his interview with the king
had restored him to youth.

When Hierax, Komanus, and the other officers returned to the room,
Euergetes gave orders that his four finest horses from Cyrene should be
led before noonday to his friend Publius Cornelius Scipio, in token of
his affection and respect. Then he suffered himself to be dressed, and
went to Aristarchus with whom he sat down to work at his studies.




CHAPTER XIV.

The temple of Serapis lay in restful silence, enveloped in darkness,
which so far hid its four wings from sight as to give it the aspect of a
single rock-like mass wrapped in purple mist.

Outside the temple precincts too all had been still; but just now a
clatter of hoofs and rumble of wheels was audible through the silence,
otherwise so profound that it seemed increased by every sound. Before
the vehicle which occasioned this disturbance had reached the temple,
it stopped, just outside the sacred acacia-grove, for the neighing of a
horse was now audible in that direction.

It was one of the king’s horses that neighed; Lysias, the Greek, tied
him up to a tree by the road at the edge of the grove, flung his mantle
over the loins of the smoking beast; and feeling his way from tree to
tree soon found himself by the Well of the Sun where he sat down on the
margin.

Presently from the east came a keen, cold breeze, the harbinger of
sunrise; the gray gloaming began by degrees to pierce and part the tops
of the tall trees, which, in the darkness, had seemed a compact black
roof. The crowing of cocks rang out from the court-yard of the temple,
and, as the Corinthian rose with a shiver to warm himself by a rapid
walk backwards and forwards, he heard a door creak near the outer wall
of the temple, of which the outline now grew sharper and clearer every
instant in the growing light.

He now gazed with eager observation down the path which, as the day
approached, stood out with increasing clearness from the surrounding
shades, and his heart began to beat faster as he perceived a figure
approaching the well, with rapid steps. It was a human form that
advanced towards him--only one--no second figure accompanied it; but it
was not a man--no, a woman in a long robe. Still, she for whom he waited
was surely smaller than the woman, who now came near to him. Was it the
elder and not the younger sister, whom alone he was anxious to speak
with, who came to the well this morning?

He could now distinguish her light foot-fall--now she was divided from
him by a young acacia-shrub which hid her from his gaze-now she set
down two water-jars on the ground--now she briskly lifted the bucket and
filled the vessel she held in her left hand--now she looked towards the
eastern horizon, where the dim light of dawn grew broader and brighter,
and Lysias thought he recognized Irene--and now--Praised be the gods!
he was sure; before him stood the younger and not the elder sister; the
very maiden whom he sought.

Still half concealed by the acacia-shrub, and in a soft voice so as not
to alarm her, he called Irene’s name, and the poor child’s blood froze
with terror, for never before had she been startled by a man here, and
at this hour. She stood as if rooted to the spot, and, trembling with
fright, she pressed the cold, wet, golden jar, sacred to the god,
closely to her bosom.

Lysias repeated her name, a little louder than before, and went on, but
in a subdued voice:

“Do not be frightened, Irene; I am Lysias, the Corinthian--your friend,
whose pomegranate-blossom you wore yesterday, and who spoke to you after
the procession. Let me bid you good morning!”

At these words the girl let her hand fall by her side, still holding the
jar, and pressing her right hand to her heart, she exclaimed, drawing a
deep breath:

“How dreadfully you frightened me! I thought some wandering soul was
calling me that had not yet returned to the nether world, for it is not
till the sun rises that spirits are scared away.”

“But it cannot scare men of flesh and blood whose purpose is good. I,
you may believe me, would willingly stay with you, till Helios departs
again, if you would permit me.”

“I can neither permit nor forbid you anything,” answered Irene. “But,
how came you here at this hour?”

“In a chariot,” replied Lysias smiling.

“That is nonsense--I want to know what you came to the Well of the Sun
for at such an hour.”

“I What but for you yourself? You told me yesterday that you were glad
to sleep, and so am I; still, to see you once more, I have been only to
glad to shorten my night’s rest considerably.”

“But, how did you know?”

“You yourself told me yesterday at what time you were allowed to leave
the temple.”

“Did I tell you? Great Serapis! how light it is already. I shall be
punished if the water-jar is not standing on the altar by sunrise, and
there is Klea’s too to be filled.”

“I will fill it for you directly--there--that is done; and now I will
carry them both for you to the end of the grove, if you will promise me
to return soon, for I have many things to ask you.”

“Go on--only go on,” said the girl; “I know very little; but ask away,
though you will not find much to be made of any answers that I can
give.”

“Oh! yes, indeed, I shall--for instance, if I asked you to tell me all
about your parents. My friend Publius, whom you know, and I also have
heard how cruelly and unjustly they were punished, and we would gladly
do much to procure their release.”

“I will come--I will be sure to come,” cried Irene loudly and eagerly,
“and shall I bring Klea with me? She was called up in the middle of the
night by the gatekeeper, whose child is very ill. My sister is very fond
of it, and Philo will only take his medicine from her. The little one
had gone to sleep in her lap, and his mother came and begged me to fetch
the water for us both. Now give me the jars, for none but we may enter
the temple.”

“There they are. Do not disturb your sister on my account in her care of
the poor little boy, for I might indeed have one or two things to say to
you which she need not hear, and which might give you pleasure. Now, I
am going back to the well, so farewell! But do not let me have to wait
very long for you.” He spoke in a tender tone of entreaty, and the girl
answered low and rapidly as she hurried away from him:

“I will come when the sun is up.”

The Corinthian looked after her till she had vanished within the temple,
and his heart was stirred--stirred as it had not been for many years.
He could not help recalling the time when he would teaze his younger
sister, then still quite a child, putting her to the test by asking her,
with a perfectly grave face, to give him her cake or her apple which
he did not really want at all. The little one had almost always put the
thing he asked for to his mouth with her tiny hands, and then he had
often felt exactly as he felt now.

Irene too was still but a child, and no less guileless than his darling
in his own home; and just as his sister had trusted him--offering him
the best she had to give--so this simple child trusted him; him, the
profligate Lysias, before whom all the modest women of Corinth cast
down their eyes, while fathers warned their growing-up sons against him;
trusted him with her virgin self--nay, as he thought, her sacred person.

“I will do thee no harm, sweet child!” he murmured to himself, as he
presently turned on his heel to return to the well. He went forward
quickly at first, but after a few steps he paused before the marvellous
and glorious picture that met his gaze. Was Memphis in flames? Had fire
fallen to burn up the shroud of mist which had veiled his way to the
temple?

The trunks of the acacia-trees stood up like the blackened pillars of a
burning city, and behind them the glow of a conflagration blazed high
up to the heavens. Beams of violet and gold slipped and sparkled between
the boughs, and danced among the thorny twigs, the white racemes of
flowers, and the tufts of leaves with their feathery leaflets; the
clouds above were fired with tints more pure and tender than those of
the roses with which Cleopatra had decked herself for the banquet.

Not like this did the sun rise in his own country! Or, was it perhaps
only that in Corinth or in Athens at break of day, as he staggered
home drunk from some feast, he had looked more at the earth than at the
heavens?

His horses began now to neigh loudly as if to greet the steeds of the
coming Sun-god. Lysias hurried to them through the grove, patted their
shining necks with soothing words, and stood looking down at the vast
city at his feet, over which hung a film of violet mist--at the solemn
Pyramids, over which the morning glow flung a gay robe of rose-color--on
the huge temple of Ptah, with the great colossi in front of its
pylons--on the Nile, mirroring the glory of the sky, and on the
limestone hills behind the villages of Babylon and Troy, about which he
had, only yesterday, heard a Jew at the king’s table relating a legend
current among his countrymen to the effect that these hills had been
obliged to give up all their verdure to grace the mounts of the sacred
city Hierosolyma.

The rocky cliffs of this barren range glowed at this moment like the
fire in the heart of the great ruby which had clasped the festal robe of
King Euergetes across his bull-neck, as it reflected the shimmer of
the tapers: and Lysias saw the day-star rising behind the range with
blinding radiance, shooting forth rays like myriads of golden arrows, to
rout and destroy his foe, the darkness of night.

Eos, Helios, Phoebus Apollo--these had long been to him no more than
names, with which he associated certain phenomena, certain processes and
ideas; for he when he was not luxuriating in the bath, amusing himself
in the gymnasium, at cock or quail-fights, in the theatre or at
Dionysiac processions--was wont to exercise his wits in the schools
of the philosophers, so as to be able to shine in bandying words at
entertainments; but to-day, and face to face with this sunrise, he
believed as in the days of his childhood--he saw in his mind’s eye the
god riding in his golden chariot, and curbing his foaming steeds, his
shining train floating lightly round him, bearing torches or scattering
flowers--he threw up his arms with an impulse of devotion, praying
aloud:

“To-day I am happy and light of heart. To thy presence do I owe this,
O! Phoebus Apollo, for thou art light itself. Oh! let thy favors
continue--”

But he here broke off in his invocation, and dropped his arms, for he
heard approaching footsteps. Smiling at his childish weakness--for such
he deemed it that he should have prayed--and yet content from his pious
impulse, he turned his back on the sun, now quite risen, and stood face
to face with Irene who called out to him:

“I was beginning to think that you had got out of patience and had gone
away, when I found you no longer by the well. That distressed me--but
you were only watching Helios rise. I see it every day, and yet it
always grieves me to see it as red as it was to-day, for our Egyptian
nurse used to tell me that when the east was very red in the morning it
was because the Sun-god had slain his enemies, and it was their blood
that colored the heavens, and the clouds and the hills.”

“But you are a Greek,” said Lysias, “and you must know that it is Eos
that causes these tints when she touches the horizon with her rosy
fingers before Helios appears. Now to-day you are, to me, the rosy dawn
presaging a fine day.”

“Such a ruddy glow as this,” said Irene, “forebodes great heat, storms,
and perhaps heavy rain, so the gatekeeper says; and he is always with
the astrologers who observe the stars and the signs in the heavens from
the towers near the temple-gates. He is poor little Philo’s father. I
wanted to bring Klea with me, for she knows more about our parents than
I do; but he begged me not to call her away, for the child’s throat is
almost closed up, and if it cries much the physician says it will choke,
and yet it is never quiet but when it is lying in Klea’s arms. She is so
good--and she never thinks of herself; she has been ever since midnight
till now rocking that heavy child on her lap.”

“We will talk with her presently,” said the Corinthian. “But to-day it
was for your sake that I came; you have such merry eyes, and your
little mouth looks as if it were made for laughing, and not to sing
lamentations. How can you bear being always in that shut up dungeon with
all those solemn men in their black and white robes?”

“There are some very good and kind ones among them. I am most fond of
old Krates, he looks gloomy enough at every one else; but with me only
he jokes and talks, and he often shows me such pretty and elegantly
wrought things.”

“Ah! I told you just now you are like the rosy dawn before whom all
darkness must vanish.”

“If only you could know how thoughtless I can be, and how often I give
trouble to Klea, who never scolds me for it, you would be far from
comparing me with a goddess. Little old Krates, too, often compares me
to all sorts of pretty things, but that always sounds so comical that I
cannot help laughing. I had much rather listen to you when you flatter
me.”

“Because I am young and youth suits with youth. Your sister is older,
and so much graver than you are. Have you never had a companion of
your own age whom you could play with, and to whom you could tell
everything?”

“Oh! yes when I was still very young; but since my parents fell into
trouble, and we have lived here in the temple, I have always been alone
with Klea. What do you want to know about my father?”

“That I will ask you by-and-by. Now only tell me, have you never played
at hide and seek with other girls? May you never look on at the merry
doings in the streets at the Dionysiac festivals? Have you ever ridden
in a chariot?”

“I dare say I have, long ago--but I have forgotten it. How should I have
any chance of such things here in the temple? Klea says it is no good
even to think of them. She tells me a great deal about our parents--how
my mother took care of us, and what my father used to say. Has anything
happened that may turn out favorably for him? Is it possible that the
king should have learned the truth? Make haste and ask your questions at
once, for I have already been too long out here.”

The impatient steeds neighed again as she spoke, and Lysias, to whom
this chat with Irene was perfectly enchanting, but who nevertheless had
not for a moment lost sight of his object, hastily pointed to the spot
where his horses were standing, and said:

“Did you hear the neighing of those mettlesome horses? They brought me
hither, and I can guide them well; nay, at the last Isthmian games I won
the crown with my own quadriga. You said you had never ridden standing
in a chariot. How would you like to try for once how it feels? I will
drive you with pleasure up and down behind the grove for a little
while.”

Irene heard this proposal with sparkling eyes and cried, as she clapped
her hands:

“May I ride in a chariot with spirited horses, like the queen? Oh!
impossible! Where are your horses standing?”

In this instant she had forgotten Klea, the duty which called her back
to the temple, even her parents, and she followed the Corinthian with
winged steps, sprang into the two-wheeled chariot, and clung fast to the
breastwork, as Lysias took his place by her side, seized the reins,
and with a strong and practised hand curbed the mettle of his spirited
steeds.

She stood perfectly guileless and undoubting by his side, and wholly
at his mercy as the chariot rattled off; but, unknown to herself,
beneficent powers were shielding her with buckler and armor--her
childlike innocence, and that memory of her parents which her tempter
himself had revived in her mind, and which soon came back in vivid
strength.

Breathing deep with excitement, and filled with such rapture as a bird
may feel when it first soars from its narrow nest high up into the ether
she cried out again and again:

“Oh, this is delightful! this is splendid!” and then:

“How we rush through the air as if we were swallows! Faster, Lysias,
faster! No, no--that is too fast; wait a little that I may not fall! Oh,
I am not frightened; it is too delightful to cut through the air just
as a Nile boat cuts through the stream in a storm, and to feel it on my
face and neck.”

Lysias was very close to her; when, at her desire, he urged his horses
to their utmost pace, and saw her sway, he involuntarily put out his
hand to hold her by the girdle; but Irene avoided his grasp, pressing
close against the side of the chariot next her, and every time he
touched her she drew her arm close up to her body, shrinking together
like the fragile leaf of a sensitive plant when it is touched by some
foreign object.

She now begged the Corinthian to allow her to hold the reins for a
little while, and he immediately acceded to her request, giving them
into her hand, though, stepping behind her, he carefully kept the ends
of them in his own. He could now see her shining hair, the graceful oval
of her head, and her white throat eagerly bent forward; an indescribable
longing came over him to press a kiss on her head; but he forbore, for
he remembered his friend’s words that he would fulfil the part of a
guardian to these girls. He too would be a protector to her, aye and
more than that, he would care for her as a father might. Still, as often
as the chariot jolted over a stone, and he touched her to support her,
the suppressed wish revived, and once when her hair was blown quite
close to his lips he did indeed kiss it--but only as a friend or a
brother might. Still, she must have felt the breath from his lips, for
she turned round hastily, and gave him back the reins; then, pressing
her hand to her brow, she said in a quite altered voice--not unmixed
with a faint tone of regret:

“This is not right--please now to turn the horses round.”

Lysias, instead of obeying her, pulled at the reins to urge the horses
to a swifter pace, and before he could find a suitable answer, she had
glanced up at the sun, and pointing to the east she exclaimed:

“How late it is already! what shall I say if I have been looked for, and
they ask me where I have been so long? Why don’t you turn round--nor ask
me anything about my parents?”

The last words broke from her with vehemence, and as Lysias did not
immediately reply nor make any attempt to check the pace of the horses,
she herself seized the reins exclaiming:

“Will you turn round or no?”

“No!” said the Greek with decision. “But--”

“And this is what you intended!” shrieked the girl, beside herself. “You
meant to carry me off by stratagem--but wait, only wait--”

And before Lysias could prevent her she had turned round, and was
preparing to spring from the chariot as it rushed onwards; but her
companion was quicker than she; he clutched first at her robe and then
her girdle, put his arm round her waist, and in spite of her resistance
pulled her back into the chariot.

Trembling, stamping her little feet and with tears in her eyes, she
strove to free her girdle from his grasp; he, now bringing his horses to
a stand-still, said kindly but earnestly:

“What I have done is the best that could happen to you, and I will even
turn the horses back again if you command it, but not till you have
heard me; for when I got you into the chariot by stratagem it was
because I was afraid that you would refuse to accompany me, and yet I
knew that every delay would expose you to the most hideous peril. I did
not indeed take a base advantage of your father’s name, for my friend
Publius Scipio, who is very influential, intends to do everything in his
power to procure his freedom and to reunite you to him. But, Irene,
that could never have happened if I had left you where you have hitherto
lived.”

During this discourse the girl had looked at Lysias in bewilderment, and
she interrupted him with the exclamation:

“But I have never done any one an injury! Who can gain any benefit by
persecuting a poor creature like me:

“Your father was the most righteous of men,” replied Lysias, “and
nevertheless he was carried off into torments like a criminal. It is not
only the unrighteous and the wicked that are persecuted. Have you ever
heard of King Euergetes, who, at his birth, was named the ‘well-doer,’
and who has earned that of the ‘evil doer’ by his crimes? He has heard
that you are fair, and he is about to demand of the high-priest that he
should surrender you to him. If Asclepiodorus agrees--and what can he
do against the might of a king--you will be made the companion of
flute-playing girls and painted women, who riot with drunken men at his
wild carousals and orgies, and if your parents found you thus, better
would it be for them--”

“Is it true, all you are telling me?” asked Irene with flaming cheeks.

“Yes,” answered Lysias firmly. “Listen Irene--I have a father and a
dear mother and a sister, who is like you, and I swear to you by their
heads--by those whose names never passed my lips in the presence of any
other woman I ever sued to--that I am speaking the simple truth; that I
seek nothing but only to save you; that if you desire it, as soon as I
have hidden you I will never see you again, terribly hard as that
would be to me--for I love you so dearly, so deeply--poor sweet little
Irene--as you can never imagine.”

Lysias took the girl’s hand, but she withdrew it hastily, and raising
her eyes, full of tears, to meet his she said clearly and firmly:

“I believe you, for no man could speak like that and betray another. But
how do you know all this? Where are you taking me? Will Klea follow me?”

“At first you shall be concealed with the family of a worthy sculptor.
We will let Klea know this very day of all that has happened to you, and
when we have obtained the release of your parents then--but--Help us,
protecting Zeus! Do you see the chariot yonder? I believe those are the
white horses of the Eunuch Eulaeus, and if he were to see us here, all
would be lost! Hold tight, we must go as fast as in a chariot race.
There, now the hill hides us, and down there, by the little temple of
Isis, the wife of your future host is already waiting for you; she is no
doubt sitting in the closed chariot near the palm-trees.

“Yes, certainly, certainly, Klea shall hear all, so that she may not
be uneasy about you! I must say farewell to you directly and then,
afterwards, sweet Irene, will you sometimes think of the unhappy Lysias;
or did Aurora, who greeted him this morning, so bright and full of happy
promise, usher in a day not of joy but of sorrow and regret?” The Greek
drew in rein as he spoke, bringing his horses to a sober pace, and
looked tenderly in Irene’s eyes. She returned his gaze with heart-felt
emotion, but her gunny glance was dimmed with tears.

“Say something,” entreated the Greek. “Will you not forget me? And may I
soon visit you in your new retreat?”

Irene would so gladly have said yes--and yes again, a thousand times
yes; and yet she, who was so easily carried away by every little emotion
of her heart, in this supreme moment found strength enough to snatch
her hand from that of the Greek, who had again taken it, and to answer
firmly:

“I will remember you for ever and ever, but you must not come to see me
till I am once more united to my Klea.”

“But Irene, consider, if now--” cried Lysias much agitated.

“You swore to me by the heads of your nearest kin to obey my wishes,”
 interrupted the girl. “Certainly I trust you, and all the more readily
because you are so good to me, but I shall not do so any more if you do
not keep your word. Look, here comes a lady to meet us who looks like
a friend. She is already waving her hand to me. Yes, I will go with her
gladly, and yet I am so anxious--so troubled, I cannot tell you--but I
am so thankful too! Think of me sometimes, Lysias, and of our journey
here, and of our talk, and of my parents: I entreat you, do for them all
you possibly can. I wish I could help crying--but I cannot!”




CHAPTER XV.

Lysias eyes had not deceived him. The chariot with white horses which he
had evaded during his flight with Irene belonged to Eulaeus. The morning
being cool--and also because Cleopatra’s lady-in-waiting was with
him--he had come out in a closed chariot, in which he sat on soft
cushions side by side with the Macedonian lady, endeavoring to win her
good graces by a conversation, witty enough in its way.

“On the way there,” thought he, “I will make her quite favorable to me,
and on the way back I will talk to her of my own affairs.”

The drive passed quickly and pleasantly for both, and they neither of
them paid any heed to the sound of the hoofs of the horses that were
bearing away Irene.

Eulaeus dismounted behind the acacia-grove, and expressed a hope that
Zoe would not find the time very long while he was engaged with the
high-priest; perhaps indeed, he remarked, she might even make some use
of the time by making advances to the representative of Hebe.

But Irene had been long since warmly welcomed in the house of
Apollodorus, the sculptor, by the time they once more found themselves
together in the chariot; Eulaeus feigning, and Zoe in reality feeling,
extreme dissatisfaction at all that had taken place in the temple. The
high-priest had rejected Philometor’s demand that he should send
the water-bearer to the palace on King Euergetes’ birthday, with a
decisiveness which Eulaeus would never have given him credit for, for he
had on former occasions shown a disposition to measures of compromise;
while Zoe had not even seen the waterbearer.

“I fancy,” said the queen’s shrewd friend, “that I followed you somewhat
too late, and that when I entered the temple about half an hour after
you--having been detained first by Imhotep, the old physician, and then
by an assistant of Apollodorus, the sculptor, with some new busts of
the philosophers--the high-priest had already given orders that the girl
should be kept concealed; for when I asked to see her, I was conducted
first to her miserable room, which seemed more fit for peasants or goats
than for a Hebe, even for a sham one--but I found it perfectly deserted.

“Then I was shown into the temple of Serapis, where a priest was
instructing some girls in singing, and then sent hither and thither,
till at last, finding no trace whatever of the famous Irene, I came to
the dwelling-house of the gate-keeper of the temple.

“An ungainly woman opened the door, and said that Irene had been gone
from thence for some long time, but that her elder sister was there,
so I desired she might be fetched to speak with me. And what, if you
please, was the answer I received? The goddess Klea--I call her so as
being sister to a Hebe--had to nurse a sick child, and if I wanted to
see her I might go in and find her.

“The tone of the message quite conveyed that the distance from her down
to me was as great as in fact it is the other way. However, I thought
it worth the trouble to see this supercilious water-bearing girl, and I
went into a low room--it makes me sick now to remember how it smelt
of poverty--and there she sat with an idiotic child, dying on her lap.
Everything that surrounded me was so revolting and dismal that it will
haunt my dreams with terror for weeks to come and spoil all my cheerful
hours.

“I did not remain long with these wretched creatures, but I must
confess that if Irene is as like to Hebe as her elder sister is to Hera,
Euergetes has good grounds for being angry if Asclepiodorus keeps the
girl from him.

“Many a queen--and not least the one whom you and I know so
intimately-would willingly give half of her kingdom to possess such a
figure and such a mien as this serving-girl. And then her eyes, as she
looked at me when she rose with that little gasping corpse in her arms,
and asked me what I wanted with her sister!

“There was an impressive and lurid glow in those solemn eyes, which
looked as if they had been taken out of some Medusa’s head to be set in
her beautiful face. And there was a sinister threat in them too which
seemed to say: ‘Require nothing of her that I do not approve of, or you
will be turned into stone on the spot.’ She did not answer twenty words
to my questions, and when I once more tasted the fresh air outside,
which never seemed to me so pleasant as by contrast with that horrible
hole, I had learnt no more than that no one knew--or chose to know--in
what corner the fair Irene was hidden, and that I should do well to make
no further enquiries.

“And now, what will Philometor do? What will you advise him to do?”

“What cannot be got at by soft words may sometimes be obtained by a
sufficiently large present,” replied Eulaeus. “You know very well that
of all words none is less familiar to these gentry than the little word
‘enough’; but who indeed is really ready to say it?

“You speak of the haughtiness and the stern repellent demeanor of our
Hebe’s sister. I have seen her too, and I think that her image might be
set up in the Stoa as a happy impersonation of the severest virtue: and
yet children generally resemble their parents, and her father was the
veriest peculator and the most cunning rascal that ever came in my way,
and was sent off to the gold-mines for very sufficient reasons. And for
the sake of the daughter of a convicted criminal you have been driven
through the dust and the scorching heat, and have had to submit to her
scorn and contemptuous airs, while I am threatened with grave peril on
her account, for you know that Cleopatra’s latest whim is to do honor to
the Roman, Publius Scipio; he, on the other hand, is running after our
Hebe, and, having promised her that he will obtain an unqualified pardon
for her father, he will do his utmost to throw the odium of his robbery
upon me.

“The queen is to give him audience this very day, and you cannot know
how many enemies a man makes who, like me, has for many years been one
of the leading men of a great state. The king acknowledges, and with
gratitude, all that I have done for him and for his mother; but if, at
the moment when Publius Scipio accuses me, he is more in favor with her
than ever, I am a lost man.

“You are always with the queen; do you tell her who these girls are, and
what motives the Roman has for loading me with their father’s crimes;
and some opportunity must offer for doing you and your belongings some
friendly office or another.”

“What a shameless crew!” exclaimed Zoe. “Depend upon it I will not
be silent, for I always do what is just. I cannot bear seeing others
suffering an injustice, and least of all that a man of your merit and
distinction should be wounded in his honor, because a haughty foreigner
takes a fancy to a pretty little face and a conceited doll of a girl.”

Zoe was in the right when she found the air stifling in the
gate-keeper’s house, for poor Irene, unaccustomed to such an atmosphere,
could no more endure it than the pretentious maid of honor. It cost
even Klea an effort to remain in the wretched room, which served as the
dwelling-place of the whole family; where the cooking was carried on
at a smoky hearth, while, at night, it also sheltered a goat and a few
fowls; but she had endured even severer trials than this for the sake of
what she deemed right, and she was so fond of little Philo--her anxious
care in arousing by degrees his slumbering intelligence had brought her
so much soothing satisfaction, and the child’s innocent gratitude
had been so tender a reward--that she wholly forgot the repulsive
surroundings as soon as she felt that her presence and care were
indispensable to the suffering little one.

Imhotep, the most famous of the priest-physicians of the temple of
Asclepius--a man who was as learned in Greek as in Egyptian medical
lore, and who had been known by the name of “the modern Herophilus”
 since King Philometor had summoned him from Alexandria to Memphis--had
long since been watchful of the gradual development of the dormant
intelligence of the gate-keeper’s child, whom he saw every day in his
visits to the temple. Now, not long after Zoe had quitted the house, he
came in to see the sick child for the third time. Klea was still holding
the boy on her lap when he entered. On a wooden stool in front of
her stood a brazier of charcoal, and on it a small copper kettle the
physician had brought with him; to this a long tube was attached. The
tube was in two parts, joined together by a leather joint, also tubular,
in such a way that the upper portion could be turned in any direction.
Klea from time to time applied it to the breast of the child, and, in
obedience to Imhotep’s instructions, made the little one inhale the
steam that poured out of it.

“Has it had the soothing effect it ought to have?” asked the physician.

“Yes, indeed, I think so,” replied Klea, “There is not so much noise in
the chest when the poor little fellow draws his breath.”

The old man put his ear to the child’s mouth, laid his hand on his brow,
and said:

“If the fever abates I hope for the best. This inhaling of steam is an
excellent remedy for these severe catarrhs, and a venerable one besides;
for in the oldest writings of Hermes we find it prescribed as an
application in such cases. But now he has had enough of it. Ah! this
steam--this steam! Do you know that it is stronger than horses or oxen,
or the united strength of a whole army of giants? That diligent enquirer
Hero of Alexandria discovered this lately.

“But our little invalid has had enough of it, we must not overheat him.
Now, take a linen cloth--that one will do though it is not very fine.
Fold it together, wet it nicely with cold water--there is some in that
miserable potsherd there--and now I will show you how to lay it on the
child’s throat.

“You need not assure me that you understand me, Klea, for you have
hands--neat hands--and patience without end! Sixty-five years have I
lived, and have always had good health, but I could almost wish to be
ill for once, in order to be nursed by you. That poor child is well
off better than many a king’s child when it is sick; for him hireling
nurses, no doubt, fetch and do all that is necessary, but one thing they
cannot give, for they have it not; I mean the loving and indefatigable
patience by which you have worked a miracle on this child’s mind, and
are now working another on his body. Aye, aye, my girl; it is to you and
not me that this woman will owe her child if it is preserved to her.
Do you hear me, woman? and tell your husband so too; and if you do not
reverence Klea as a goddess, and do not lay your hands beneath her feet,
may you be--no--I will wish you no ill, for you have not too much of the
good things of life as it is!”

As he spoke the gate-keeper’s wife came timidly up to the physician and
the sick child, pushed her rough and tangled hair off her forehead
a little, crossed her lean arms at full length behind her back,
and, looking down with out-stretched neck at the boy, stared in dumb
amazement at the wet cloths. Then she timidly enquired:

“Are the evil spirits driven out of the child?”

“Certainly,” replied the physician. “Klea there has exorcised them, and
I have helped her; now you know.”

“Then I may go out for a little while? I have to sweep the pavement of
the forecourt.”

Klea nodded assent, and when the woman had disappeared the physician
said:

“How many evil demons we have to deal with, alas! and how few good ones.
Men are far more ready and willing to believe in mischievous spirits
than in kind or helpful ones; for when things go ill with them--and it
is generally their own fault when they do--it comforts them and flatters
their vanity if only they can throw the blame on the shoulders of evil
spirits; but when they are well to do, when fortune smiles on them of
course, they like to ascribe it to themselves, to their own cleverness
or their superior insight, and they laugh at those who admonish them of
the gratitude they owe to the protecting and aiding demons. I, for
my part, think more of the good than of the evil spirits, and you, my
child, without doubt are one of the very best.

“You must change the compress every quarter of an hour, and between
whiles go out into the open air, and let the fresh breezes fan your
bosom--your cheeks look pale. At mid-day go to your own little room, and
try to sleep. Nothing ought to be overdone, so you are to obey me.”

Klea replied with a friendly and filial nod, and Imhotep stroked down
her hair; then he left; she remained alone in the stuffy hot room, which
grew hotter every minute, while she changed the wet cloths for the
sick child, and watched with delight the diminishing hoarseness and
difficulty of his breathing. From time to time she was overcome by a
slight drowsiness, and closed her eyes for a few minutes, but only for a
short while; and this half-awake and half-asleep condition, chequered
by fleeting dreams, and broken only by an easy and pleasing duty, this
relaxation of the tension of mind and body, had a certain charm of
which, through it all, she remained perfectly conscious. Here she was
in her right place; the physicians kind words had done her good, and
her anxiety for the little life she loved was now succeeded by a
well-founded hope of its preservation.

During the night she had already come to a definite resolution, to
explain to the high-priest that she could not undertake the office of
the twin-sisters, who wept by the bier of Osiris, and that she would
rather endeavor to earn bread by the labor of her hands for herself and
Irene--for that Irene should do any real work never entered her mind--at
Alexandria, where even the blind and the maimed could find occupation.
Even this prospect, which only yesterday had terrified her, began now
to smile upon her, for it opened to her the possibility of proving
independently the strong energy which she felt in herself.

Now and then the figure of the Roman rose before her mind’s eye, and
every time that this occurred she colored to her very forehead. But
to-day she thought of this disturber of her peace differently from
yesterday; for yesterday she had felt herself overwhelmed by him with
shame, while to-day it appeared to her as though she had triumphed over
him at the procession, since she had steadily avoided his glance, and
when he had dared to approach her she had resolutely turned her back
upon him. This was well, for how could the proud foreigner expose
himself again to such humiliation.

“Away, away--for ever away!” she murmured to herself, and her eyes and
brow, which had been lighted up by a transient smile, once more assumed
the expression of repellent sternness which, the day before, had
so startled and angered the Roman. Soon however the severity of her
features relaxed, as she saw in fancy the young man’s beseeching look,
and remembered the praise given him by the recluse, and as--in the
middle of this train of thought--her eyes closed again, slumber once
more falling upon her spirit for a few minutes, she saw in her dream
Publius himself, who approached her with a firm step, took her in
his arms like a child, held her wrists to stop her struggling hands,
gathered her up with rough force, and then flung her into a canoe lying
at anchor by the bank of the Nile.

She fought with all her might against this attack and seizure, screamed
aloud with fury, and woke at the sound of her own voice. Then she got
up, dried her eyes that were wet with tears, and, after laying a freshly
wetted cloth on the child’s throat, she went out of doors in obedience
to the physician’s advice.

The sun was already at the meridian, and its direct rays were fiercely
reflected from the slabs of yellow sandstone that paved the forecourt.
On one side only of the wide, unroofed space, one of the colonnades that
surrounded it threw a narrow shade, hardly a span wide; and she would
not go there, for under it stood several beds on which lay pilgrims
who, here in the very dwelling of the divinity, hoped to be visited with
dreams which might give them an insight into futurity.

Klea’s head was uncovered, and, fearing the heat of noon, she was about
to return into the door-keeper’s house, when she saw a young white-robed
scribe, employed in the special service of Asclepiodorus, who came
across the court beckoning eagerly to her. She went towards him, but
before he had reached her he shouted out an enquiry whether her sister
Irene was in the gate-keeper’s lodge; the high-priest desired to speak
with her, and she was nowhere to be found. Klea told him that a grand
lady from the queen’s court had already enquired for her, and that the
last time she had seen her had been before daybreak, when she was going
to fill the jars for the altar of the god at the Well of the Sun.

“The water for the first libation,” answered the priest, “was placed on
the altar at the right time, but Doris and her sister had to fetch it
for the second and third. Asclepiodorus is angry--not with you, for he
knows from Imhotep that you are taking care of a sick child--but with
Irene. Try and think where she can be. Something serious must have
occurred that the high-priest wishes to communicate to her.”

Klea was startled, for she remembered Irene’s tears the evening before,
and her cry of longing for happiness and freedom. Could it be that the
thoughtless child had yielded to this longing, and escaped without her
knowledge, though only for a few hours, to see the city and the gay life
there?

She collected herself so as not to betray her anxiety to the messenger,
and said with downcast eyes:

“I will go and look for her.”

She hurried back into the house, once more looked to the sick child,
called his mother and showed her how to prepare the compresses, urging
her to follow Imhotep’s directions carefully and exactly till she should
return; she pressed one loving kiss on little Philo’s forehead--feeling
as she did so that he was less hot than he had been in the morning--and
then she left, going first to her own dwelling.

There everything stood or lay exactly as she had left it during the
night, only the golden jars were wanting. This increased Klea’s alarm,
but the thought that Irene should have taken the precious vessels with
her, in order to sell them and to live on the proceeds, never once
entered her mind, for her sister, she knew, though heedless and easily
persuaded, was incapable of any base action.

Where was she to seek the lost girl? Serapion, the recluse, to whom she
first addressed herself, knew nothing of her.

On the altar of Serapis, whither she next went, she found both the
vessels, and carried them back to her room.

Perhaps Irene had gone to see old Krates, and while watching his work
and chattering to him, had forgotten the flight of time--but no, the
priest-smith, whom she sought in his workshop, knew nothing of the
vanished maiden. He would willingly have helped Klea to seek for his
favorite, but the new lock for the tombs of the Apis had to be finished
by mid-day, and his swollen feet were painful.

Klea stood outside the old man’s door sunk in thought, and it occurred
to her that Irene had often, in her idle hours, climbed up into the
dove-cot belonging to the temple, to look out from thence over the
distant landscape, to visit the sitting birds, to stuff food into the
gaping beaks of the young ones, or to look up at the cloud of soaring
doves. The pigeon-house, built up of clay pots and Nile-mud, stood on
the top of the storehouse, which lay adjoining the southern boundary
wall of the temple.

She hastened across the sunny courts and slightly shaded alleys, and
mounted to the flat roof of the storehouse, but she found there neither
the old dove-keeper nor his two grandsons who helped him in his work,
for all three were in the anteroom to the kitchen, taking their dinner
with the temple-servants.

Klea shouted her sister’s name; once, twice, ten times--but no one
answered. It was just as if the fierce heat of the sun burnt up the
sound as it left her lips. She looked into the first pigeon-house, the
second, the third, all the way to the last. The numberless little clay
tenements of the brisk little birds threw out a glow like a heated oven;
but this did not hinder her from hunting through every nook and corner.
Her cheeks were burning, drops of perspiration stood on her brow,
and she had much difficulty in freeing herself from the dust of the
pigeon-houses, still she was not discouraged.

Perhaps Irene had gone into the Anubidium, or sanctuary of Asclepius,
to enquire as to the meaning of some strange vision, for there, with
the priestly physicians, lived also a priestess who could interpret
the dreams of those who sought to be healed even better than a certain
recluse who also could exercise that science. The enquirers often had to
wait a long time outside the temple of Asclepius, and this consideration
encouraged Klea, and made her insensible to the burning southwest wind
which was now rising, and to the heat of the sun; still, as she returned
to the Pastophorium--slowly, like a warrior returning from a defeat--she
suffered severely from the heat, and her heart was wrung with anguish
and suspense.

Willingly would she have cried, and often heaved a groan that was more
like a sob, but the solace of tears to relieve her heart was still
denied to her.

Before going to tell Asclepiodorus that her search had been
unsuccessful, she felt prompted once more to talk with her friend, the
anchorite; but before she had gone far enough even to see his cell,
the high-priest’s scribe once more stood in her way, and desired her to
follow him to the temple. There she had to wait in mortal impatience for
more than an hour in an ante room. At last she was conducted into a room
where Asclepiodorus was sitting with the whole chapter of the priesthood
of the temple of Serapis.

Klea entered timidly, and had to wait again some minutes in the presence
of the mighty conclave before the high-priest asked her whether she
could give any information as to the whereabouts of the fugitive, and
whether she had heard or observed anything that could guide them on her
track, since he, Asclepiodorus, knew that if Irene had run away secretly
from the temple she must be as anxious about her as he was.

Klea had much difficulty in finding words, and her knees shook as she
began to speak, but she refused the seat which was brought for her by
order of Asclepiodorus. She recounted in order all the places where she
had in vain sought her sister, and when she mentioned the sanctuary of
Asclepius, and a recollection came suddenly and vividly before her of
the figure of a lady of distinction, who had come there with a number
of slaves and waiting-maids to have a dream interpreted, Zoe’s visit to
herself flashed upon her memory; her demeanor--at first so over-friendly
and then so supercilious--and her haughty enquiries for Irene.

She broke off in her narrative, and exclaimed:

“I am sure, holy father, that Irene has not fled of her own free
impulse, but some one perhaps may have lured her into quitting the
temple and me; she is still but a child with a wavering mind. Could it
possibly be that a lady of rank should have decoyed her into going with
her? Such a person came to-day to see me at the door-keeper’s lodge.
She was richly dressed and wore a gold crescent in her light wavy hair,
which was plaited with a silk ribband, and she asked me urgently about
my sister. Imhotep, the physician, who often visits at the king’s
palace, saw her too, and told me her name is Zoe, and that she is
lady-in-waiting to Queen Cleopatra.”

These words occasioned the greatest excitement throughout the conclave
of priests, and Asclepiodorus exclaimed:

“Oh! women, women! You indeed were right, Philammon; I could not and
would not believe it! Cleopatra has done many things which are forgiven
only in a queen, but that she should become the tool of her brother’s
basest passions, even you, Philammon, could hardly regard as likely,
though you are always prepared to expect evil rather than good. But now,
what is to be done? How can we protect ourselves against violence and
superior force?”

Klea had appeared before the priests with cheeks crimson and glowing
from the noontide heat, but at the high-priest’s last words the blood
left her face, she turned ashy-pale, and a chill shiver ran through her
trembling limbs. Her father’s child--her bright, innocent Irene--basely
stolen for Euergetes, that licentious tyrant of whose wild deeds
Serapion had told her only last evening, when he painted the dangers
that would threaten her and Irene if they should quit the shelter of the
sanctuary.

Alas, it was too true! They had tempted away her darling child, her
comfort and delight, lured her with splendor and ease, only to sink
her in shame! She was forced to cling to the back of the chair she had
disdained, to save herself from falling.

But this weakness overmastered her for a few minutes only; she boldly
took two hasty steps up to the table behind which the high-priest
was sitting, and, supporting herself with her right hand upon it, she
exclaimed, while her voice, usually so full and sonorous, had a hoarse
tone:

“A woman has been the instrument of making another woman unworthy of the
name of woman! and you--you, the protectors of right and virtue--you who
are called to act according to the will and mind of the gods whom you
serve--you are too weak to prevent it? If you endure this, if you do
not put a stop to this crime you are not worthy--nay, I will not be
interrupted--you, I say, are unworthy of the sacred title and of the
reverence you claim, and I will appeal--”

“Silence, girl!” cried Asclepiodorus to the terribly excited Klea.
“I would have you imprisoned with the blasphemers, if I did not well
understand the anguish which has turned your brain. We will interfere
on behalf of the abducted girl, and you must wait patiently in silence.
You, Callimachus, must at once order Ismael, the messenger, to saddle
the horses, and ride to Memphis to deliver a despatch from me to the
queen; let us all combine to compose it, and subscribe our names as soon
as we are perfectly certain that Irene has been carried off from these
precincts. Philammon, do you command that the gong be sounded which
calls together all the inhabitants of the temple; and you, my girl, quit
this hall, and join the others.”




CHAPTER XVI.

Klea obeyed the high-priest’s command at once, and wandered--not knowing
exactly whither--from one corridor to another of the huge pile, till she
was startled by the sound of the great brazen plate, struck with mighty
blows, which rang out to the remotest nook and corner of the precincts.
This call was for her too, and she went forthwith into the great
court of assembly, which at every moment grew fuller and fuller. The
temple-servants and the keepers of the beasts, the gate-keepers,
the litter-bearers, the water-carriers-all streamed in from their
interrupted meal, some wiping their mouths as they hurried in, or still
holding in their hands a piece of bread, a radish, or a date which they
hastily munched; the washer-men and women came in with hands still wet
from washing the white robes of the priests, and the cooks arrived with
brows still streaming from their unfinished labors. Perfumes floated
round from the unwashed hands of the pastophori, who had been busied in
the laboratories in the preparation of incense, while from the library
and writing-rooms came the curators and scribes and the officials of
the temple counting-house, their hair in disorder, and their light
working-dress stained with red or black. The troop of singers, male
and female, came in orderly array, just as they had been assembled for
practice, and with them came the faded twins to whom Klea and Irene had
been designated as successors by Asclepiodorus. Then came the pupils of
the temple-school, tumbling noisily into the court-yard in high delight
at this interruption to their lessons. The eldest of these were sent
to bring in the great canopy under which the heads of the establishment
might assemble.

Last of all appeared Asclepiodorus, who handed to a young scribe a
complete list of all the inhabitants and members of the temple, that he
might read it out. This he proceeded to do; each one answered with an
audible “Here” as his name was called, and for each one who was absent
information was immediately given as to his whereabouts.

Klea had joined the singing-women, and awaited in breathless anxiety a
long-endlessly long-time for the name of her sister to be called; for it
was not till the very smallest of the school-boys and the lowest of the
neat-herds had answered, “Here,” that the scribe read out, “Klea, the
water-bearer,” and nodded to her in answer as she replied “Here!”

Then his voice seemed louder than before as he read. “Irene, the
water-bearer.”

No answer following on these words, a slight movement, like the bowing
wave that flies over a ripe cornfield when the morning breeze sweeps
across the ears, was evident among the assembled inhabitants of the
temple, who waited in breathless silence till Asclepiodorus stood forth,
and said in a distinct and audible voice:

“You have all met here now at my call. All have obeyed it excepting
those holy men consecrated to Serapis, whose vows forbid their breaking
their seclusion, and Irene, the water-bearer. Once more I call, ‘Irene,’
a second, and a third time--and still no answer; I now appeal to you all
assembled here, great and small, men and women who serve Serapis. Can
any one of you give any information as to the whereabouts of this young
girl? Has any one seen her since, at break of day, she placed the first
libation from the Well of the Sun on the altar of the god? You are all
silent! Then no one has met her in the course of this day? Now, one
question more, and whoever can answer it stand forth and speak the words
of truth.

“By which gate did this lady of rank depart who visited the temple early
this morning?--By the eastern gate--good.

“Was she alone?--She was.

“By which gate did the epistolographer Eulaeus depart?--By the east.

“Was he alone?--He was.

“Did any one here present meet the chariot either of the lady or of
Eulaeus?”

“I did,” cried a car-driver, whose daily duty it was to go to Memphis
with his oxen and cart to fetch provisions for the kitchen, and other
necessaries.

“Speak,” said the high-priest.

“I saw,” replied the man, “the white horses of my Lord Eulaeus hard
by the vineyard of Khakem; I know them well. They were harnessed to a
closed chariot, in which besides himself sat a lady.”

“Was it Irene?” asked Asclepiodorus.

“I do not know,” replied the tarter, “for I could not see who sat in the
chariot, but I heard the voice of Eulaeus, and then a woman’s laugh. She
laughed so heartily that I had to screw my mouth up myself, it tickled
me so.”

While Klea supposed this description to apply to Irene’s merry
laugh-which she had never thought of with regret till this moment--the
high-priest exclaimed:

“You, keeper of the eastern gate, did the lady and Eulaeus enter and
leave this sanctuary together?”

“No,” was the answer. “She came in half an hour later than he did, and
she quitted the temple quite alone and long after the eunuch.”

“And Irene did not pass through your gate, and cannot have gone out by
it?--I ask you in the name of the god we serve!”

“She may have done so, holy father,” answered the gate-keeper in much
alarm. “I have a sick child, and to look after him I went into my room
several times; but only for a few minutes at a time-still, the gate
stands open, all is quiet in Memphis now.”

“You have done very wrong,” said Asclepiodorus severely, “but since you
have told the truth you may go unpunished. We have learned enough. All
you gate-keepers now listen to me. Every gate of the temple must be
carefully shut, and no one--not even a pilgrim nor any dignitary from
Memphis, however high a personage he may be--is to enter or go out
without my express permission; be as alert as if you feared an attack,
and now go each of you to his duties.”

The assembly dispersed; these to one side, those to another.

Klea did not perceive that many looked at her with suspicion as
though she were responsible for her sister’s conduct, and others with
compassion; she did not even notice the twin-sisters, whose place she
and Irene were to have filled, and this hurt the feelings of the good
elderly maidens, who had to perform so much lamenting which they did not
feel at all, that they eagerly seized every opportunity of expressing
their feelings when, for once in a way, they were moved to sincere
sorrow. But neither these sympathizing persons nor any other of the
inhabitants of the temple, who approached Klea with the purpose of
questioning or of pitying her, dared to address her, so stern and
terrible was the solemn expression of her eyes which she kept fixed upon
the ground.

At last she remained alone in the great court; her heart beat faster
unusual, and strange and weighty thoughts were stirring in her soul.
One thing was clear to her: Eulaeus--her father’s ruthless foe and
destroyer--was now also working the fall of the child of the man he
had ruined, and, though she knew it not, the high-priest shared her
suspicions. She, Klea, was by no means minded to let this happen without
an effort at defence, and it even became clearer and clearer to her mind
that it was her duty to act, and without delay. In the first instance
she would ask counsel of her friend Serapion; but as she approached his
cell the gong was sounded which summoned the priests to service, and at
the same time warned her of her duty of fetching water.

Mechanically, and still thinking of nothing but Irene’s deliverance, she
fulfilled the task which she was accustomed to perform every day at the
sound of this brazen clang, and went to her room to fetch the golden
jars of the god.

As she entered the empty room her cat sprang to meet her with two leaps
of joy, putting up her back, rubbing her soft head against her feet with
her fine bushy tail ringed with black stripes set up straight, as
cats are wont only when they are pleased. Klea was about to stroke the
coaxing animal, but it sprang back, stared at her shyly, and, as she
could not help thinking, angrily with its green eyes, and then shrank
back into the corner close to Irene’s couch.

“She mistook me!” thought Klea. “Irene is more lovable than I even to a
beast, and Irene, Irene--” She sighed deeply at the name, and would have
sunk down on her trunk there to consider of new ways and means--all of
which however she was forced to reject as foolish and impracticable--but
on the chest lay a little shirt she had begun to make for little
Philo, and this reminded her again of the sick child and of the duty of
fetching the water.

Without further delay she took up the jars, and as she went towards the
well she remembered the last precepts that had been given her by her
father, whom she had once been permitted to visit in prison. Only a few
detached sentences of this, his last warning speech, now came into
her mind, though no word of it had escaped her memory; it ran much as
follows:

“It may seem as though I had met with an evil recompense from the gods
for my conduct in adhering to what I think just and virtuous; but it
only seems so, and so long as I succeed in living in accordance with
nature, which obeys an everlasting law, no man is justified in accusing
me. My own peace of mind especially will never desert me so long as I do
not set myself to act in opposition to the fundamental convictions of my
inmost being, but obey the doctrines of Zeno and Chrysippus. This peace
every one may preserve, aye, even you, a woman, if you constantly do
what you recognize to be right, and fulfil the duties you take upon
yourself. The very god himself is proof and witness of this doctrine,
for he grants to him who obeys him that tranquillity of spirit which
must be pleasing in his eyes, since it is the only condition of the soul
in which it appears to be neither fettered and hindered nor tossed and
driven; while he, on the contrary, who wanders from the paths of virtue
and of her daughter, stern duty, never attains peace, but feels the
torment of an unsatisfied and hostile power, which with its hard grip
drags his soul now on and now back.

“He who preserves a tranquil mind is not miserable, even in misfortune,
and thankfully learns to feel con tented in every state of life; and
that because he is filled with those elevated sentiments which are
directly related to the noblest portion of his being--those, I mean--of
justice and goodness. Act then, my child, in conformity with justice
and duty, regardless of any ulterior object, without considering
whether your action will bring you pleasure or pain, without fear of the
judgment of men or the envy of the gods, and you will win that peace of
mind which distinguishes the wise from the unwise, and may be happy
even in adverse circumstances; for the only real evil is the dominion of
wickedness, that is to say the unreason which rebels against nature, and
the only true happiness consists in the possession of virtue. He alone,
however, can call virtue his who possesses it wholly, and sins not
against it in the smallest particular; for there is no difference of
degrees either in good or in evil, and even the smallest action opposed
to duty, truth or justice, though punishable by no law, is a sin, and
stands in opposition to virtue.

“Irene,” thus Philotas had concluded his injunctions, “cannot as yet
understand this doctrine, but you are grave and have sense beyond your
years. Repeat this to her daily, and when the time comes impress on your
sister--towards whom you must fill the place of a mother--impress on her
heart these precepts as your father’s last will and testament.”

And now, as Klea went towards the well within the temple-wall to fetch
water, she repeated to herself many of these injunctions; she felt
herself encouraged by them, and firmly resolved not to give her sister
up to the seducer without a struggle.

As soon as the vessels for libation at the altar were filled she
returned to little Philo, whose state seemed to her to give no further
cause for anxiety; after staying with him for more than an hour she left
the gate-keeper’s dwelling to seek Serapion’s advice, and to divulge
to him all she had been able to plan and consider in the quiet of the
sick-room.

The recluse was wont to recognize her step from afar, and to be looking
out for her from his window when she went to visit him; but to-day he
heard her not, for he was stepping again and again up and down the few
paces which the small size of his tiny cell allowed him to traverse.
He could reflect best when he walked up and down, and he thought
and thought again, for he had heard all that was known in the temple
regarding Irene’s disappearance; and he would, he must rescue her--but
the more he tormented his brain the more clearly he saw that every
attempt to snatch the kidnapped girl from the powerful robber must in
fact be vain.

“And it must not, it shall not be!” he had cried, stamping his great
foot, a few minutes before Klea reached his cell; but as soon as he was
aware of her presence he made an effort to appear quite easy, and cried
out with the vehemence which characterized him even in less momentous
circumstances:

“We must consider, we must reflect, we must puzzle our brains, for the
gods have been napping this morning, and we must be doubly wide-awake.
Irene--our little Irene--and who would have thought it yesterday! It is
a good-for-nothing, unspeakably base knave’s trick--and now, what can
we do to snatch the prey from the gluttonous monster, the savage wild
beast, before he can devour our child, our pet little one?

“Often and often I have been provoked at my own stupidity, but never,
never have I felt so stupid, such a godforsaken blockhead as I do now.
When I try to consider I feel as if that heavy shutter had been nailed
clown on my head. Have you had any ideas? I have not one which would not
disgrace the veriest ass--not a single one.”

“Then you know everything?” asked Klea, “even that it is probably our
father’s enemy, Eulaeus, who has treacherously decoyed the poor child to
go away with him?”

“Yes, Yes!” cried Serapion, “wherever there is some scoundrel’s trick
to be played he must have a finger in the pie, as sure as there must
be meal for bread to be made. But it is a new thing to me that on this
occasion he should be Euergetes’ tool. Old Philammon told me all about
it. Just now the messenger came back from Memphis, and brought a paltry
scrap of papyrus on which some wretched scribbler had written in the
name of Philometer, that nothing was known of Irene at court, and
complaining deeply that Asclepiodorus had not hesitated to play
an underhand game with the king. So they have no idea whatever of
voluntarily releasing our child.”

“Then I shall proceed to do my duty,” said Klea resolutely. “I shall go
to Memphis, and fetch my sister.”

The anchorite stared at the girl in horror, exclaiming: “That is folly,
madness, suicide! Do you want to throw two victims into his jaws instead
of one?”

“I can protect myself, and as regards Irene, I will claim the queen’s
assistance. She is a woman, and will never suffer--”

“What is there in this world that she will not suffer if it can procure
her profit or pleasure? Who knows what delightful thing Euergetes may
not have promised her in return for our little maid? No, by Serapis! no,
Cleopatra will not help you, but--and that is a good idea--there is one
who will to a certainty. We must apply to the Roman Publius Scipio, and
he will have no difficulty in succeeding.”

“From him,” exclaimed Klea, coloring scarlet, “I will accept neither
good nor evil; I do not know him, and I do not want to know him.”

“Child, child!” interrupted the recluse with grave chiding. “Does your
pride then so far outweigh your love, your duty, and concern for Irene?
What, in the name of all the gods, has Publius done to you that you
avoid him more anxiously than if he were covered with leprosy? There
is a limit to all things, and now--aye, indeed--I must out with it come
what may, for this is not the time to pretend to be blind when I see
with both eyes what is going on--your heart is full of the Roman, and
draws you to him; but you are an honest girl, and, in order to remain
so, you fly from him because you distrust yourself, and do not know what
might happen if he were to tell you that he too has been hit by one of
Eros’ darts. You may turn red and white, and look at me as if I were
your enemy, and talking contemptible nonsense. I have seen many strange
things, but I never saw any one before you who was a coward out of sheer
courage, and yet of all the women I know there is not one to whom fear
is less known than my bold and resolute Klea. The road is a hard one
that you must take, but only cover your poor little heart with a coat
of mail, and venture in all confidence to meet the Roman, who is an
excellent good fellow. No doubt it will be hard to you to crave a boon,
but ought you to shrink from those few steps over sharp stones? Our poor
child is standing on the edge of the abyss; if you do not arrive at the
right time, and speak the right words to the only person who is able to
help in this matter, she will be thrust into the foul bog and sink in
it, because her brave sister was frightened at--herself!”

Klea had cast down her eyes as the anchorite addressed her thus; she
stood for some time frowning at the ground in silence, but at last she
said, with quivering lips and as gloomily as if she were pronouncing a
sentence on herself.

“Then I will ask the Roman to assist me; but how can I get to him?”

“Ah!--now my Klea is her father’s daughter once more,” answered
Serapion, stretching out both his arms towards her from the little
window of his cell; and then he went on: “I can make the painful path
somewhat smoother for you. My brother Glaucus, who is commander of the
civic guard in the palace, you already know; I will give you a few
words of recommendation to him, and also, to lighten your task, a little
letter to Publius Scipio, which shall contain a short account of the
matter in hand. If Publius wishes to speak with you yourself go to him
and trust him, but still more trust yourself.

“Now go, and when you have once more filled the water-jars come back
to me, and fetch the letters. The sooner you can go the better, for it
would be well that you should leave the path through the desert behind
you before nightfall, for in the dark there are often dangerous tramps
about. You will find a friendly welcome at my sister Leukippa’s; she
lives in the toll-house by the great harbor--show her this ring and she
will give you a bed, and, if the gods are merciful, one for Irene too.”

“Thank you, father,” said Klea, but she said no more, and then left him
with a rapid step.

Serapion looked lovingly after her; then he took two wooden tablets
faced with wax out of his chest, and, with a metal style, he wrote on
one a short letter to his brother, and on the other a longer one to the
Roman, which ran as follows:

“Serapion, the recluse of Serapis, to Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica,
the Roman.

“Serapion greets Publius Scipio, and acquaints him that Irene, the
younger sister of Klea, the water-bearer, has disappeared from this
temple, and, as Serapion suspects, by the wiles of the epistolographer
Eulaeus, whom we both know, and who seems to have acted under the orders
of King Ptolemy Euergetes. Seek to discover where Irene can be. Save her
if thou canst from her ravishers, and conduct her back to this temple or
deliver her in Memphis into the hands of my sister Leukippa, the wife
of the overseer of the harbor, named Hipparchus, who dwells in the
toll-house. May Serapis preserve thee and thine.”

The recluse had just finished his letters when Klea returned to him. The
girl hid them in the folds of the bosom of her robe, said farewell to
her friend, and remained quite grave and collected, while Serapion, with
tears in his eyes, stroked her hair, gave her his parting blessing,
and finally even hung round her neck an amulet for good luck, that
his mother had worn--it was an eye in rock-crystal with a protective
inscription. Then, without any further delay, she set out towards the
temple gate, which, in obedience to the commands of the high priest, was
now locked. The gate-keeper--little Philo’s father--sat close by on a
stone bench, keeping guard. In a friendly tone Klea asked him to open
the gate; but the anxious official would not immediately comply with
her request, but reminded her of Asclepiodorus’ strict injunctions, and
informed her that the great Roman had demanded admission to the temple
about three hours since, but had been refused by the high-priest’s
special orders. He had asked too for her, and had promised to return on
the morrow.

The hot blood flew to Klea’s face and eyes as she heard this news. Could
Publius no more cease to think of her than she of him? Had Serapion
guessed rightly? “The darts of Eros”--the recluse’s phrase flashed
through her mind, and struck her heart as if it were itself a winged
arrow; it frightened her and yet she liked it, but only for one brief
instant, for the utmost distrust of her own weakness came over her
again directly, and she told herself with a shudder that she was on the
high-road to follow up and seek out the importunate stranger.

All the horrors of her undertaking stood vividly before her, and if she
had now retraced her steps she would not have been without an excuse to
offer to her own conscience, since the temple-gate was closed, and might
not be opened to any one, not even to her.

For a moment she felt a certain satisfaction in this flattering
reflection, but as she thought again of Irene her resolve was once more
confirmed, and going closer up to the gate-keeper she said with great
determination:

“Open the gate to me without delay; you know that I am not accustomed
to do or to desire anything wrong. I beg of you to push back the bolt at
once.”

The man to whom Klea had done many kindnesses, and whom Imhotep had that
very day told that she was the good spirit of his house, and that he
ought to venerate her as a divinity--obeyed her orders, though with some
doubt and hesitation. The heavy bolt flew back, the brazen gate opened,
the water-bearer stepped out, flung a dark veil over her head, and set
out on her walk.




CHAPTER XVII.

A paved road, with a row of Sphinxes on each side, led from the Greek
temple of Serapis to the rock-hewn tombs of Apis, and the temples and
chapels built over them, and near them; in these the Apis bull after its
death--or “in Osiris” as the phrase went--was worshipped, while, so long
as it lived, it was taken care of and prayed to in the temple to which
it belonged, that of the god Ptah at Memphis. After death these sacred
bulls, which were distinguished by peculiar marks, had extraordinarily
costly obsequies; they were called the risen Ptah, and regarded as the
symbol of the soul of Osiris, by whose procreative power all that dies
or passes away is brought to new birth and new life--the departed soul
of man, the plant that has perished, and the heavenly bodies that have
set. Osiris-Sokari, who was worshipped as the companion of Osiris,
presided over the wanderings which had to be performed by the seemingly
extinct spirit before its resuscitation as another being in a new form;
and Egyptian priests governed in the temples of these gods, which were
purely Egyptian in style, and which had been built at a very early date
over the tomb-cave of the sacred bulls. And even the Greek ministers of
Serapis, settled at Memphis, were ready to follow the example of their
rulers and to sacrifice to Osiris-Apis, who was closely allied to
Serapis--not only in name but in his essential attributes. Serapis
himself indeed was a divinity introduced from Asia into the Nile
valley by the Ptolemies, in order to supply to their Greek and Egyptian
subjects alike an object of adoration, before whose altars they could
unite in a common worship. They devoted themselves to the worship of
Apis in Osiris at the shrines, of Greek architecture, and containing
stone images of bulls, that stood outside the Egyptian sanctuary, and
they were very ready to be initiated into the higher significance of
his essence; indeed, all religious mysteries in their Greek home bore
reference to the immortality of the soul and its fate in the other
world.

Just as two neighboring cities may be joined by a bridge, so the Greek
temple of Serapis--to which the water-bearers belonged--was connected
with the Egyptian sanctuary of Osiris-Apis by the fine paved road for
processions along which Klea now rapidly proceeded. There was a shorter
way to Memphis, but she chose this one, because the mounds of sand on
each side of the road bordered by Sphinxes--which every day had to
be cleared of the desert-drift--concealed her from the sight of her
companions in the temple; besides the best and safest way into the
city was by a road leading from a crescent, decorated with busts of
the philosophers, that lay near the principal entrance to the new Apis
tombs.

She looked neither at the lion-bodies with men’s heads that guarded the
way, nor at the images of beasts on the wall that shut it in; nor did
she heed the dusky-hued temple-slaves of Osiris-Apis who were sweeping
the sand from the paved way with large brooms, for she thought of
nothing but Irene and the difficult task that lay before her, and she
walked swiftly onwards with her eyes fixed on the ground.

But she had taken no more than a few steps when she heard her name
called quite close to her, and looking up in alarm she found herself
standing opposite Krates, the little smith, who came close up to her,
took hold of her veil, threw it back a little before she could prevent
him, and asked:

“Where are you off to, child?”

“Do not detain me,” entreated Klea. “You know that Irene, whom you are
always so fond of, has been carried off; perhaps I may be able to save
her, but if you betray me, and if they follow me--”

“I will not hinder you,” interrupted the old man. “Nay, if it were not
for these swollen feet I would go with you, for I can think of nothing
else but the poor dear little thing; but as it is I shall be glad enough
when I am sitting still again in my workshop; it is exactly as if a
workman of my own trade lived in each of my great toes, and was dancing
round in them with hammer and file and chisel and nails. Very likely you
may be so fortunate as to find your sister, for a crafty woman succeeds
in many things which are too difficult for a wise man. Go on, and if
they seek for you old Krates will not betray you.”

He nodded kindly at Klea, and had already half turned his back on her
when he once more looked round, and called out to her:

“Wait a minute, girl--you can do me a little service. I have just
fitted a new lock to the door of the Apis-tomb down there. It answers
admirably, but the one key to it which I have made is not enough; we
require four, and you shall order them for me of the locksmith Heri,
to be sent the day after to-morrow; he lives opposite the gate of
Sokari--to the left, next the bridge over the canal--you cannot miss it.
I hate repeating and copying as much as I like inventing and making new
things, and Heri can work from a pattern just as well as I can. If it
were not for my legs I would give the man my commission myself, for he
who speaks by the lips of a go-between is often misunderstood or not
understood at all.”

“I will gladly save you the walk,” replied Klea, while the Smith sat
down on the pedestal of one of the Sphinxes, and opening the leather
wallet which hung by his side shook out the contents. A few files,
chisels, and nails fell out into his lap; then the key, and finally a
sharp, pointed knife with which Krates had cut out the hollow in the
door for the insertion of the lock; Krates touched up the pattern-key
for the smith in Memphis with a few strokes of the file, and then,
muttering thoughtfully and shaking his head doubtfully from side to
side, he exclaimed:

“You still must come with me once more to the door, for I require
accurate workmanship from other people, and so I must be severe upon my
own.”

“But I want so much to reach Memphis before dark,” besought Klea.

“The whole thing will not take a minute, and if you will give me your
arm I shall go twice as fast. There are the files, there is the knife.”

“Give it me,” Klea requested. “This blade is sharp and bright, and as
soon as I saw it I felt as if it bid me take it with me. Very likely I
may have to come through the desert alone at night.”

“Aye,” said the smith, “and even the weakest feels stronger when he has
a weapon. Hide the knife somewhere about you, my child, only take care
not to hurt yourself with it. Now let me take your arm, and on we will
go--but not quite so fast.”

Klea led the smith to the door he indicated, and saw with admiration
how unfailingly the bolt sprang forward when one half of the door closed
upon the other, and how easily the key pushed it back again; then, after
conducting Krates back to the Sphinx near which she had met him, she
went on her way at her quickest pace, for the sun was already very low,
and it seemed scarcely possible to reach Memphis before it should set.

As she approached a tavern where soldiers and low people were accustomed
to resort, she was met by a drunken slave. She went on and past him
without any fear, for the knife in her girdle, and on which she kept her
hand, kept up her courage, and she felt as if she had thus acquired
a third hand which was more powerful and less timid than her own. A
company of soldiers had encamped in front of the tavern, and the wine of
Kbakem, which was grown close by, on the eastern declivity of the Libyan
range, had an excellent savor. The men were in capital spirits, for at
noon today--after they had been quartered here for months as guards of
the tombs of Apis and of the temples of the Necropolis--a commanding
officer of the Diadoches had arrived at Memphis, who had ordered them
to break up at once, and to withdraw into the capital before nightfall.
They were not to be relieved by other mercenaries till the next morning.

All this Klea learned from a messenger from the Egyptian temple in
the Necropolis, who recognized her, and who was going to Memphis,
commissioned by the priests of Osiris-Apis and Sokari to convey a
petition to the king, praying that fresh troops might be promptly sent
to replace those now withdrawn.

For some time she went on side by side with this messenger, but soon she
found that she could not keep up with his hurried pace, and had to fall
behind. In front of another tavern sat the officers of the troops,
whose noisy mirth she had heard as she passed the former one; they were
sitting over their wine and looking on at the dancing of two Egyptian
girls, who screeched like cackling hens over their mad leaps, and who
so effectually riveted the attention of the spectators, who were beating
time for them by clapping their hands, that Klea, accelerating her step,
was able to slip unobserved past the wild crew. All these scenes,
nay everything she met with on the high-road, scared the girl who was
accustomed to the silence and the solemn life of the temple of Serapis,
and she therefore struck into a side path that probably also led to the
city which she could already see lying before her with its pylons, its
citadel and its houses, veiled in evening mist. In a quarter of an hour
at most she would have crossed the desert, and reach the fertile meadow
land, whose emerald hue grew darker and darker every moment. The sun
was already sinking to rest behind the Libyan range, and soon after, for
twilight is short in Egypt, she was wrapped in the darkness of night.
The westwind, which had begun to blow even at noon, now rose higher,
and seemed to pursue her with its hot breath and the clouds of sand it
carried with it from the desert.

She must certainly be approaching water, for she heard the deep pipe of
the bittern in the reeds, and fancied she breathed a moister air. A few
steps more, and her foot sank in mud; and she now perceived that she was
standing on the edge of a wide ditch in which tall papyrus-plants were
growing. The side path she had struck into ended at this plantation, and
there was nothing to be done but to turn about, and to continue her walk
against the wind and with the sand blowing in her face.

The light from the drinking-booth showed her the direction she must
follow, for though the moon was up, it is true, black clouds swept
across it, covering it and the smaller lights of heaven for many minutes
at a time. Still she felt no fatigue, but the shouts of the men and the
loud cries of the women that rang out from the tavern filled her with
alarm and disgust. She made a wide circuit round the hostelry, wading
through the sand hillocks and tearing her dress on the thorns and
thistles that had boldly struck deep root in the desert, and had grown
up there like the squalid brats in the hovel of a beggar. But still, as
she hurried on by the high-road, the hideous laughter and the crowing
mirth of the dancing-girls still rang in her mind’s ear.

Her blood coursed more swiftly through her veins, her head was on fire,
she saw Irene close before her, tangibly distinct--with flowing hair
and fluttering garments, whirling in a wild dance like a Moenad at a
Dionysiac festival, flying from one embrace to another and shouting and
shrieking in unbridled folly like the wretched girls she had seen on her
way. She was seized with terror for her sister--an unbounded dread such
as she had never felt before, and as the wind was now once more behind
her she let herself be driven on by it, lifting her feet in a swift run
and flying, as if pursued by the Erinnyes, without once looking round
her and wholly forgetful of the smith’s commission, on towards the city
along the road planted with trees, which as she knew led to the gate of
the citadel.




CHAPTER XVIII.

In front of the gate of the king’s palace sat a crowd of petitioners who
were accustomed to stay here from early dawn till late at night, until
they were called into the palace to receive the answer to the petition
they had drawn up. When Klea reached the end of her journey she was
so exhausted and bewildered that she felt the imperative necessity of
seeking rest and quiet reflection, so she seated herself among these
people, next to a woman from Upper Egypt. But hardly had she taken her
place by her with a silent greeting, when her talkative neighbor began
to relate with particular minuteness why she had come to Memphis, and
how certain unjust judges had conspired with her bad husband to trick
her--for men were always ready to join against a woman--and to deprive
her of everything which had been secured to her and her children by her
marriage-contract. For two months now, she said, she had been waiting
early and late before the sublime gate, and was consuming her last ready
cash in the city where living was so dear; but it was all one to her,
and at a pinch she would sell even her gold ornaments, for sooner or
later her cause must come before the king, and then the wicked villain
and his accomplices would be taught what was just.

Klea heard but little of this harangue; a feeling had come over her like
that of a person who is having water poured again and again on the top
of his head. Presently her neighbor observed that the new-comer was not
listening at all to her complainings; she slapped her shoulder with her
hand, and said:

“You seem to think of nothing but your own concerns; and I dare say they
are not of such a nature as that you should relate them to any one else;
so far as mine are concerned the more they are discussed, the better.”

The tone in which these remarks were made was so dry, and at the same
time so sharp, that it hurt Klea, and she rose hastily to go closer to
the gate. Her neighbor threw a cross word after her; but she did not
heed it, and drawing her veil closer over her face, she went through
the gate of the palace into a vast courtyard, brightly lighted up by
cressets and torches, and crowded with foot-soldiers and mounted guards.

The sentry at the gate perhaps had not observed her, or perhaps had
let her pass unchallenged from her dignified and erect gait, and the
numerous armed men through whom she now made her way seemed to be so
much occupied with their own affairs, that no one bestowed any notice on
her. In a narrow alley, which led to a second court and was lighted
by lanterns, one of the body-guard known as Philobasilistes, a haughty
young fellow in yellow riding-boots and a shirt of mail over his red
tunic, came riding towards her on his tall horse, and noticing her he
tried to squeeze her between his charger and the wall, and put out his
hand to raise her veil; but Klea slipped aside, and put up her hands to
protect herself from the horse’s head which was almost touching her.

The cavalier, enjoying her alarm, called out: “Only stand still--he is
not vicious.”

“Which, you or your horse?” asked Klea, with such a solemn tone in
her deep voice that for an instant the young guardsman lost his
self-possession, and this gave her time to go farther from the horse.
But the girl’s sharp retort had annoyed the conceited young fellow,
and not having time to follow her himself, he called out in a tone of
encouragement to a party of mercenaries from Cyprus, whom the frightened
girl was trying to pass:

“Look under this girl’s veil, comrades, and if she is as pretty as she
is well-grown, I wish you joy of your prize.” He laughed as he pressed
his knees against the flanks of his bay and trotted slowly away, while
the Cypriotes gave Klea ample time to reach the second court, which
was more brightly lighted even than the first, that they might there
surround her with insolent importunity.

The helpless and persecuted girl felt the blood run cold in her veins,
and for a few minutes she could see nothing but a bewildering confusion
of flashing eyes and weapons, of beards and hands, could hear nothing
but words and sounds, of which she understood and felt only that they
were revolting and horrible, and threatened her with death and ruin.
She had crossed her arms over her bosom, but now she raised her hands
to hide her face, for she felt a strong hand snatch away the veil that
covered her head. This insolent proceeding turned her numb horror to
indignant rage, and, fixing her sparkling eyes on her bearded opponents,
she exclaimed:

“Shame upon you, who in the king’s own house fall like wolves on a
defenceless woman, and in a peaceful spot snatch the veil from a young
girl’s head. Your mothers would blush for you, and your sisters cry
shame on you--as I do now!”

Astonished at Klea’s distinguished beauty, startled at the angry glare
in her eyes, and the deep chest-tones of her voice which trembled with
excitement, the Cypriotes drew back, while the same audacious rascal
that had pulled away her veil came closer to her, and cried:

“Who would make such a noise about a rubbishy veil! If you will be my
sweetheart I will buy you a new one, and many things besides.”

At the same time he tried to throw his arm round her; but at his touch
Klea felt the blood leave her cheeks and mount to her bloodshot eyes,
and at that instant her hand, guided by some uncontrollable inward
impulse, grasped the handle of the knife which Krates had lent her; she
raised it high in the air though with an unsteady arm, exclaiming:

“Let me go or, by Serapis whom I serve, I will strike you to the heart!”

The soldier to whom this threat was addressed, was not the man to be
intimidated by a blade of cold iron in a woman’s hand; with a quick
movement he seized her wrist in order to disarm her; but although Klea
was forced to drop the knife she struggled with him to free herself from
his clutch, and this contest between a man and a woman, who seemed to be
of superior rank to that indicated by her very simple dress, seemed to
most of the Cypriotes so undignified, so much out of place within the
walls of a palace, that they pulled their comrade back from Klea, while
others on the contrary came to the assistance of the bully who defended
himself stoutly. And in the midst of the fray, which was conducted with
no small noise, stood Klea with flying breath. Her antagonist, though
flung to the ground, still held her wrist with his left hand while he
defended himself against his comrades with the right, and she tried with
all her force and cunning to withdraw it; for at the very height of her
excitement and danger she felt as if a sudden gust of wind had swept her
spirit clear of all confusion, and she was again able to contemplate her
position calmly and resolutely.

If only her hand were free she might perhaps be able to take advantage
of the struggle between her foes, and to force her way out between their
ranks.

Twice, thrice, four times, she tried to wrench her hand with a sudden
jerk through the fingers that grasped it; but each time in vain.
Suddenly, from the man at her feet there broke a loud, long-drawn cry of
pain which re-echoed from the high walls of the court, and at the same
time she felt the fingers of her antagonist gradually and slowly slip
from her arm like the straps of a sandal carefully lifted by the surgeon
from a broken ankle.

“It is all over with him!” exclaimed the eldest of the Cypriotes. “A man
never calls out like that but once in his life! True enough--the dagger
is sticking here just under the ninth rib! This is mad work! That is
your doing again, Lykos, you savage wolf!”

“He bit deep into my finger in the struggle--”

“And you are for ever tearing each other to pieces for the sake of the
women,” interrupted the elder, not listening to the other’s excuses.
“Well, I was no better than you in my time, and nothing can alter it!
You had better be off now, for if the Epistrategist learns we have
fallen to stabbing each other again--”

The Cypriote had not ceased speaking, and his countrymen were in the
very act of raising the body of their comrade when a division of the
civic watch rushed into the court in close order and through the passage
near which the fight for the girl had arisen, thus stopping the way
against those who were about to escape, since all who wished to get out
of the court into the open street must pass through the doorway into
which Klea had been forced by the horseman. Every other exit from this
second court of the citadel led into the strictly guarded gardens and
buildings of the palace itself.

The noisy strife round Klea, and the cry of the wounded man had
attracted the watch; the Cypriotes and the maiden soon found themselves
surrounded, and they were conducted through a narrow side passage into
the court-yard of the prison. After a short enquiry the men who had been
taken were allowed to return under an escort to their own phalanx, and
Klea gladly followed the commander of the watch to a less brilliantly
illuminated part of the prison-yard, for in him she had recognized at
once Serapion’s brother Glaucus, and he in her the daughter of the man
who had done and suffered so much for his father’s sake; besides they
had often exchanged greetings and a few words in the temple of Serapis.

“All that is in my power,” said Glaucus--a man somewhat taller but not
so broadly built as his brother--when he had read the recluse’s note and
when Klea had answered a number of questions, “all that is in my power
I will gladly do for you and your sister, for I do not forget all that
I owe to your father; still I cannot but regret that you have incurred
such risk, for it is always hazardous for a pretty young girl to venture
into this palace at a late hour, and particularly just now, for the
courts are swarming not only with Philometor’s fighting men but with
those of his brother, who have come here for their sovereign’s birthday
festival. The people have been liberally entertained, and the soldier
who has been sacrificing to Dionysus seizes the gifts of Eros and
Aphrodite wherever he may find them. I will at once take charge of my
brother’s letter to the Roman Publius Cornelius Scipio, but when you
have received his answer you will do well to let yourself be escorted
to my wife or my sister, who both live in the city, and to remain till
to-morrow morning with one or the other. Here you cannot remain a minute
unmolested while I am away--Where now--Aye! The only safe shelter I
can offer you is the prison down there; the room where they lock up
the subaltern officers when they have committed any offence is quite
unoccupied, and I will conduct you thither. It is always kept clean, and
there is a bench in it too.”

Klea followed her friend who, as his hasty demeanor plainly showed, had
been interrupted in important business. In a few steps they reached the
prison; she begged Glaucus to bring her the Roman’s answer as quickly as
possible, declared herself quite ready to remain in the dark--since she
perceived that the light of a lamp might betray her, and she was not
afraid of the dark--and suffered herself to be locked in.

As she heard the iron bolt creak in its brass socket a shiver ran
through her, and although the room in which she found herself was
neither worse nor smaller than that in which she and her sister lived
in the temple, still it oppressed her, and she even felt as if an
indescribable something hindered her breathing as she said to herself
that she was locked in and no longer free to come and to go. A dim light
penetrated into her prison through the single barred window that opened
on to the court, and she could see a little bench of palm-branches on
which she sat down to seek the repose she so sorely needed. All sense
of discomfort gradually vanished before the new feeling of rest and
refreshment, and pleasant hopes and anticipations were just beginning
to mingle themselves with the remembrance of the horrors she had just
experienced when suddenly there was a stir and a bustle just in front
of the prison--and she could hear, outside, the clatter of harness
and words of command. She rose from her seat and saw that about twenty
horsemen, whose golden helmets and armor reflected the light of the
lanterns, cleared the wide court by driving the men before them, as the
flames drive the game from a fired hedge, and by forcing them into a
second court from which again they proceeded to expel them. At least
Klea could hear them shouting ‘In the king’s name’ there as they had
before done close to her. Presently the horsemen returned and placed
themselves, ten and ten, as guards at each of the passages leading into
the court. It was not without interest that Klea looked on at this scene
which was perfectly new to her; and when one of the fine horses, dazzled
by the light of the lanterns, turned restive and shied, leaping and
rearing and threatening his rider with a fall--when the horseman checked
and soothed it, and brought it to a stand-still--the Macedonian warrior
was transfigured in her eyes to Publius, who no doubt could manage a
horse no less well than this man.

No sooner was the court completely cleared of men by the mounted guard
than a new incident claimed Klea’s attention. First she heard footsteps
in the room adjoining her prison, then bright streaks of light fell
through the cracks of the slight partition which divided her place of
retreat from the other room, then the two window-openings close to hers
were closed with heavy shutters, then seats or benches were dragged
about and various objects were laid upon a table, and finally the door
of the adjoining room was thrown open and slammed to again so violently,
that the door which closed hers and the bench near which she was
standing trembled and jarred.

At the same moment a deep sonorous voice called out with a loud and
hearty shout of laughter:

“A mirror--give me a mirror, Eulaeus. By heaven! I do not look much like
prison fare--more like a man in whose strong brain there is no lack of
deep schemes, who can throttle his antagonist with a grip of his fist,
and who is prompt to avail himself of all the spoil that comes in his
way, so that he may compress the pleasures of a whole day into every
hour, and enjoy them to the utmost! As surely as my name is Euergetes
my uncle Antiochus was right in liking to mix among the populace. The
splendid puppets who surround us kings, and cover every portion of their
own bodies in wrappings and swaddling bands, also stifle the expression
of every genuine sentiment; and it is enough to turn our brain to
reflect that, if we would not be deceived, every word that we hear--and,
oh dear! how many words we must needs hear-must be pondered in our
minds. Now, the mob on the contrary--who think themselves beautifully
dressed in a threadbare cloth hanging round their brown loins--are far
better off. If one of them says to another of his own class--a naked
wretch who wears about him everything he happens to possess--that he is
a dog, he answers with a blow of his fist in the other’s face, and what
can be plainer than that! If on the other hand he tells him he is a
splendid fellow, he believes it without reservation, and has a perfect
right to believe it.

“Did you see how that stunted little fellow with a snub-nose and
bandy-legs, who is as broad as he is long, showed all his teeth in a
delighted grin when I praised his steady hand? He laughs just like a
hyena, and every respectable father of a family looks on the fellow as
a god-forsaken monster; but the immortals must think him worth something
to have given him such magnificent grinders in his ugly mouth, and to
have preserved him mercifully for fifty years--for that is about the
rascal’s age. If that fellow’s dagger breaks he can kill his victim with
those teeth, as a fox does a duck, or smash his bones with his fist.”

“But, my lord,” replied Eulaeus dryly and with a certain matter-of-fact
gravity to King Euergetes--for he it was who had come with him into the
room adjoining Klea’s retreat, “the dry little Egyptian with the thin
straight hair is even more trustworthy and tougher and nimbler than his
companion, and, so far, more estimable. One flings himself on his prey
with a rush like a block of stone hurled from a roof, but the other,
without being seen, strikes his poisoned fang into his flesh like an
adder hidden in the sand. The third, on whom I had set great hopes, was
beheaded the day before yesterday without my knowledge; but the pair
whom you have condescended to inspect with your own eyes are sufficient.
They must use neither dagger nor lance, but they will easily achieve
their end with slings and hooks and poisoned needles, which leave wounds
that resemble the sting of an adder. We may safely depend on these
fellows.”

Once more Euergetes laughed loudly, and exclaimed: What criticism!
Exactly as if these blood-hounds were tragic actors of which one could
best produce his effects by fire and pathos, and the other by the
subtlety of his conception. I call that an unprejudiced judgment. And
why should not a man be great even as a murderer? From what hangman’s
noose did you drag out the neck of one, and from what headsman’s block
did you rescue the other when you found them?

“It is a lucky hour in which we first see something new to us, and,
by Heracles! I never before in the whole course of my life saw such
villains as these. I do not regret having gone to see them and talked to
them as if I were their equal. Now, take this torn coat off me, and help
me to undress. Before I go to the feast I will take a hasty plunge in my
bath, for I twitch in every limb, I feel as if I had got dirty in their
company.

“There lie my clothes and my sandals; strap them on for me, and tell me
as you do it how you lured the Roman into the toils.”

Klea could hear every word of this frightful conversation, and clasped
her hand over her brow with a shudder, for she found it difficult to
believe in the reality of the hideous images that it brought before her
mind. Was she awake or was she a prey to some horrid dream?

She hardly knew, and, indeed, she scarcely understood half of all she
heard till the Roman’s name was mentioned. She felt as if the point of a
thin, keen knife was being driven obliquely through her brain from right
to left, as it now flashed through her mind that it was against him,
against Publius, that the wild beasts, disguised in human form, were
directed by Eulaeus, and face to face with this--the most hideous, the
most incredible of horrors--she suddenly recovered the full use of her
senses. She softly slipped close to that rift in the partition through
which the broadest beam of light fell into the room, put her ear close
to it, and drank in, with fearful attention, word for word the
report made by the eunuch to his iniquitous superior, who frequently
interrupted him with remarks, words of approval or a short laugh-drank
them in, as a man perishing in the desert drinks the loathsome waters of
a salt pool.

And what she heard was indeed well fitted to deprive her of her senses,
but the more definite the facts to which the words referred that she
could overhear, the more keenly she listened, and the more resolutely
she collected her thoughts. Eulaeus had used her own name to induce
the Roman to keep an assignation at midnight in the desert close to the
Apis-tombs. He repeated the words that he had written to this effect
on a tile, and which requested Publius to come quite alone to the spot
indicated, since she dare not speak with him in the temple. Finally he
was invited to write his answer on the other side of the square of clay.
As Klea heard these words, put into her own mouth by a villain, she
could have sobbed aloud heartily with anguish, shame, and rage; but the
point now was to keep her ears wide open, for Euergetes asked his odious
tool:

“And what was the Roman’s answer?” Eulaeus must have handed the tile to
the king, for he laughed loudly again, and cried out:

“So he will walk into the trap--will arrive by half an hour after
midnight at the latest, and greets Klea from her sister Irene. He
carries on love-making and abduction wholesale, and buys water-bearers
by the pair, like doves in the market or sandals in a shoe maker’s
stall. Only see how the simpleton writes Greek; in these few words there
are two mistakes, two regular schoolboys’ blunders.

“The fellow must have had a very pleasant day of it, since he must have
been reckoning on a not unsuccessful evening--but the gods have an ugly
habit of clenching the hand with which they have long caressed their
favorites, and striking him with their fist.

“Amalthea’s horn has been poured out on him today; first he snapped up,
under my very nose, my little Hebe, the Irene of Irenes, whom I hope
to-morrow to inherit from him; then he got the gift of my best Cyrenaan
horses, and at the same time the flattering assurance of my valuable
friendship; then he had audience of my fair sister--and it goes more to
the heart of a republican than you would believe when crowned heads
are graciously disposed towards him--finally the sister of his pretty
sweetheart invites him to an assignation, and she, if you and Zoe speak
the truth, is a beauty in the grand style. Now these are really too many
good things for one inhabitant of this most stingily provided world; and
in one single day too, which, once begun, is so soon ended; and justice
requires that we should lend a helping hand to destiny, and cut off
the head of this poppy that aspires to rise above its brethren; the
thousands who have less good fortune than he would otherwise have great
cause to complain of neglect.”

“I am happy to see you in such good humor,” said Eulaeus.

“My humor is as may be,” interrupted the king. “I believe I am only
whistling a merry tune to keep up my spirits in the dark. If I were on
more familiar terms with what other men call fear I should have ample
reason to be afraid; for in the quail-fight we have gone in for I have
wagered a crown-aye, and more than that even. To-morrow only will decide
whether the game is lost or won, but I know already to-day that I would
rather see my enterprise against Philometor fail, with all my hopes of
the double crown, than our plot against the life of the Roman; for I
was a man before I was a king, and a man I should remain, if my throne,
which now indeed stands on only two legs, were to crash under my weight.

“My sovereign dignity is but a robe, though the costliest, to be sure,
of all garments. If forgiveness were any part of my nature I might
easily forgive the man who should soil or injure that--but he who comes
too near to Euergetes the man, who dares to touch this body, and the
spirit it contains, or to cross it in its desires and purposes--him I
will crush unhesitatingly to the earth, I will see him torn in pieces.
Sentence is passed on the Roman, and if your ruffians do their duty, and
if the gods accept the holocaust that I had slain before them at sunset
for the success of my project, in a couple of hours Publius Cornelius
Scipio will have bled to death.

“He is in a position to laugh at me--as a man--but I therefore--as a
man--have the right, and--as a king--have the power, to make sure that
that laugh shall be his last. If I could murder Rome as I can him how
glad should I be! for Rome alone hinders me from being the greatest of
all the great kings of our time; and yet I shall rejoice to-morrow when
they tell me Publius Cornelius Scipio has been torn by wild beasts, and
his body is so mutilated that his own mother could not recognize it more
than if a messenger were to bring me the news that Carthage had broken
the power of Rome.”

Euergetes had spoken the last words in a voice that sounded like the
roll of thunder as it growls in a rapidly approaching storm, louder,
deeper, and more furious each instant. When at last he was silent
Eulaeus said: “The immortals, my lord, will not deny you this happiness.
The brave fellows whom you condescended to see and to talk to strike as
certainly as the bolt of our father Zeus, and as we have learned from
the Roman’s horse-keeper where he has hidden Irene, she will no more
elude your grasp than the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt.--Now, allow
me to put on your mantle, and then to call the body-guard that they may
escort you as you return to your residence.”

“One thing more,” cried the king, detaining Eulaeus. “There are always
troops by the Tombs of Apis placed there to guard the sacred places; may
not they prove a hindrance to your friends?”

“I have withdrawn all the soldiers and armed guards to Memphis down to
the last man,” replied Eulaeus, “and quartered them within the White
Wall. Early tomorrow, before you proceed to business, they will
be replaced by a stronger division, so that they may not prove a
reinforcement to your brother’s troops here if things come to fighting.”

“I shall know how to reward your foresight,” said Euergetes as Eulaeus
quitted the room.

Again Klea heard a door open, and the sound of many hoofs on the
pavement of the court-yard, and when she went, all trembling, up to the
window, she saw Euergetes himself, and the powerfully knit horse that
was led in for him. The tyrant twisted his hand in the mane of the
restless and pawing steed, and Klea thought that the monstrous mass
could never mount on to the horse’s back without the aid of many men;
but she was mistaken, for with a mighty spring the giant flung himself
high in the air and on to the horse, and then, guiding his panting steed
by the pressure of his knees alone, he bounded out of the prison-yard
surrounded by his splendid train.

For some minutes the court-yard remained empty, then a man hurriedly
crossed it, unlocked the door of the room where Klea was, and informed
her that he was a subaltern under Glaucus, and had brought her a message
from him.

“My lord,” said the veteran soldier to the girl, “bid me greet you, and
says that he found neither the Roman Publius Scipio, nor his friend the
Corinthian at home. He is prevented from coming to you himself; he has
his hands full of business, for soldiers in the service of both the
kings are quartered within the White Wall, and all sorts of squabbles
break out between them. Still, you cannot remain in this room, for it
will shortly be occupied by a party of young officers who began the
fray. Glaucus proposes for your choice that you should either allow
me to conduct you to his wife or return to the temple to which you are
attached. In the latter case a chariot shall convey you as far as the
second tavern in Khakem on the borders of the desert-for the city is
full of drunken soldiery. There you may probably find an escort if you
explain to the host who you are. But the chariot must be back again in
less than an hour, for it is one of the king’s, and when the banquet is
over there may be a scarcity of chariots.”

“Yes--I will go back to the place I came from,” said Klea eagerly,
interrupting the messenger. “Take me at once to the chariot.”

“Follow me, then,” said the old man.

“But I have no veil,” observed Klea, “and have only this thin robe on.
Rough soldiers snatched my wrapper from my face, and my cloak from off
my shoulders.”

“I will bring you the captain’s cloak which is lying here in the
orderly’s room, and his travelling-hat too; that will hide your face
with its broad flap. You are so tall that you might be taken for a man,
and that is well, for a woman leaving the palace at this hour would
hardly pass unmolested. A slave shall fetch the things from your temple
to-morrow. I may inform you that my master ordered me take as much care
of you as if you were his own daughter. And he told me too--and I had
nearly forgotten it--to tell you that your sister was carried off by
the Roman, and not by that other dangerous man, you would know whom he
meant. Now wait, pray, till I return; I shall not be long gone.”

In a few minutes the guard returned with a large cloak in which he
wrapped Klea, and a broad-brimmed travelling-hat which she pressed down
on her head, and he then conducted her to that quarter of the palace
where the king’s stables were. She kept close to the officer, and was
soon mounted on a chariot, and then conducted by the driver--who took
her for a young Macedonian noble, who was tempted out at night by
some assignation--as far as the second tavern on the road back to the
Serapeum.




CHAPTER XIX.

While Klea had been listening to the conversation between Euergetes and
Eulaeus, Cleopatra had been sitting in her tent, and allowing herself to
be dressed with no less care than on the preceding evening, but in other
garments.

It would seem that all had not gone so smoothly as she wished during the
day, for her two tire-women had red eyes. Her lady-in-waiting, Zoe, was
reading to her, not this time from a Greek philosopher but from a Greek
translation of the Hebrew Psalms: a discussion as to their poetic merit
having arisen a few days previously at the supper-table. Onias, the
Israelite general, had asserted that these odes might be compared with
those of Alcman or of Pindar, and had quoted certain passages that had
pleased the queen. To-day she was not disposed for thought, but wanted
something strange and out of the common to distract her mind, so she
desired Zoe to open the book of the Hebrews, of which the translation
was considered by the Hellenic Jews in Alexandria as an admirable
work--nay, even as inspired by God himself; it had long been known to
her through her Israelite friends and guests.

Cleopatra had been listening for about a quarter of an hour to Zoe’s
reading when the blast of a trumpet rang out on the steps which led
up her tent, announcing a visitor of the male sex. The queen glanced
angrily round, signed to her lady to stop reading, and exclaimed:

“I will not see my husband now! Go, Thais, and tell the eunuchs on the
steps, that I beg Philometor not to disturb me just now. Go on, Zoe.”

Ten more psalms had been read, and a few verses repeated twice or thrice
by Cleopatra’s desire, when the pretty Athenian returned with flaming
cheeks, and said in an excited tone:

“It is not your husband, the king, but your brother Euergetes, who asks
to speak with you.”

“He might have chosen some other hour,” replied Cleopatra, looking round
at her maid. Thais cast down her eyes, and twitched the edge of her robe
between her fingers as she addressed her mistress; but the queen, whom
nothing could escape that she chose to see, and who was not to-day
in the humor for laughing or for letting any indiscretion escape
unreproved, went on at once in an incensed and cutting tone, raising her
voice to a sharp pitch:

“I do not choose that my messengers should allow themselves to be
detained, be it by whom it may--do you hear! Leave Me this instant
and go to your room, and stay there till I want you to undress me this
evening. Andromeda--do you hear, old woman?--you can bring my brother to
me, and he will let you return quicker than Thais, I fancy. You need
not leer at yourself in the glass, you cannot do anything to alter your
wrinkles. My head-dress is already done. Give me that linen wrapper,
Olympias, and then he may come! Why, there he is already! First you ask
permission, brother, and then disdain to wait till it is given you.”

“Longing and waiting,” replied Euergetes, “are but an ill-assorted
couple. I wasted this evening with common soldiers and fawning
flatterers; then, in order to see a few noble countenances, I went into
the prison, after that I hastily took a bath, for the residence of your
convicts spoils one’s complexion more, and in a less pleasant manner,
than this little shrine, where everything looks and smells like
Aphrodite’s tiring-room; and now I have a longing to hear a few good
words before supper-time comes.”

“From my lips?” asked Cleopatra.

“There are none that can speak better, whether by the Nile or the
Ilissus.”

“What do you want of me?”

“I--of you?”

“Certainly, for you do not speak so prettily unless you want something.”

“But I have already told you! I want to hear you say something wise,
something witty, something soul-stirring.”

“We cannot call up wit as we would a maid-servant. It comes unbidden,
and the more urgently we press it to appear the more certainly it
remains away.”

“That may be true of others, but not of you who, even while you declare
that you have no store of Attic salt, are seasoning your speech with it.
All yield obedience to grace and beauty, even wit and the sharp-tongued
Momus who mocks even at the gods.”

“You are mistaken, for not even my own waiting-maids return in proper
time when I commission them with a message to you.”

“And may we not to be allowed to sacrifice to the Charites on the way to
the temple of Aphrodite?”

“If I were indeed the goddess, those worshippers who regarded my
hand-maidens as my equals would find small acceptance with me.”

“Your reproof is perfectly just, for you are justified in requiring that
all who know you should worship but one goddess, as the Jews do but one
god. But I entreat you do not again compare yourself to the brainless
Cyprian dame. You may be allowed to do so, so far as your grace is
concerned; but who ever saw an Aphrodite philosophizing and reading
serious books? I have disturbed you in grave studies no doubt; what is
the book you are rolling up, fair Zoe?”

“The sacred book of the Jews, Sire,” replied Zoe; “one that I know you
do not love.”

“And you--who read Homer, Pindar, Sophocles, and Plato--do you like it?”
 asked Euergetes.

“I find passages in it which show a profound knowledge of life, and
others of which no one can dispute the high poetic flight,” replied
Cleopatra. “Much of it has no doubt a thoroughly barbarian twang, and it
is particularly in the Psalms--which we have now been reading, and which
might be ranked with the finest hymns--that I miss the number and rhythm
of the syllables, the observance of a fixed metre--in short, severity of
form. David, the royal poet, was no less possessed by the divinity when
he sang to his lyre than other poets have been, but he does not seem to
have known that delight felt by our poets in overcoming the difficulties
they have raised for themselves. The poet should slavishly obey the laws
he lays down for himself of his own free-will, and subordinate to them
every word, and yet his matter and his song should seem to float on a
free and soaring wing. Now, even the original Hebrew text of the Psalms
has no metrical laws.”

“I could well dispense with them,” replied Euergetes; “Plato too
disdained to measure syllables, and I know passages in his works which
are nevertheless full of the highest poetic beauty. Besides, it has been
pointed out to me that even the Hebrew poems, like the Egyptian, follow
certain rules, which however I might certainly call rhetorical
rather than poetical. The first member in a series of ideas stands in
antithesis to the next, which either re-states the former one in a new
form or sets it in a clearer light by suggesting some contrast. Thus
they avail themselves of the art of the orator--or indeed of the
painter--who brings a light color into juxtaposition with a dark one, in
order to increase its luminous effect. This method and style are indeed
not amiss, and that was the least of all the things that filled me with
aversion for this book, in which besides, there is many a proverb which
may be pleasing to kings who desire to have submissive subjects, and to
fathers who would bring up their sons in obedience to themselves and to
the laws. Even mothers must be greatly comforted by them,--who ask no
more than that their children may get through the world without being
jostled or pushed, and unmolested if possible, that they may live longer
than the oaks or ravens, and be blessed with the greatest possible
number of descendants. Aye! these ordinances are indeed precious to
those who accept them, for they save them the trouble of thinking for
themselves. Besides, the great god of the Jews is said to have dictated
all that this book contains to its writers, just as I dictate to
Philippus, my hump-backed secretary, all that I want said. They regard
everyone as a blasphemer and desecrator who thinks that anything written
in that roll is erroneous, or even merely human. Plato’s doctrines are
not amiss, and yet Aristotle had criticised them severely and attempted
to confute them. I myself incline to the views of the Stagyrite, you to
those of the noble Athenian, and how many good and instructive hours we
owe to our discussions over this difference of opinion! And how
amusing it is to listen when the Platonists on the one hand and the
Aristotelians on the other, among the busy threshers of straw in the
Museum at Alexandria, fall together by the ears so vehemently that they
would both enjoy flinging their metal cups at each others’ heads--if
the loss of the wine, which I pay for, were not too serious to bear. We
still seek for truth; the Jews believe they possess it entirely.

“Even those among them who most zealously study our philosophers believe
this; and yet the writers of this book know of nothing but actual
present, and their god--who will no more endure another god as his
equal than a citizen’s wife will admit a second woman to her husband’s
house--is said to have created the world out of nothing for no other
purpose but to be worshipped and feared by its inhabitants.

“Now, given a philosophical Jew who knows his Empedocles--and I grant
there are many such in Alexandria, extremely keen and cultivated
men--what idea can he form in his own mind of ‘creation out of nothing?’
Must he not pause to think very seriously when he remembers the
fundamental axiom that ‘out of nothing, nothing can come,’ and that
nothing which has once existed can ever be completely annihilated? At
any rate the necessary deduction must be that the life of man ends in
that nothingness whence everything in existence has proceeded. To live
and to die according to this book is not highly profitable. I can easily
reconcile myself to the idea of annihilation, as a man who knows how to
value a dreamless sleep after a day brimful of enjoyment--as a man who
if he must cease to be Euergetes would rather spring into the open jaws
of nothingness--but as a philosopher, no, never!”

“You, it is true,” replied the queen, “cannot help measuring all and
everything by the intellectual standard exclusively; for the gods, who
endowed you with gifts beyond a thousand others, struck with blindness
or deafness that organ which conveys to our minds any religious or moral
sentiment. If that could see or hear, you could no more exclude the
conviction that these writings are full of the deepest purport than I
can, nor doubt that they have a powerful hold on the mind of the reader.

“They fetter their adherents to a fixed law, but they take all
bitterness out of sorrow by teaching that a stern father sends us
suffering which is represented as being sometimes a means of education,
and sometimes a punishment for transgressing a hard and clearly defined
law. Their god, in his infallible but stern wisdom, sets those who cling
to him on an evil and stony path to prove their strength, and to let
them at last reach the glorious goal which is revealed to them from the
beginning.”

“How strange such words as these sound in the mouth of a Greek,”
 interrupted Euergetes. “You certainly must be repeating them after the
son of the Jewish high-priest, who defends the cause of his cruel god
with so much warmth and skill.”

“I should have thought,” retorted Cleopatra, “that this overwhelming
figure of a god would have pleased you, of all men; for I know of no
weakness in you. Quite lately Dositheos, the Jewish centurion--a very
learned man--tried to describe to my husband the one great god to whom
his nation adheres with such obstinate fidelity, but I could not help
thinking of our beautiful and happy gods as a gay company of amorous
lords and pleasure-loving ladies, and comparing them with this stern and
powerful being who, if only he chose to do it, might swallow them all
up, as Chronos swallowed his own children.”

“That,” exclaimed Euergetes, “is exactly what most provokes me in
this superstition. It crushes our light-hearted pleasure in life, and
whenever I have been reading the book of the Hebrews everything has come
into my mind that I least like to think of. It is like an importunate
creditor that reminds us of our forgotten debts, and I love pleasure
and hate an importunate reminder. And you, pretty one, life blooms for
you--”

“But I,” interrupted Cleopatra, “I can admire all that is great; and
does it not seem a bold and grand thing even to you, that the mighty
idea that it is one single power that moves and fills the world, should
be freely and openly declared in the sacred writings of the Jews--an
idea which the Egyptians carefully wrap up and conceal, which the
priests of the Nile only venture to divulge to the most privileged of
those who are initiated into their mysteries, and which--though the
Greek philosophers indeed have fearlessly uttered it--has never been
introduced by any Hellene into the religion of the people? If you were
not so averse to the Hebrew nation, and if you, like my husband and
myself, had diligently occupied yourself with their concerns and their
belief you would be juster to them and to their scriptures, and to the
great creating and preserving spirit, their god--”

“You are confounding this jealous and most unamiable and ill-tempered
tyrant of the universe with the Absolute of Aristotle!” cried Euergetes;
“he stigmatises most of what you and I and all rational Greeks require
for the enjoyment of life as sin--sin upon sin. And yet if my easily
persuadable brother governed at Alexandria, I believe the shrewd
priests might succeed in stamping him as a worshipper of that magnified
schoolmaster, who punishes his untutored brood with fire and torment.”

“I cannot deny,” replied Cleopatra, “that even to me the doctrine of the
Jews has something very fearful in it, and that to adopt it seems to
me tantamount to confiscating all the pleasures of life.--But enough of
such things, which I should no more relish as a daily food than you
do. Let us rejoice in that we are Hellenes, and let us now go to the
banquet. I fear you have found a very unsatisfactory substitute for what
you sought in coming up here.”

“No--no. I feel strangely excited to-day, and my work with Aristarchus
would have led to no issue. It is a pity that we should have begun to
talk of that barbarian rubbish; there are so many other subjects more
pleasing and more cheering to the mind. Do you remember how we used to
read the great tragedians and Plato together?”

“And how you would often interrupt our tutor Agatharchides in his
lectures on geography, to point out some mistake! Did you prosecute
those studies in Cyrene?”

“Of course. It really is a pity, Cleopatra, that we should no longer
live together as we did formerly. There is no one, not even Aristarchus,
with whom I find it more pleasant and profitable to converse and discuss
than with you. If only you had lived at Athens in the time of Pericles,
who knows if you might not have been his friend instead of the immortal
Aspasia. This Memphis is certainly not the right place for you; for a
few months in the year you ought to come to Alexandria, which has now
risen to be superior to Athens.”

“I do not know you to-day!” exclaimed Cleopatra, gazing at her brother
in astonishment. “I have never heard you speak so kindly and brotherly
since the death of my mother. You must have some great request to make
of us.”

“You see how thankless a thing it is for me to let my heart speak for
once, like other people. I am like the boy in the fable when the wolf
came! I have so often behaved in an unbrotherly fashion that when I show
the aspect of a brother you think I have put on a mask. If I had had
anything special to ask of you I should have waited till to-morrow, for
in this part of the country even a blind beggar does not like to refuse
his lame comrade anything on his birthday.”

“If only we knew what you wish for! Philometor and I would do it
more than gladly, although you always want something monstrous. Our
performance to-morrow will--at any rate--but--Zoe, pray be good enough
to retire with the maids; I have a few words to say to my brother
alone.”

As soon as the queen’s ladies had withdrawn, she went on:

“It is a real grief to use, but the best part of the festival in honor
of your birthday will not be particularly successful, for the priests of
Serapis spitefully refuse us the Hebe about whom Lysias has made us so
curious. Asclepiodorus, it would seem, keeps her in concealment, and
carries his audacity so far as to tell us that someone has carried her
off from the temple. He insinuates that we have stolen her, and demands
her restitution in the name of all his associates.”

“You are doing the man an injustice; our dove has followed the lure of
a dove-catcher who will not allow me to have her, and who is now billing
and cooing with her in his own nest. I am cheated, but I can scarcely be
angry with the Roman, for his claim was of older standing than mine.”

“The Roman?” asked Cleopatra, rising from her seat and turning pale.
“But that is impossible. You are making common cause with Eulaeus, and
want to set me against Publius Scipio. At the banquet last night you
showed plainly enough your ill-feeling against him.”

“You seem to feel more warmly towards him. But before I prove to you
that I am neither lying nor joking, may I enquire what has this man,
this many-named Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, to recommend him above
any handsome well-grown Macedonian, who is resolute in my cause, in the
whole corps of your body guard, excepting his patrician pride? He is as
bitter and ungenial as a sour apple, and all the very best that you--a
subtle thinker, a brilliant and cultivated philosopher--can find to say
is no more appreciated by his meanly cultivated intellect than the odes
of Sappho by a Nubian boatman.”

“It is exactly for that,” cried the queen, “that I value him; he is
different from all of us; we who--how shall I express myself--who always
think at second-hand, and always set our foot in the rut trodden by the
master of the school we adhere to; who squeeze our minds into the moulds
that others have carved out, and when we speak hesitate to step beyond
the outlines of those figures of rhetoric which we learned at school!
You have burst these bonds, but even your mighty spirit still shows
traces of them. Publius Scipio, on the contrary, thinks and sees and
speaks with perfect independence, and his upright sense guides him to
the truth without any trouble or special training. His society revives
me like the fresh air that I breathe when I come out into the open air
from the temple filled with the smoke of incense--like the milk and
bread which a peasant offered us during our late excursion to the coast,
after we had been living for a year on nothing but dainties.”

“He has all the admirable characteristics of a child!” interrupted
Euergetes. “And if that is all that appears estimable to you in the
Roman your son may soon replace the great Cornelius.”

“Not soon! no, not till he shall have grown older than you are, and a
man, a thorough man, from the crown of his head to the sole of his
foot, for such a man is Publius! I believe--nay, I am sure--that he is
incapable of any mean action, that he could not be false in word or even
in look, nor feign a sentiment be did not feel.”

“Why so vehement, sister? So much zeal is quite unnecessary on this
occasion! You know well enough that I have my easy days, and that this
excitement is not good for you; nor has the Roman deserved that you
should be quite beside yourself for his sake. The fellow dared in my
presence to look at you as Paris might at Helen before he carried her
off, and to drink out of your cup; and this morning he no doubt did
not contradict what he conveyed to you last night with his eyes--nay,
perhaps by his words. And yet, scarcely an hour before, he had been to
the Necropolis to bear his sweetheart away from the temple of the gloomy
Serapis into that of the smiling Eros.”

“You shall prove this!” cried the queen in great excitement. “Publius is
my friend--”

“And I am yours!”

“You have often proved the reverse, and now again with lies and
cheating--”

“You seem,” interrupted Euergetes, “to have learned from your
unphilosophical favorite to express your indignation with extraordinary
frankness; to-day however I am, as I have said, as gentle as a kitten--”

“Euergetes and gentleness!” cried Cleopatra with a forced laugh. “No,
you only step softly like a cat when she is watching a bird, and your
gentleness covers some ruthless scheme, which we shall find out soon
enough to our cost. You have been talking with Eulaeus to-day; Eulaeus,
who fears and hates Publius, and it seems to me that you have hatched
some conspiracy against him; but if you dare to cast a single stone in
his path, to touch a single hair of his head, I will show you that even
a weak woman can be terrible. Nemesis and the Erinnyes from Alecto to
Megaera, the most terrible of all the gods, are women!”

Cleopatra had hissed rather than spoken these words, with her teeth set
with rage, and had raised her small fist to threaten her brother; but
Euergetes preserved a perfect composure till she had ceased speaking.
Then he took a step closer to her, crossed his arms over his breast, and
asked her in the deepest bass of his fine deep voice:

“Are you idiotically in love with this Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica,
or do you purpose to make use of him and his kith and kin in Rome
against me?”

Transported with rage, and without blenching in the least at her
brother’s piercing gaze, she hastily retorted: “Up to this moment only
the first perhaps--for what is my husband to me? But if you go on as you
have begun I shall begin to consider how I may make use of his influence
and of his liking for me, on the shores of the Tiber.”

“Liking!” cried Euergetes, and he laughed so loud and violently that
Zoe, who was listening at the tent door, gave a little scream, and
Cleopatra drew back a step. “And to think that you--the most prudent
of the prudent--who can hear the dew fall and the grass grow, and smell
here in Memphis the smoke of every fire that is lighted in Alexandria
or in Syria or even in Rome--that you, my mother’s daughter, should be
caught over head and ears by a broad-shouldered lout, for all the world
like a clumsy town-girl or a wench at a loom. This ignorant Adonis,
who knows so well how to make use of his own strange and resolute
personality, and of the power that stands in his background, thinks no
more of the hearts he sets in flames than I of the earthen jar out of
which water is drawn when I am thirsty. You think to make use of him by
the ‘Tiber; but he has anticipated you, and learns from you all that
is going on by the Nile and everything they most want to know in the
Senate.

“You do not believe me, for no one ever is ready to believe anything
that can diminish his self-esteem--and why should you believe me? I
frankly confess that I do not hesitate to lie when I hope to gain more
by untruth than by that much-belauded and divine truth, which, according
to your favorite Plato, is allied to all earthly beauty; but it is
often just as useless as beauty itself, for the useful and the beautiful
exclude each other in a thousand cases, for ten when they coincide.
There, the gong is sounding for the third time. If you care for plain
proof that the Roman, only an hour before he visited you this morning,
had our little Hebe carried off from the temple, and conveyed to the
house of Apollodorus, the sculptor, at Memphis, you have only to come
to see me in my rooms early to-morrow after the first morning sacrifice.
You will at any rate wish to come and congratulate me; bring your
children with you, as I propose making them presents. You might even
question the Roman himself at the banquet to-day, but he will hardly
appear, for the sweetest gifts of Eros are bestowed at night, and as
the temple of Serapis is closed at sunset Publius has never yet seen his
Irene in the evening. May I expect you and the children after morning
sacrifice?”

Before Cleopatra had time to answer this question another trumpet-blast
was heard, and she exclaimed: “That is Philometor, come to fetch us to
the banquet. I will ere long give the Roman the opportunity of defending
himself, though--in spite of your accusations--I trust him entirely.
This morning I asked him solemnly whether it was true that he was in
love with his friend’s charming Hebe, and he denied it in his firm and
manly way, and his replies were admirable and worthy of the noblest
mind, when I ventured to doubt his sincerity. He takes truth more
seriously than you do. He regards it not only as beautiful and right to
be truthful, he says, but as prudent too; for lies can only procure us
a small short-lived advantage, as transitory as the mists of night which
vanish as soon as the sun appears, while truth is like the sunlight
itself, which as often as it is dimmed by clouds reappears again and
again. And, he says, what makes a liar so particularly contemptible in
his eyes is, that to attain his end, he must be constantly declaring and
repeating the horror he has of those who are and do the very same thing
as he himself. The ruler of a state cannot always be truthful, and I
often have failed in truth; but my intercourse with Publius has aroused
much that is good in me, and which had been slumbering with closed eyes;
and if this man should prove to be the same as all the rest of you, then
I will follow your road, Euergetes, and laugh at virtue and truth, and
set the busts of Aristippus and Strato on the pedestals where those of
Zeno and Antisthenes now stand.”

“You mean to have the busts of the philosophers moved again?” asked
King Philometor, who, as he entered the tent, had heard the queen’s
last words. “And Aristippus is to have the place of honor? I have no
objection--though he teaches that man must subjugate matter and not
become subject to it.--[‘Mihi res, non me rebus subjungere.’]--This
indeed is easier to say than to do, and there is no man to whom it is
more impossible than to a king who has to keep on good terms with Greeks
and Egyptians, as we have, and with Rome as well. And besides all this
to avoid quarrelling with a jealous brother, who shares our kingdom!
If men could only know how much they would have to do as kings only in
reading and writing, they would take care never to struggle for a
crown! Up to this last half hour I have been examining and deciding
applications and petitions. Have you got through yours, Euergetes? Even
more had accumulated for you than for us.”

“All were settled in an hour,” replied the other promptly. “My eye is
quicker than the mouth of your reader, and my decisions commonly consist
of three words while you dictate long treatises to your scribes. So I
had done when you had scarcely begun, and yet I could tell you at once,
if it were not too tedious a matter, every single case that has come
before me for months, and explain it in all its details.”

“That I could not indeed,” said Philometor modestly, “but I know and
admire your swift intelligence and accurate memory.”

“You see I am more fit for a king than you are;” laughed Euergetes. “You
are too gentle and debonair for a throne! Hand over your government to
me. I will fill your treasury every year with gold. I beg you now, come
to Alexandria with Cleopatra for good, and share with me the palace and
the gardens in the Bruchion. I will nominate your little Philopator heir
to the throne, for I have no wish to contract a permanent tie with
any woman, as Cleopatra belongs to you. This is a bold proposal, but
reflect, Philometor, if you were to accept it, how much time it would
give you for your music, your disputations with the Jews, and all your
other favorite occupations.”

“You never know how far you may go with your jest!” interrupted
Cleopatra. “Besides, you devote quite as much time to your studies
in philology and natural history as he does to music and improving
conversations with his learned friends.”

“Just so,” assented Philometor, “and you may be counted among the sages
of the Museum with far more reason than I.”

“But the difference between us,” replied Euergetes, “is that I despise
all the philosophical prattlers and rubbish-collectors in Alexandria
almost to the point of hating them, while for science I have as great a
passion as for a lover. You, on the contrary, make much of the learned
men, but trouble yourself precious little about science.”

“Drop the subject, pray,” begged Cleopatra. “I believe that you two have
never yet been together for half an hour without Euergetes having begun
some dispute, and Philometor having at last given in, to pacify him.
Our guests must have been waiting for us a long time. Had Publius Scipio
made his appearance?”

“He had sent to excuse himself,” replied the king as he scratched the
poll of Cleopatra’s parrot, parting its feathers with the tips of his
fingers. “Lysias, the Corinthian, is sitting below, and he says he does
not know where his friend can be gone.”

“But we know very well,” said Euergetes, casting an ironical glance
at the queen. “It is pleasant to be with Philometor and Cleopatra, but
better still with Eros and Hebe. Sister, you look pale--shall I call for
Zoe?”

Cleopatra shook her head in negation, but she dropped into a seat,
and sat stooping, with her head bowed over her knees as if she were
dreadfully tired. Euergetes turned his back on her, and spoke to his
brother of indifferent subjects, while she drew lines, some straight and
some crooked, with her fan-stick through the pile of the soft rug on the
floor, and sat gazing thoughtfully at her feet. As she sat thus her
eye was caught by her sandals, richly set with precious stones, and the
slender toes she had so often contemplated with pleasure; but now the
sight of them seemed to vex her, for in obedience to a swift impulse
she loosened the straps, pushed off her right sandal with her left foot,
kicked it from her, and said, turning to her husband:

“It is late and I do not feel well, and you may sup without me.”

“By the healing Isis!” exclaimed Philometor, going up to her. “You look
suffering. Shall I send for the physicians? Is it really nothing more
than your usual headache? The gods be thanked! But that you should be
unwell just to-day! I had so much to say to you; and the chief thing
of all was that we are still a long way from completeness in our
preparations for our performance. If this luckless Hebe were not--”

“She is in good hands,” interrupted Euergetes. “The Roman, Publius
Scipio, has taken her to a place of safety; perhaps in order to present
her to me to morrow morning in return for the horses from Cyrene which
I sent him to-day. How brightly your eyes sparkle, sister--with joy no
doubt at this good idea. This evening, I dare say he is rehearsing the
little one in her part that she may perform it well to-morrow. If we are
mistaken--if Publius is ungrateful and proposes keeping the dove, then
Thais, your pretty Athenian waiting-woman, may play the part of Hebe.
What do you think of that suggestion, Cleopatra?”

“That I forbid such jesting with me!” cried the queen vehemently.
“No one has any consideration for me--no one pities me, and I suffer
fearfully! Euergetes scorns me--you, Philometor, would be glad to drag
me down! If only the banquet is not interfered with, and so long as
nothing spoils your pleasure!--Whether I die or no, no one cares!”

With these words the queen burst into tears, and roughly pushed away her
husband as he endeavored to soothe her. At last she dried her eyes, and
said: “Go down-the guests are waiting.”

“Immediately, my love,” replied Philometor. “But one thing I must tell
you, for I know that it will arouse your sympathy. The Roman read to you
the petition for pardon for Philotas, the chief of the Chrematistes
and ‘relative of the king,’ which contains such serious charges against
Eulaeus. I was ready with all my heart to grant your wish and to pardon
the man who is the father of these miserable water-bearers; but,
before having the decree drawn up, I had the lists of the exiles to the
gold-mines carefully looked through, and there it was discovered that
Philotas and his wife have both been dead more than half a year. Death
has settled this question, and I cannot grant to Publius the first
service he has asked of me--asked with great urgency too. I am sorry for
this, both for his sake and for that of poor Philotas, who was held in
high esteem by our mother.”

“May the ravens devour them!” answered Cleopatra, pressing her forehead
against the ivory frame which surrounded the stuffed back of her seat.
“Once more I beg of you excuse me from all further speech.” This time
the two kings obeyed her wishes. When Euergetes offered her his hand she
said with downcast eyes, and poking her fan-stick into the wool of the
carpet:

“I will visit you early to-morrow.”

“After the first sacrifice,” added Euergetes. “If I know you well,
something that you will then hear will please you greatly; very greatly
indeed, I should think. Bring the children with you; that I ask of you
as a birthday request.”




CHAPTER XX.

The royal chariot in which Klea was standing, wrapped in the cloak and
wearing the hat of the captain of the civic guard, went swiftly and
without stopping through the streets of Memphis. As long as she saw
houses with lighted windows on each side of the way, and met riotous
soldiers and quiet citizens going home from the taverns, or from working
late in their workshops, with lanterns in their hands or carried by
their slaves--so long her predominant feeling was one of hatred to
Publius; and mixed with this was a sentiment altogether new to her--a
sentiment that made her blood boil, and her heart now stand still
and then again beat wildly--the thought that he might be a wretched
deceiver. Had he not attempted to entrap one of them--whether her sister
or herself it was all the same--wickedly to betray her, and to get her
into his power!

“With me,” thought she, “he could not hope to gain his evil ends,
and when he saw that I knew how to protect myself he lured the poor
unresisting child away with him, in order to ruin her and to drag her
into shame and misery. Just like Rome herself, who seizes on one country
after another to make them her own, so is this ruthless man. No sooner
had that villain Eulaeus’ letter reached him, than he thought himself
justified in believing that I too was spellbound by a glance from his
eyes, and would spread my wings to fly into his arms; and so he put
out his greedy hand to catch me too, and threw aside the splendor and
delights of a royal banquet to hurry by night out into the desert,
and to risk a hideous death--for the avenging deities still punish the
evildoer.”

By this time she was shrouded in total darkness, for the moon was still
hidden by black clouds. Memphis was already behind her, and the chariot
was passing through a tall-stemmed palm-grove, where even at mid-day
deep shades intermingled with the sunlight. When, just at this spot,
the thought once more pierced her soul that the seducer was devoted to
death, she felt as though suddenly a bright glaring light had flashed up
in her and round her, and she could have broken out into a shout of joy
like one who, seeking retribution for blood, places his foot at last on
the breast of his fallen foe. She clenched her teeth tightly and grasped
her girdle, in which she had stuck the knife given her by the smith.

If the charioteer by her side had been Publius, she would have stabbed
him to the heart with the weapon with delight, and then have thrown
herself under the horses’ hoofs and the brazen wheels of the chariot.

But no! Still more gladly would she have found him dying in the desert,
and before his heart had ceased to beat have shouted in his ear how much
she hated him; and then, when his breast no longer heaved a breath--then
she would have flung herself upon him, and have kissed his dimmed eyes.

Her wildest thoughts of vengeance were as inseparable from tender pity
and the warmest longings of a heart overflowing with love, as the dark
waters of a river are from the brighter flood of a stream with which
it has recently mingled. All the passionate impulses which had hitherto
been slumbering in her soul were set free, and now raised their
clamorous voices as she was whirled across the desert through the gloom
of night. The wishes roused in her breast by her hatred appealing to her
on one side and her love singing in her ear, in tempting flute-tones, on
the other, jostled and hustled one another, each displacing the other as
they crowded her mind in wild confusion. As she proceeded on her journey
she felt that she could have thrown herself like a tigress on her
victim, and yet--like an outcast woman--have flung herself at Publius’
knees in supplication for the love that was denied her. She had lost all
idea of time and distance, and started as from a wild and bewildering
dream when the chariot suddenly halted, and the driver said in his rough
tones:

“Here we are, I must turn back again.”

She shuddered, drew the cloak more closely round her, sprang out on to
the road, and stood there motionless till the charioteer said:

“I have not spared my horses, my noble gentleman. Won’t you give me
something to get a drop of wine?” Klea’s whole possessions were two
silver drachma, of which she herself owned one and the other belonged to
Irene. On the last anniversary but one of his mother’s death, the king
had given at the temple a sum to be divided among all the attendants,
male and female, who served Serapis, and a piece of silver had fallen to
the share of herself and her sister. Klea had them both about her in a
little bag, which also contained a ring that her mother had given her at
parting, and the amulet belonging to Serapion. The girl took out the two
silver coins and gave them to the driver, who, after testing the liberal
gift with his fingers, cried out as he turned his horses:

“A pleasant night to you, and may Aphrodite and all the Loves be
favorable!”

“Irene’s drachma!” muttered Klea to herself, as the chariot rolled away.
The sweet form of her sister rose before her mind; she recalled the hour
when the girl--still but a child--had entrusted it to her, because she
lost everything unless Klea took charge of it for her.

“Who will watch her and care for her now?” she asked herself, and she
stood thinking, trying to defend herself against the wild wishes which
again began to stir in her, and to collect her scattered thoughts. She
had involuntarily avoided the beam of light which fell across the road
from the tavern-window, and yet she could not help raising her eyes and
looking along it, and she found herself looking through the darkness
which enveloped her, straight into the faces of two men whose gaze was
directed to the very spot where she was standing. And what faces they
were that she saw! One, a fat face, framed in thick hair and a short,
thick and ragged beard, was of a dusky brown and as coarse and brutal as
the other was smooth, colorless and lean, cruel and crafty. The eyes of
the first of these ruffians were prominent, weak and bloodshot, with a
fixed glassy stare, while those of the other seemed always to be on the
watch with a restless and uneasy leer.

These were Euergetes’ assassins--they must be! Spellbound with terror
and revulsion she stood quite still, fearing only that the ruffians
might hear the beating of her heart, for she felt as if it were a hammer
swung up and down in an empty space, and beating with loud echoes, now
in her bosom and now in her throat.

“The young gentleman must have gone round behind the tavern--he knows
the shortest way to the ‘tombs. Let us go after him, and finish off the
business at once,” said the broad-shouldered villain in a hoarse whisper
that broke down every now and then, and which seemed to Klea even more
repulsive than the monster’s face.

“So that he may hear us go after him-stupid!” answered the other. “When
he has been waiting for his sweetheart about a quarter of an hour I
will call his name in a woman’s voice, and at his first step towards the
desert do you break his neck with the sand-bag. We have plenty of time
yet, for it must still be a good half hour before midnight.”

“So much the better,” said the other. “Our wine-jar is not nearly empty
yet, and we paid the lazy landlord for it in advance, before he crept
into bed.”

“You shall only drink two cups more,” said the punier villain. “For this
time we have to do with a sturdy fellow, Setnam is not with us now to
lend a hand in the work, and the dead meat must show no gaping thrusts
or cuts. My teeth are not like yours when you are fasting--even cooked
food must not be too tough for them to chew it, now-a-days. If you soak
yourself in drink and fail in your blow, and I am not ready with the
poisoned stiletto the thing won’t come off neatly. But why did not the
Roman let his chariot wait?”

“Aye! why did he let it go away?” asked the other staring open-mouthed
in the direction where the sound of wheels was still to be heard. His
companion mean while laid his hand to his ear, and listened. Both were
silent for a few minutes, then the thin one said:

“The chariot has stopped at the first tavern. So much the better. The
Roman has valuable cattle in his shafts, and at the inn down there,
there is a shed for horses. Here in this hole there is hardly a stall
for an ass, and nothing but sour wine and mouldy beer. I don’t like the
rubbish, and save my coin for Alexandria and white Mariotic; that is
strengthening and purifies the blood. For the present I only wish we
were as well off as those horses; they will have plenty of time to
recover their breath.”

“Yes, plenty of time,” answered the other with a broad grin, and then he
with his companion withdrew into the room to fill his cup.

Klea too could hear that the chariot which had brought her hither,
had halted at the farther tavern, but it did not occur to her that
the driver had gone in to treat himself to wine with half of Irene’s
drachma. The horses should make up for the lost time, and they could
easily do it, for when did the king’s banquets ever end before midnight?

As soon as Plea saw that the assassins were filling their earthen cups,
she slipped softly on tiptoe behind the tavern; the moon came out from
behind the clouds for a few minutes, she sought and found the short way
by the desert-path to the Apis-tombs, and hastened rapidly along it. She
looked straight before her, for whenever she glanced at the road-side,
and her eye was caught by some dried up shrub of the desert, silvery
in the pale moonlight, she fancied she saw behind it the face of a
murderer.

The skeletons of fallen beasts standing up out of the dust, and the
bleached jawbones of camels and asses, which shone much whiter than the
desert-sand on which they lay, seemed to have come to life and motion,
and made her think of the tiger-teeth of the bearded ruffian.

The clouds of dust driven in her face by the warm west wind, which had
risen higher, increased her alarm, for they were mingled with the colder
current of the night-breeze; and again and again she felt as if spirits
were driving her onwards with their hot breath, and stroking her face
with their cold fingers. Every thing that her senses perceived was
transformed by her heated imagination into a fearful something; but more
fearful and more horrible than anything she heard, than any phantom that
met her eye in the ghastly moonlight, were her own thoughts of what
was to be done now, in the immediate future--of the fearful fate that
threatened the Roman and Irene; and she was incapable of separating one
from the other in her mind, for one influence alone possessed her,
heart and soul: dread, dread; the same boundless, nameless, deadly
dread--alike of mortal peril and irremediable shame, and of the airiest
phantoms and the merest nothings.

A large black cloud floated slowly across the moon and utter darkness
hid everything around, even the undefined forms which her imagination
had turned to images of dread. She was forced to moderate her pace, and
find her way, feeling each step; and just as to a child some hideous
form that looms before him vanishes into nothingness when he covers his
eyes with his hand, so the profound darkness which now enveloped her,
suddenly released her soul from a hundred imaginary terrors.

She stood still, drew a deep breath, collected the whole natural force
of her will, and asked herself what she could do to avert the horrid
issue.

Since seeing the murderers every thought of revenge, every wish to
punish the seducer with death, had vanished from her mind; one desire
alone possessed her now--that of rescuing him, the man, from the
clutches of these ravening beasts. Walking slowly onwards she repeated
to herself every word she had heard that referred to Publius and Irene
as spoken by Euergetes, Eulaeus, the recluse, and the assassins, and
recalled every step she had taken since she left the temple; thus she
brought herself back to the consciousness that she had come out and
faced danger and endured terror, solely and exclusively for Irene’s
sake. The image of her sister rose clearly before her mind in all its
bright charm, undimmed by any jealous grudge which, indeed, ever
since her passion had held her in its toils had never for the smallest
fraction of a minute possessed her.

Irene had grown up under her eye, sheltered by her care, in the sunshine
of her love. To take care of her, to deny herself, and bear the severest
fatigue for her had been her pleasure; and now as she appealed to her
father--as she wont to do--as if he were present, and asked him in an
inaudible cry: “Tell me, have I not done all for her that I could do?”
 and said to herself that he could not possibly answer her appeal but
with assent, her eyes filled with tears; the bitterness and discontent
which had lately filled her breast gradually disappeared, and a gentle,
calm, refreshing sense of satisfaction came over her spirit, like a
cooling breeze after a scorching day.

As she now again stood still, straining her eyes which were growing more
accustomed to the darkness, to discover one of the temples at the end
of the alley of sphinxes, suddenly and unexpectedly at her right hand a
solemn and many-voiced hymn of lamentation fell upon her ear. This was
from the priests of Osiris-Apis who were performing the sacred mysteries
of their god, at midnight, on the roof of the temple. She knew the hymn
well--a lament for the deceased Osiris which implored him with urgent
supplication to break the power of death, to rise again, to bestow new
light and new vitality on the world and on men, and to vouchsafe to all
the departed a new existence.

The pious lament had a powerful effect on her excited spirit. Her
parents too perhaps had passed through death, and were now taking part
in the conduct of the destiny of the world and of men in union with the
life giving God. Her breath came fast, she threw up her arms, and, for
the first time since in her wrath she had turned her back on the holy
of holies in the temple of Serapis, she poured forth her whole soul with
passionate fervor in a deep and silent prayer for strength to fulfil her
duty to the end,--for some sign to show her the way to save Irene from
misfortune, and Publius from death. And as she prayed she felt no
longer alone--no, it seemed to her that she stood face to face with
the invincible Power which protects the good, in whom she now again had
faith, though for Him she knew no name; as a daughter, pursued by foes,
might clasp her powerful father’s knees and claim his succor.

She had not stood thus with uplifted arms for many minutes when the
moon, once more appearing, recalled her to herself and to actuality.
She now perceived close to her, at hardly a hundred paces from where she
stood, the line of sphinxes by the side of which lay the tombs of Apis
near which she was to await Publius. Her heart began to beat faster
again, and her dread of her own weakness revived. In a few minutes she
must meet the Roman, and, involuntarily putting up her hand to smooth
her hair, she was reminded that she still wore Glaucus’ hat on her head
and his cloak wrapped round her shoulders. Lifting up her heart again
in a brief prayer for a calm and collected mind, she slowly arranged her
dress and its folds, and as she did so the key of the tomb-cave, which
she still had about her, fell under her hand. An idea flashed through
her brain--she caught at it, and with hurried breath followed it out,
till she thought she had now hit upon the right way to preserve from
death the man who was so rich and powerful, who had given her nothing
but taken everything from her, and to whom, nevertheless, she--the poor
water-bearer whom he had thought to trifle with--could now bestow the
most precious of the gifts of the immortals, namely, life.

Serapion had said, and she was willing to believe, that Publius was not
base, and he certainly was not one of those who could prove ungrateful
to a preserver. She longed to earn the right to demand something of him,
and that could be nothing else but that he should give up her sister and
bring Irene back to her.

When could it be that he had come to an understanding with the
inexperienced and easily wooed maiden? How ready she must have been to
clasp the hand held out to her by this man! Nothing surprised her in
Irene, the child of the present; she could comprehend too that Irene’s
charm might quickly win the heart even of a grave and serious man.

And yet--in all the processions it was never Irene that he had gazed at,
but always herself, and how came it to pass that he had given a prompt
and ready assent to the false invitation to go out to meet her in the
desert at midnight? Perhaps she was still nearer to his heart than
Irene, and if gratitude drew him to her with fresh force then--aye
then--he might perhaps woo her, and forget his pride and her lowly
position, and ask her to be his wife.

She thought this out fully, but before she had reached the half circle
enclosed by the Philosophers’ busts the question occurred to her mind.
And Irene?

Had she gone with him and quitted her without bidding her farewell
because the young heart was possessed with a passionate love for
Publius--who was indeed the most lovable of men? And he? Would he
indeed, out of gratitude for what she hoped to do for him, make up his
mind, if she demanded it, to make her Irene his wife--the poor but more
than lovely daughter of a noble house?

And if this were possible, if these two could be happy in love and
honor, should she Klea come between the couple to divide them? Should
she jealously snatch Irene from his arms and carry her back to the
gloomy temple which now--after she had fluttered awhile in sportive
freedom in the sunny air--would certainly seem to her doubly
sinister and unendurable? Should she be the one to plunge Irene into
misery--Irene, her child, the treasure confided to her care, whom she
had sworn to cherish?

“No, and again no,” she said resolutely. “She was born for happiness,
and I for endurance, and if I dare beseech thee to grant me one thing
more, O thou infinite Divinity! it is that Thou wouldst cut out from my
soul this love which is eating into my heart as though it were rotten
wood, and keep me far from envy and jealousy when I see her happy in his
arms. It is hard--very hard to drive one’s own heart out into the desert
in order that spring may blossom in that of another: but it is well
so--and my mother would commend me and my father would say I had acted
after his own heart, and in obedience to the teaching of the great men
on these pedestals. Be still, be still my aching heart--there--that is
right!”

Thus reflecting she went past the busts of Zeno and Chrysippus, glancing
at their features distinct in the moonlight: and her eyes falling on
the smooth slabs of stone with which the open space was paved, her own
shadow caught her attention, black and sharply defined, and exactly
resembling that of some man travelling from one town to another in his
cloak and broad-brimmed hat.

“Just like a man!” she muttered to herself; and as, at the same moment,
she saw a figure resembling her own, and, like herself, wearing a hat,
appear near the entrance to the tombs, and fancied she recognized it as
Publius, a thought, a scheme, flashed through her excited brain, which
at first appalled her, but in the next instant filled her with the
ecstasy which an eagle may feel when he spreads his mighty wings and
soars above the dust of the earth into the pure and infinite ether. Her
heart beat high, she breathed deeply and slowly, but she advanced to
meet the Roman, drawn up to her full height like a queen, who goes
forward to receive some equal sovereign; her hat, which she had taken
off, in her left hand, and the Smith’s key in her right-straight on
towards the door of the Apis-tombs.




CHAPTER XXI.

The man whom Klea had seen was in fact none other than Publius. He was
now at the end of a busy day, for after he had assured himself that
Irene had been received by the sculptor and his wife, and welcomed as if
she were their own child, he had returned to his tent to write once more
a dispatch to Rome. But this he could not accomplish, for his friend
Lysias paced restlessly up and down by him as he sat, and as often as
he put the reed to the papyrus disturbed him with enquiries about the
recluse, the sculptor, and their rescued protegee.

When, finally, the Corinthian desired to know whether he, Publius,
considered Irene’s eyes to be brown or blue, he had sprung up
impatiently, and exclaimed indignantly:

“And supposing they were red or green, what would it matter to me!”

Lysias seemed pleased rather than vexed with this reply, and he was on
the point of confessing to his friend that Irene had caused in his heart
a perfect conflagration--as of a forest or a city in flames--when a
master of the horse had appeared from Euergetes, to present the four
splendid horses from Cyrene, which his master requested the noble Roman
Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica to accept in token of his friendship.

The two friends, who both were judges and lovers of horses, spent
at least an hour in admiring the fine build and easy paces of these
valuable beasts. Then came a chamberlain from the queen to invite
Publius to go to her at once.

The Roman followed the messenger after a short delay in his tent, in
order to take with him the gems representing the marriage of Hebe, for
on his way from the sculptor’s to the palace it had occurred to him
that he would offer them to the queen, after he had informed her of
the parentage of the two water-carriers. Publius had keen eyes, and the
queen’s weaknesses had not escaped him, but he had never suspected
her of being capable of abetting her licentious brother in forcibly
possessing himself of the innocent daughter of a noble father. He now
purposed to make her a present--as in some degree a substitute for
the representation his friend had projected, and which had come
to nothing--of the picture which she had hoped to find pleasure in
reproducing.

Cleopatra received him on her roof, a favor of which few could boast;
she allowed him to sit at her feet while she reclined on her couch, and
gave him to understand, by every glance of her eyes and every word she
spoke, that his presence was a happiness to her, and filled her with
passionate delight. Publius soon contrived to lead the conversation to
the subject of the innocent parents of the water-bearers, who had been
sent off to the goldmines; but Cleopatra interrupted his speech in their
favor and asked him plainly, undisguisedly, and without any agitation,
whether it was true that he himself desired to win the youthful Hebe.
And she met his absolute denial with such persistent and repeated
expressions of disbelief, assuming at last a tone of reproach, that he
grew vexed and broke out into a positive declaration that he regarded
lying as unmanly and disgraceful, and could endure any insult rather
than a doubt of his veracity.

Such a vehement and energetic remonstrance from a man she had
distinguished was a novelty to Cleopatra, and she did not take it amiss,
for she might now believe--what she much wished to believe--that Publius
wanted to have nothing to do with the fair Hebe, that Eulaeus had
slandered her friend, and that Zoe had been in error when, after
her vain expedition to the temple--from which she had then just
returned--she had told her that the Roman was Irene’s lover, and must at
the earliest hour have betrayed to the girl herself, or to the priests
in the Serapeum, what was their purpose regarding her.

In the soul of this noble youth there was nothing false--there could be
nothing false! And she, who was accustomed never to hear a word from
the men who surrounded her without asking herself with what aim it was
spoken, and how much of it was dissimulation or downright falsehood,
trusted the Roman, and was so happy in her trust that, full of gracious
gaiety, she herself invited Publius to give her the recluse’s petition
to read. The Roman at once gave her the roll, saying that since it
contained so much that was sad, much as he hoped she would make herself
acquainted with it, he felt himself called upon also to give her
some pleasure, though in truth but a very small one. Thus speaking he
produced the gems, and she showed as much delight over this little work
of art as if, instead of being a rich queen and possessed of the finest
engraved gems in the world, she were some poor girl receiving her first
gift of some long-desired gold ornament.

“Exquisite, splendid!” she cried again and again. “And besides, they
are an imperishable memorial of you, dear friend, and of your visit to
Egypt. I will have them set with the most precious stones; even diamonds
will seem worthless to me compared with this gift from you. This has
already decided my sentence as to Eulaeus and his unhappy victims
before I read your petition. Still I will read that roll, and read
it attentively, for my husband regards Eulaeus as a useful--almost an
indispensable-tool, and I must give good reasons for my verdict and for
the pardon. I believe in the innocence of the unfortunate Philotas,
but if he had committed a hundred murders, after this present I would
procure his freedom all the same.”

The words vexed the Roman, and they made her who had spoken them in
order to please him appear to him at that moment more in the light of a
corruptible official than of a queen. He found the time hang heavy
that he spent with Cleopatra, who, in spite of his reserve, gave him
to understand with more and more insistence how warmly she felt towards
him; but the more she talked and the more she told him, the more silent
he became, and he breathed a sigh of relief when her husband at last
appeared to fetch him and Cleopatra away to their mid-day meal.

At table Philometor promised to take up the cause of Philotas and his
wife, both of whom he had known, and whose fate had much grieved him;
still he begged his wife and the Roman not to bring Eulaeus to justice
till Euergetes should have left Memphis, for, during his brother’s
presence, beset as he was with difficulties, he could not spare him; and
if he might judge of Publius by himself he cared far more to reinstate
the innocent in their rights, and to release them from their miserable
lot--a lot of which he had only learned the full horrors quite recently
from his tutor Agatharchides--than to drag a wretch before the judges
to-morrow or the day after, who was unworthy of his anger, and who at
any rate should not escape punishment.

Before the letter from Asclepiodorus--stating the mistaken hypothesis
entertained by the priests of Serapis that Irene had been carried off
by the king’s order--could reach the palace, Publius had found an
opportunity of excusing himself and quitting the royal couple. Not even
Cleopatra herself could raise any objection to his distinct assurance
that he must write to Rome today on matters of importance. Philometor’s
favor was easy to win, and as soon as he was alone with his wife he
could not find words enough in praise of the noble qualities of the
young man, who seemed destined in the future to be of the greatest
service to him and to his interests at Rome, and whose friendly attitude
towards himself was one more advantage that he owed--as he was happy to
acknowledge--to the irresistible talents and grace of his wife.

When Publius had quitted the palace and hurried back to his tent, he
felt like a journeyman returning from a hard day’s labor, or a man
acquitted from a serious charge; like one who had lost his way, and has
found the right road again.

The heavy air in the arbors and alleys of the embowered gardens seemed
to him easier to breathe than the cool breeze that fanned Cleopatra’s
raised roof. He felt the queen’s presence to be at once exciting and
oppressive, and in spite of all that was flattering to himself in the
advances made to him by the powerful princess, it was no more gratifying
to his taste than an elegantly prepared dish served on gold plate, which
we are forced to partake of though poison may be hidden in it, and which
when at last we taste it is sickeningly sweet.

Publius was an honest man, and it seemed to him--as to all who resemble
him--that love which was forced upon him was like a decoration of honor
bestowed by a hand which we do not respect, and that we would rather
refuse than accept; or like praise out of all proportion to our merit,
which may indeed delight a fool, but rouses the indignation rather than
the gratitude of a wise man. It struck him too that Cleopatra intended
to make use of him, in the first place as a toy to amuse herself, and
then as a useful instrument or underling, and this so gravely incensed
and discomfited the serious and sensitive young man that he would
willingly have quitted Memphis and Egypt at once and without any
leave-taking. However, it was not quite easy for him to get away, for
all his thoughts of Cleopatra were mixed up with others of Klea, as
inseparably as when we picture to ourselves the shades of night, the
tender light of the calm moon rises too before our fancy.

Having saved Irene, his present desire was to restore her parents to
liberty; to quit Egypt without having seen Klea once more seemed to him
absolutely impossible. He endeavored once more to revive in his mind the
image of her proud tall figure; he felt he must tell her that she was
beautiful, a woman worthy of a king--that he was her friend and hated
injustice, and was ready to sacrifice much for justice’s sake and for
her own in the service of her parents and herself. To-day again, before
the banquet, he purposed to go to the temple, and to entreat the recluse
to help him to an interview with his adopted daughter.

If only Klea could know beforehand what he had been doing for Irene and
their parents she must surely let him see that her haughty eyes could
look kindly on him, must offer him her hand in farewell, and then he
should clasp it in both his, and press it to his breast. Then would he
tell her in the warmest and most inspired words he could command how
happy he was to have seen her and known her, and how painful it was to
bid her farewell; perhaps she might leave her hand in his, and give
him some kind word in return. One kind word--one phrase of thanks from
Klea’s firm but beautiful mouth--seemed to him of higher value than a
kiss or an embrace from the great and wealthy Queen of Egypt.

When Publius was excited he could be altogether carried away by a sudden
sweep of passion, but his imagination was neither particularly lively
nor glowing. While his horses were being harnessed, and then while
he was driving to the Serapeum, the tall form of the water-bearer was
constantly before him; again and again he pictured himself holding her
hand instead of the reins, and while he repeated to himself all he meant
to say at parting, and in fancy heard her thank him with a trembling
voice for his valuable help, and say that she would never forget him, he
felt his eyes moisten--unused as they had been to tears for many years.
He could not help recalling the day when he had taken leave of his
family to go to the wars for the first time. Then it had not been his
own eyes but his mother’s that had sparkled through tears, and it struck
him that Klea, if she could be compared to any other woman, was most
like to that noble matron to whom he owed his life, and that she might
stand by the side of the daughter of the great Scipio Africanus like a
youthful Minerva by the side of Juno, the stately mother of the gods.

His disappointment was great when he found the door of the temple
closed, and was forced to return to Memphis without having seen either
Klea or the recluse.

He could try again to-morrow to accomplish what had been impossible
to-day, but his wish to see the girl he loved, rose to a torturing
longing, and as he sat once more in his tent to finish his second
despatch to Rome the thought of Klea came again to disturb his serious
work. Twenty times he started up to collect his thoughts, and as often
flung away his reed as the figure of the water-bearer interposed between
him and the writing under his hand; at last, out of patience with
himself, he struck the table in front of him with some force, set his
fists in his sides hard enough to hurt himself, and held them there for
a minute, ordering himself firmly and angrily to do his duty before he
thought of anything else.

His iron will won the victory; by the time it was growing dusk the
despatch was written. He was in the very act of stamping the wax of
the seal with the signet of his family--engraved on the sardonyx of his
ring--when one of his servants announced a black slave who desired to
speak with him. Publius ordered that he should be admitted, and the
negro handed him the tile on which Eulaeus had treacherously written
Klea’s invitation to meet her at midnight near the Apis-tombs. His
enemy’s crafty-looking emissary seemed to the young man as a messenger
from the gods; in a transport of haste and, without the faintest shadow
of a suspicion he wrote, “I will be there,” on the luckless piece of
clay.

Publius was anxious to give the letter to the Senate, which he had just
finished, with his own hand, and privately, to the messenger who had
yesterday brought him the despatch from Rome; and as he would rather
have set aside an invitation to carry off a royal treasure that same
night than have neglected to meet Klea, he could not in any case be a
guest at the king’s banquet, though Cleopatra would expect to see him
there in accordance with his promise. At this juncture he was annoyed to
miss his friend Lysias, for he wished to avoid offending the queen;
and the Corinthian, who at this moment was doubtless occupied in some
perfectly useless manner, was as clever in inventing plausible excuses
as he himself was dull in such matters. He hastily wrote a few lines to
the friend who shared his tent, requesting him to inform the king that
he had been prevented by urgent business from appearing among his guests
that evening; then he threw on his cloak, put on his travelling-hat
which shaded his face, and proceeded on foot and without any servant to
the harbor, with his letter in one hand and a staff in the other.

The soldiers and civic guards which filled the courts of the palace,
taking him for a messenger, did not challenge him as he walked swiftly
and firmly on, and so, without being detained or recognized, he reached
the inn by the harbor, where he was forced to wait an hour before the
messenger came home from the gay strangers’ quarter where he had gone to
amuse himself. He had a great deal to talk of with this man, who was to
set out next morning for Alexandria and Rome; but Publius hardly gave
himself the necessary time, for he meant to start for the meeting place
in the Necropolis indicated by Klea, and well-known to himself, a
full hour before midnight, although he knew that he could reach his
destination in a very much shorter time.

The sun seems to move too slowly to those who long and wait, and a
planet would be more likely to fail in punctuality than a lover when
called by love.

In order to avoid observation he did not take a chariot but a strong
mule which the host of the inn lent him with pleasure; for the Roman
was so full of happy excitement in the hope of meeting Klea that he
had slipped a gold piece into the small, lightly-closed fingers of the
innkeeper’s pretty child, which lay asleep on a bench by the side of the
table, besides paying double as much for the country wine he had drunk
as if it had been fine Falernian and without asking for his reckoning.
The host looked at him in astonishment when, finally, he sprang with a
grand leap on to the back of the tall beast, without laying his hand on
it; and it seemed even to Publius himself as though he had never since
boyhood felt so fresh, so extravagantly happy as at this moment.

The road to the tombs from the harbor was a different one to that which
led thither from the king’s palace, and which Klea had taken, nor did it
lead past the tavern in which she had seen the murderers. By day it was
much used by pilgrims, and the Roman could not miss it even by night,
for the mule he was riding knew it well. That he had learned, for in
answer to his question as to what the innkeeper kept the beast for he
had said that it was wanted every day to carry pilgrims arriving from
Upper Egypt to the temple of Serapis and the tombs of the sacred bulls;
he could therefore very decidedly refuse the host’s offer to send a
driver with the beast. All who saw him set out supposed that he was
returning to the city and the palace.

Publius rode through the streets of the city at an easy trot, and, as
the laughter of soldiers carousing in a tavern fell upon his ear, he
could have joined heartily in their merriment. But when the silent
desert lay around him, and the stars showed him that he would be much
too early at the appointed place, he brought the mule to a slower pace,
and the nearer he came to his destination the graver he grew, and the
stronger his heart beat. It must be something important and pressing
indeed that Klea desired to tell him in such a place and at such an
hour. Or was she like a thousand other women--was he now on the way to
a lover’s meeting with her, who only a few days before had responded to
his glance and accepted his violets?

This thought flashed once through his mind with importunate
distinctness, but he dismissed it as absurd and unworthy of himself.
A king would be more likely to offer to share his throne with a beggar
than this girl would be to invite him to enjoy the sweet follies of
love-making with her in a secret spot.

Of course she wanted above all things to acquire some certainty as to
her sister’s fate, perhaps too to speak to him of her parents; still,
she would hardly have made up her mind to invite him if she had not
learned to trust him, and this confidence filled him with pride, and at
the same time with an eager longing to see her, which seemed to storm
his heart with more violence with every minute that passed.

While the mule sought and found its way in the deep darkness with slow
and sure steps, he gazed up at the firmament, at the play of the clouds
which now covered the moon with their black masses, and now parted,
floating off in white sheeny billows while the silver crescent of the
moon showed between them like a swan against the dark mirror of a lake.

And all the time he thought incessantly of Klea--thinking in a dreamy
way that he saw her before him, but different and taller than before,
her form growing more and more before his eyes till at last it was so
tall that her head touched the sky, the clouds seemed to be her veil,
and the moon a brilliant diadem in her abundant dark hair. Powerfully
stirred by this vision he let the bridle fall on the mule’s neck, and
spread open his arms to the beautiful phantom, but as he rode forwards
it ever retired, and when presently the west wind blew the sand in his
face, and he had to cover his eyes with his hand it vanished entirely,
and did not return before he found himself at the Apis-tombs.

He had hoped to find here a soldier or a watchman to whom he could
entrust the beast, but when the midnight chant of the priests of the
temple of Osiris-Apis had died away not a sound was to be heard far or
near; all that lay around him was as still and as motionless as though
all that had ever lived there were dead. Or had some demon robbed him
of his hearing? He could hear the rush of his own swift pulses in his
ears-not the faintest sound besides.

Such silence is there nowhere but in the city of the dead and at night,
nowhere but in the desert.

He tied the mule’s bridle to a stela of granite covered with
inscriptions, and went forward to the appointed place. Midnight must be
past--that he saw by the position of the moon, and he was beginning to
ask himself whether he should remain standing where he was or go on to
meet the water-bearer when he heard first a light footstep, and then saw
a tall erect figure wrapped in a long mantle advancing straight towards
him along the avenue of sphinxes. Was it a man or a woman--was it she
whom he expected? and if it were she, was there ever a woman who had
come to meet a lover at an assignation with so measured, nay so solemn,
a step? Now he recognized her face--was it the pale moonlight that made
it look so bloodless and marble-white? There was something rigid in her
features, and yet they had never--not even when she blushingly accepted
his violets--looked to him so faultlessly beautiful, so regular and so
nobly cut, so dignified, nay impressive.

For fully a minute the two stood face to face, speechless and yet quite
near to each other. Then Publius broke the silence, uttering with the
warmest feeling and yet with anxiety in his deep, pure voice, only one
single word; and the word was her name “Klea.”

The music of this single word stirred the girl’s heart like a message
and blessing from heaven, like the sweetest harmony of the siren’s song,
like the word of acquittal from a judge’s lips when the verdict is life
or death, and her lips were already parted to say ‘Publius’ in a tone
no less deep and heartfelt-but, with all the force of her soul, she
restrained herself, and said softly and quickly:

“You are here at a late hour, and it is well that you have come.”

“You sent for me,” replied the Roman.

“It was another that did that, not I,” replied Klea in a slow dull tone,
as if she were lifting a heavy weight, and could hardly draw her breath.
“Now--follow me, for this is not the place to explain everything in.”

With these words Klea went towards the locked door of the Apis-tombs,
and tried, as she stood in front of it, to insert into the lock the
key that Krates had given her; but the lock was still so new, and her
fingers shook so much, that she could not immediately succeed. Publius
meanwhile was standing close by her side, and as he tried to help her
his fingers touched hers.

And when he--certainly not by mistake--laid his strong and yet trembling
hand on hers, she let it stay for a moment, for she felt as if a tide of
warm mist rose up in her bosom dimming her perceptions, and paralyzing
her will and blurring her sight.

“Klea,” he repeated, and he tried to take her left hand in his own;
but she, like a person suddenly aroused to consciousness after a short
dream, immediately withdrew the hand on which his was resting, put the
key into the lock, opened the door, and exclaimed in a voice of almost
stern command, “Go in first.”

Publius obeyed and entered the spacious antechamber of the venerable
cave, hewn out of the rock and now dimly lighted. A curved passage of
which he could not see the end lay before him, and on both sides, to
the right and left of him, opened out the chambers in which stood the
sarcophagi of the deceased sacred bulls. Over each of the enormous stone
coffins a lamp burnt day and night, and wherever a vault stood open
their glimmer fell across the deep gloom of the cave, throwing a bright
beam of light on the dusky path that led into the heart of the rock,
like a carpet woven of rays of light.

What place was this that Klea had chosen to speak with him in.

But though her voice sounded firm, she herself was not cool and
insensible as Orcus--which this place, which was filled with the fumes
of incense and weighed upon his senses, much resembled--for he had felt
her fingers tremble under his, and when he went up to her, to help her,
her heart beat no less violently and rapidly than his own. Ah! the man
who should succeed in touching that heart of hard, but pure and precious
crystal would indeed enjoy a glorious draught of the most perfect bliss.

“This is our destination,” said Klea; and then she went on in short
broken sentences. “Remain where you are. Leave me this place near the
door. Now, answer me first one question. My sister Irene has vanished
from the temple. Did you cause her to be carried off?”

“I did,” replied Publius eagerly. “She desired me to greet you from her,
and to tell you how much she likes her new friends. When I shall have
told you--”

“Not now,” interrupted Klea excitedly. “Turn round--there where you see
the lamp-light.” Publius did as he was desired, and a slight shudder
shook even his bold heart, for the girl’s sayings and doings seemed
to him not solemn merely, but mysterious like those of a prophetess.
A violent crash sounded through the silent and sacred place, and loud
echoes were tossed from side to side, ringing ominously throughout the
grotto. Publius turned anxiously round, and his eye, seeking Klea, found
her no more; then, hurrying to the door of the cave, he heard her lock
it on the outside.

The water-bearer had escaped him, had flung the heavy door to, and
imprisoned him; and this idea was to the Roman so degrading and
unendurable that, lost to every feeling but rage, wounded pride, and
the wild desire to be free, he kicked the door with all his might, and
called out angrily to Klea:

“Open this door--I command you. Let me free this moment or, by all the
gods--”

He did not finish his threat, for in the middle of the right-hand panel
of the door a small wicket was opened through which the priests were
wont to puff incense into the tomb of the sacred bulls--and twice,
thrice, finally, when he still would not be pacified, a fourth time,
Klea called out to him:

“Listen to me--listen to me, Publius.” Publius ceased storming, and she
went on:

“Do not threaten me, for you will certainly repent it when you have
heard what I have to tell you. Do not interrupt me; I may tell you at
once this door is opened every day before sunrise, so your imprisonment
will not last long; and you must submit to it, for I shut you in to save
your life--yes, your life which was in danger. Do you think my anxiety
was folly? No, Publius, it is only too well founded, and if you, as a
man, are strong and bold, so am I as a woman. I never was afraid of an
imaginary nothing. Judge yourself whether I was not right to be afraid
for you.

“King Euergetes and Eulaeus have bribed two hideous monsters to murder
you. When I went to seek out Irene I overheard all, and I have seen with
my own eyes the two horrible wolves who are lurking to fall upon you,
and heard with these ears their scheme for doing it. I never wrote the
note on the tile which was signed with my name; Eulaeus did it, and you
took his bait and came out into the desert by night. In a few minutes
the ruffians will have stolen up to this place to seek their victim, but
they will not find you, Publius, for I have saved you--I, Klea, whom you
first met with smiles--whose sister you have stolen away--the same Klea
that you a minute since were ready to threaten. Now, at once, I am going
into the desert, dressed like a traveller in a coat and hat, so that in
the doubtful light of the moon I may easily be taken for you--going to
give my weary heart as a prey to the assassins’ knife.”

“You are mad!” cried Publius, and he flung himself with his whole weight
on the door, and kicked it with all his strength. “What you purpose is
pure madness open the door, I command you! However strong the villains
may be that Euergetes has bribed, I am man enough to defend myself.”

“You are unarmed, Publius, and they have cords and daggers.”

“Then open the door, and stay here with me till day dawns. It is not
noble, it is wicked to cast away your life. Open the door at once, I
entreat you, I command you!”

At any other time the words would not have failed of their effect on
Klea’s reasonable nature, but the fearful storm of feeling which had
broken over her during the last few hours had borne away in its whirl
all her composure and self-command. The one idea, the one resolution,
the one desire, which wholly possessed her was to close the life
that had been so full of self-sacrifice by the greatest sacrifice
of all--that of life itself, and not only in order to secure Irene’s
happiness and to save the Roman, but because it pleased her--her
father’s daughter--to make a noble end; because she, the maiden, would
fain show Publius what a woman might be capable of who loved him above
all others; because, at this moment, death did not seem a misfortune;
and her mind, overwrought by hours of terrific tension, could not free
itself from the fixed idea that she would and must sacrifice herself.

She no longer thought these things--she was possessed by them; they had
the mastery, and as a madman feels forced to repeat the same words again
and again to himself, so no prayer, no argument at this moment would
have prevailed to divert her from her purpose of giving up her young
life for Publius and Irene. She contemplated this resolve with affection
and pride as justifying her in looking up to herself as to some nobler
creature. She turned a deaf ear to the Roman’s entreaty, and said in a
tone of which the softness surprised him:

“Be silent Publius, and hear me further. You too are noble, and
certainly you owe me some gratitude for having saved your life.”

“I owe you much, and I will pay it,” cried Publius, “as long as there is
breath in this body--but open the door, I beseech you, I implore you--”

“Hear me to the end, time presses; hear me out, Publius. My sister Irene
went away with you. I need say nothing about her beauty, but how bright,
how sweet her nature is you do not know, you cannot know, but you will
find out. She, you must be told, is as poor as I am, but the child of
freeborn and noble parents. Now swear to me, swear--no, do not interrupt
me--swear by the head of your father that you will never, abandon her,
that you will never behave to her otherwise than as if she were the
daughter of your dearest friend or of your own brother.”

“I swear it and I will keep my oath--by the life of the man whose head
is more sacred to me than the names of all the gods. But now I beseech
you, I command you open this door, Klea--that I may not lose you--that I
may tell you that my whole heart is yours, and yours alone--that I love
you, love you unboundedly.”

“I have your oath,” cried the girl in great excitement, for she could
now see a shadow moving backwards and forwards at some distance in the
desert. “You have sworn by the head of your father. Never let Irene
repent having gone with you, and love her always as you fancy now, in
this moment, that you love me, your preserver. Remember both of you the
hapless Klea who would gladly have lived for you, but who now gladly
dies for you. Do not forget me, Publius, for I have never but this once
opened my heart to love, but I have loved you Publius, with pain and
torment, and with sweet delight--as no other woman ever yet revelled in
the ecstasy of love or was consumed in its torments.” She almost shouted
the last words at the Roman as if she were chanting a hymn of triumph,
beside herself, forgetting everything and as if intoxicated.

Why was he now silent, why had he nothing to answer, since she had
confessed to him the deepest secret of her breast, and allowed him to
look into the inmost sanctuary of her heart? A rush of burning words
from his lips would have driven her off at once to the desert and to
death; his silence held her back--it puzzled her and dropped like cool
rain on the soaring flames of her pride, fell on the raging turmoil of
her soul like oil on troubled water. She could not part from him thus,
and her lips parted to call him once more by his name.

While she had been making confession of her love to the Roman as if
it were her last will and testament, Publius felt like a man dying
of thirst, who has been led to a flowing well only to be forbidden
to moisten his lips with the limpid fluid. His soul was filled with
passionate rage approaching to despair, and as with rolling eyes he
glanced round his prison an iron crow-bar leaning against the wall met
his gaze; it had been used by the workmen to lift the sarcophagus of the
last deceased Apis into its right place. He seized upon this tool, as a
drowning man flings himself on a floating plank: still he heard Klea’s
last words, and did not lose one of them, though the sweat poured from
his brow as he inserted the metal lever like a wedge between the two
halves of the door, just above the threshold.

All was now silent outside; perhaps the distracted girl was already
hurrying towards the assassins--and the door was fearfully heavy and
would not open nor yield. But he must force it--he flung himself on the
earth and thrust his shoulder under the lever, pushing his whole
body against the iron bar, so that it seemed to him that every joint
threatened to give way and every sinew to crack; the door rose--once
more he put forth the whole strength of his manly vigor, and now the
seam in the wood cracked, the door flew open, and Klea, seized with
terror, flew off and away--into the desert--straight towards the
murderers.

Publius leaped to his feet and flung himself out of his prison; as he
saw Klea escape he flew after her with, hasty leaps, and caught her in
a few steps, for her mantle hindered her in running, and when she would
not obey his desire that she should stand still he stood in front of her
and said, not tenderly but sternly and decidedly:

“You do not go a step farther, I forbid it.”

“I am going where I must go,” cried the girl in great agitation. “Let me
go, at once!”

“You will stay here--here with me,” snarled Publius, and taking both
her hands by the wrists he clasped them with his iron fingers as with
handcuffs. “I am the man and you are the woman, and I will teach you who
is to give orders here and who is to obey.”

Anger and rage prompted these quite unpremeditated words, and as
Klea--while he spoke them with quivering lips--had attempted with the
exertion of all her strength, which was by no means contemptible, to
wrench her hands from his grasp, he forced her--angry as he still was,
but nevertheless with due regard for her womanliness--forced her by a
gentle and yet irresistible pressure on her arms to bend before him, and
compelled her slowly to sink down on both knees.

As soon as she was in this position, Publius let her free; she covered
her eyes with her aching hands and sobbed aloud, partly from anger, and
because she felt herself bitterly humiliated.

“Now, stand up,” said Publius in an altered tone as he heard her
weeping. “Is it then such a hard matter to submit to the will of a man
who will not and cannot let you go, and whom you love, besides?” How
gentle and kind the words sounded! Klea, when she heard them, raised her
eyes to Publius, and as she saw him looking down on her as a supplicant
her anger melted and turned to grateful emotion--she went closer to him
on her knees, laid her head against him and said:

“I have always been obliged to rely upon myself, and to guide another
person with loving counsel, but it must be sweeter far to be led by
affection and I will always, always obey you.”

“I will thank you with heart and soul henceforth from this hour!” cried
Publius, lifting her up. “You were ready to sacrifice your life for
me, and now mine belongs to you. I am yours and you are mine--I your
husband, you my wife till our life’s end!”

He laid his hands on her shoulders, and turned her face round to his;
she resisted no longer, for it was sweet to her to yield her will to
that of this strong man. And how happy was she, who from her childhood
had taken it upon herself to be always strong, and self-reliant, to feel
herself the weaker, and to be permitted to trust in a stronger arm than
her own. Somewhat thus a young rose-tree might feel, which for the first
time receives the support of the prop to which it is tied by the careful
gardener.

Her eyes rested blissfully and yet anxiously on his, and his lips had
just touched hers in a first kiss when they started apart in terror, for
Klea’s name was clearly shouted through the still night-air, and in the
next instant a loud scream rang out close to them followed by dull cries
of pain.

“The murderers!” shrieked Klea, and trembling for herself and for
him she clung closely to her lover’s breast. In one brief moment the
self-reliant heroine--proud in her death-defying valor--had become a
weak, submissive, dependent woman.




CHAPTER XXII.

On the roof of the tower of the pylon by the gate of the Serapeum stood
an astrologer who had mounted to this, the highest part of the temple,
to observe the stars; but it seemed that he was not destined on this
occasion to fulfil his task, for swiftly driving black clouds swept
again and again across that portion of the heavens to which his
observations were principally directed. At last he impatiently laid
aside his instruments, his waxed tablet and style, and desired the
gate-keeper--the father of poor little Philo--whose duty it was to
attend at night on the astrologers on the tower, to carry down all his
paraphernalia, as the heavens were not this evening favorable to his
labors.

“Favorable!” exclaimed the gate-keeper, catching up the astrologer’s
words, and shrugging his shoulders so high that his head disappeared
between them.

“It is a night of horror, and some great disaster threatens us for
certain. Fifteen years have I been in my place, and I never saw such a
night but once before, and the very next day the soldiers of Antiochus,
the Syrian king, came and plundered our treasury. Aye--and to-night is
worse even than that was; when the dog-star first rose a horrible shape
with a lion’s mane flew across the desert, but it was not till midnight
that the fearful uproar began, and even you shuddered when it broke out
in the Apis-cave. Frightful things must be coming on us when the sacred
bulls rise from the dead and butt and storm at the door with their
horns to break it open. Many a time have I seen the souls of the dead
fluttering and wheeling and screaming above the old mausoleums, and
rock-tombs of ancient times. Sometimes they would soar up in the air in
the form of hawks with men’s heads, or like ibises with a slow lagging
flight, and sometimes sweep over the desert like gray shapeless shadows,
or glide across the sand like snakes; or they would creep out of the
tombs, howling like hungry dogs. I have often heard them barking like
jackals or laughing like hyenas when they scent carrion, but to-night
is the first time I ever heard them shrieking like furious men, and then
groaning and wailing as if they were plunged in the lake of fire and
suffering horrible torments.

“Look there--out there--something is moving again! Oh! holy father,
exorcise them with some mighty bann. Do you not see how they are growing
larger? They are twice the size of ordinary mortals.” The astronomer
took an amulet in his hand, muttered a few sentences to himself,
seeking at the same time to discover the figures which had so scared the
gate-keeper.

“They are indeed tall,” he said when he perceived them. “And now they
are melting into one, and growing smaller and smaller--however,
perhaps they are only men come to rob the tombs, and who happen to be
particularly tall, for these figures are not of supernatural height.”

“They are twice as tall as you, and you are not short,” cried the
gate-keeper, pressing his lips devoutly to the amulet the astrologer
held in his hand, “and if they are robbers why has no watchman called
out to stop them? How is it their screams and groans have not waked the
sentinels that are posted there every night? There--that was another
fearful cry! Did you ever hear such tones from any human breast? Great
Serapis, I shall die of fright! Come down with me, holy father, that I
may look after my little sick boy, for those who have seen such sights
do not escape unstricken.”

The peaceful silence of the Necropolis had indeed been disturbed, but
the spirits of the departed had no share in the horrors which had been
transacted this night in the desert, among the monuments and rocktombs.
They were living men that had disturbed the calm of the sacred place,
that had conspired with darkness in cold-blooded cruelty, greater than
that of evil spirits, to achieve the destruction of a fellow-man; but
they were living men too who, in the midst of the horrors of a most
fearful night, had experienced the blossoming in their own souls of the
divinest germ which heaven implants in the bosom of its mortal children.
Thus in a day of battle amid blood and slaughter may a child be born
that shall grow up blessed and blessing, the comfort and joy of his
family.

The lion-maned monster whose appearance and rapid disappearance in
the desert had first alarmed the gate-keeper, had been met by several
travellers on its way to Memphis, and each and all, horrified by its
uncanny aspect, had taken to flight or tried to hide themselves--and
yet it was no more than a man with warm pulses, an honest purpose, and
a true and loving heart. But those who met him could not see into his
soul, and his external aspect certainly bore little resemblance to that
of other men.

His feet, unused to walking, moved but clumsily, and had a heavy body
to carry, and his enormous beard and the mass of gray hair on his
head--which he turned now this way and now that--gave him an aspect that
might well scare even a bold man who should meet him unexpectedly. Two
stall-keepers who, by day, were accustomed to offer their wares for sale
near the Serapeum to the pilgrims, met him close to the city.

“Did you see that panting object?” said one to the other as they looked
after him. “If he were not shut up fast in his cell I could declare it
was Serapion, the recluse.”

“Nonsense,” replied the other. “He is tied faster by his oath than by
chains and fetters. It must be one of the Syrian beggars that besiege
the temple of Astarte.”

“Perhaps,” answered his companion with indifference. “Let us get on now,
my wife has a roast goose for supper this evening.”

Serapion, it is true, was fast tied to his cell, and yet the pedler
had judged rightly, for he it was who hurried along the high-road
frightening all he met. After his long captivity walking was very
painful to him; besides, he was barefoot, and every stone in the
path hurt the soles of his feet which had grown soft; nevertheless he
contrived to make a by no means contemptible pace when in the distance
he caught sight of a woman’s figure which he could fancy to be Klea.
Many a man, who in his own particular sphere of life can cut a very
respectable figure, becomes a laughing-stock for children when he is
taken out of his own narrow circle, and thrown into the turmoil of
the world with all his peculiarities clinging to him. So it was with
Serapion; in the suburbs the street-boys ran after him mocking at him,
but it was not till three smart hussys, who were resting from their
dance in front of a tavern, laughed loudly as they caught sight of him,
and an insolent soldier drove the point of his lance through his flowing
mane, as if by accident, that he became fully conscious of his wild
appearance, and it struck him forcibly that he could never in this guise
find admission to the king’s palace.

With prompt determination he turned into the first barber’s stall that
he saw lighted up; at his appearance the barber hastily retreated behind
his counter, but he got his hair and beard cut, and then, for the first
time for many years, he saw his own face in the mirror that the barber
held before him. He nodded, with a melancholy smile, at the face--so
much aged--that looked at him from the bright surface, paid what was
asked, and did not heed the compassionate glance which the barber and
his assistant sent after him. They both thought they had been exercising
their skill on a lunatic, for he had made no answer to all their
questions, and had said nothing but once in a deep and fearfully loud
voice:

“Chatter to other people--I am in a hurry.”

In truth his spirit was in no mood for idle gossip; no, it was full of
gnawing anxiety and tender fears, and his heart bled when he reflected
that he had broken his vows, and forsworn the oath he had made to his
dying mother.

When he reached the palace-gate he begged one of the civic guard to
conduct him to his brother, and as he backed his request with a gift
of money he was led at once to the man whom he sought. Glaucus was
excessively startled to recognize Serapion, but he was so much
engaged that he could only give up a few minutes to his brother, whose
proceedings he considered as both inexplicable and criminal.

Irene, as the anchorite now learned, had been carried off from the
temple, not by Euergetes but by the Roman, and Klea had quitted the
palace only a few minutes since in a chariot and would return about
midnight and on foot from the second tavern to the temple. And the poor
child was so utterly alone, and her way lay through the desert where she
might be attacked by dissolute soldiery or tomb-robbers or jackals and
hyenas. Her walk was to begin from the second tavern, and that was the
very spot where low rioters were wont to assemble--and his darling was
so young, so fair, and so defenceless!

He was once more a prey to the same unendurable dread that had come over
him, in his cell, after Klea had left the temple and darkness had closed
in. At that moment he had felt all that a father could feel who from his
prison-window sees his beloved and defenceless child snatched away by
some beast of prey. All the perils that could threaten her in the palace
or in the city, swarming with drunken soldiers, had risen before his
mind with fearful vividness, and his powerful imagination had painted in
glaring colors all the dangers to which his favorite--the daughter of a
noble and respected man--might be exposed.

He rushed up and down his cell like a wounded tiger, he flung himself
against the walls, and then, with his body hanging far out of the
window, had looked out to see if the girl--who could not possibly have
returned yet--were not come back again. The darker it grew, the more his
anguish rose, and the more hideous were the pictures that stood before
his fancy; and when, presently, a pilgrim in the Pastophorium who had
fallen into convulsions screamed out loud, he was no longer master of
himself--he kicked open the door which, locked on the outside and rotten
from age, had been closed for years, hastily concealed about him some
silver coins he kept in his chest, and let himself down to the ground.

There he stood, between his cell and the outer wall of the temple, and
now it was that he remembered his vows, and the oath he had sworn,
and his former flight from his retreat. Then he had fled because the
pleasures and joys of life had tempted him forth--then he had sinned
indeed; but now the love, the anxious care that urged him to quit his
prison were the same as had brought him back to it. It was to keep faith
that he now broke faith, and mighty Serapis could read his heart, and
his mother was dead, and while she lived she had always been ready and
willing to forgive.

He fancied so vividly that he could see her kind old face looking at him
that he nodded at her as if indeed she stood before him.

Then, he rolled an empty barrel to the foot of the wall, and with some
difficulty mounted on it. The sweat poured down him as he climbed up the
wall built of loose unbaked bricks to the parapet, which was much more
than a man’s height; then, sliding and tumbling, he found himself in the
ditch which ran round it on the outside, scrambled up its outer slope,
and set out at last on his walk to Memphis.

What he had afterwards learned in the palace concerning Klea had but
little relieved his anxiety on her account; she must have reached the
border of the desert so much sooner than he, and quick walking was so
difficult to him, and hurt the soles of his feet so cruelly! Perhaps
he might be able to procure a staff, but there was just as much bustle
outside the gate of the citadel as by day. He looked round him, feeling
the while in his wallet, which was well filled with silver, and his eye
fell on a row of asses whose drivers were crowding round the soldiers
and servants that streamed out of the great gate.

He sought out the strongest of the beasts with an experienced eye, flung
a piece of silver to the owner, mounted the ass, which panted under its
load, and promised the driver two drachmm in addition if he would take
him as quickly as possible to the second tavern on the road to the
Serapeum. Thus--he belaboring the sides of the unhappy donkey with
his sturdy bare legs, while the driver, running after him snorting
and shouting, from time to time poked him up from behind with a
stick--Serapion, now going at a short trot, and now at a brisk gallop,
reached his destination only half an hour later than Klea.

In the tavern all was dark and empty, but the recluse desired no
refreshment. Only his wish that he had a staff revived in his mind, and
he soon contrived to possess himself of one, by pulling a stake out
of the fence that surrounded the innkeeper’s little garden. This was
a somewhat heavy walking-stick, but it eased the recluse’s steps, for
though his hot and aching feet carried him but painfully the strength of
his arms was considerable.

The quick ride had diverted his mind, had even amused him, for he was
easily pleased, and had recalled to him his youthful travels; but now,
as he walked on alone in the desert, his thoughts reverted to Klea, and
to her only.

He looked round for her keenly and eagerly as soon as the moon came out
from behind the clouds, called her name from time to time, and thus got
as far as the avenue of sphinxes which connected the Greek and Egyptian
temples; a thumping noise fell upon his ear from the cave of the
Apis-tombs. Perhaps they were at work in there, preparing for the
approaching festival. But why were the soldiers, which were always on
guard here, absent from their posts to-night? Could it be that they had
observed Klea, and carried her off?

On the farther side of the rows of sphinxes too, which he had now
reached, there was not a man to be seen--not a watchman even though the
white limestone of the tombstones and the yellow desert-sand shone as
clear in the moonlight as if they had some internal light of their own.

At every instant he grew more and more uneasy, he climbed to the top of
a sand-hill to obtain a wider view, and loudly called Klea’s name.

There--was he deceived? No--there was a figure visible near one of the
ancient tomb-shrines--a form that seemed wrapped in a long robe, and
when once more he raised his voice in a loud call it came nearer to him
and to the row of sphinxes. In great haste and as fast as he could he
got down again to the roadway, hurried across the smooth pavement, on
both sides of which the long perspective of man-headed lions kept guard,
and painfully clambered up a sand-heap on the opposite side. This was in
truth a painful effort, for the sand crumbled away again and again under
his feet, slipping down hill and carrying him with it, thus compelling
him to find a new hold with hand and foot. At last he was standing on
the outer border of the sphinx-avenue and opposite the very shrine where
he fancied he had seen her whom he sought; but during his clamber it had
become perfectly dark again, for a heavy cloud had once more veiled the
moon. He put both hands to his mouth, and shouted as loud as he could,
“Klea!”--and then again, “Klea!”

Then, close at his feet he heard a rustle in the sand, and saw a figure
moving before him as though it had risen out of the ground. This could
not be Klea, it was a man--still, perhaps, he might have seen his
darling--but before he had time to address him he felt the shock of
a heavy blow that fell with tremendous force on his back between his
shoulders. The assassin’s sand-bag had missed the exact spot on the nape
of the neck, and Serapion’s strongly-knit backbone would have been able
to resist even a stronger blow.

The conviction that he was attacked by robbers flashed on his
consciousness as immediately as the sense of pain, and with it the
certainty that he was a lost man if he did not defend himself stoutly.

Behind him he heard another rustle in the sand. As quickly as he could
he turned round with an exclamation of “Accursed brood of vipers!” and
with his heavy staff he fell upon the figure before him like a smith
beating cold iron, for his eye, now more accustomed to the darkness,
plainly saw it to be a man. Serapion must have hit straight, for his foe
fell at his feet with a hideous roar, rolled over and over in the sand,
groaning and panting, and then with one shrill shriek lay silent and
motionless.

The recluse, in spite of the dim light, could see all the movements
of the robber he had punished so severely, and he was bending over the
fallen man anxiously and compassionately when he shuddered to feel two
clammy hands touching his feet, and immediately after two sharp pricks
in his right heel, which were so acutely painful that he screamed aloud,
and was obliged to lift up the wounded foot. At the same time, however,
he did not overlook the need to defend himself. Roaring like a wounded
bull, cursing and raging, he laid about him on all sides with his staff,
but hit nothing but the ground. Then as his blows followed each other
more slowly, and at last his wearied arms could no longer wield the
heavy stake, and he found himself compelled to sink on his knees, a
hoarse voice addressed him thus:

“You have taken my comrade’s life, Roman, and a two-legged serpent has
stung you for it. In a quarter of an hour it will be all over with you,
as it is with that fellow there. Why does a fine gentleman like you go
to keep an appointment in the desert without boots or sandals, and so
make our work so easy? King Euergetes and your friend Eulaeus send you
their greetings. You owe it to them that I leave you even your ready
money; I wish I could only carry away that dead lump there!”

During this rough speech Serapion was lying on the ground in great
agony; he could only clench his fists, and groan out heavy curses with
his lips which were now getting parched. His sight was as yet undimmed,
and he could distinctly see by the light of the moon, which now shone
forth from a broad cloudless opening in the sky, that the murderer
attempted to carry away his fallen comrade, and then, after raising his
head to listen for a moment sprang off with flying steps away into the
desert. But the recluse now lost consciousness, and when some minutes
later he once more opened his eyes his head was resting softly in the
lap of a young girl, and it was the voice of his beloved Klea that asked
him tenderly.

“You poor dear father! How came you here in the desert, and into the
hands of these murderers? Do you know me--your Klea? And he who is
looking for your wounds--which are not visible at all--he is the Roman
Publius Scipio. Now first tell us where the dagger hit you that I may
bind it up quickly--I am half a physician, and understand these things
as you know.”

The recluse tried to turn his head towards Klea’s, but the effort was in
vain, and he said in a low voice: “Prop me up against the slanting wall
of the tomb shrine yonder; and you, child, sit down opposite to me, for
I would fain look at you while I die. Gently, gently, my friend Publius,
for I feel as if all my limbs were made of Phoenician glass, and might
break at the least touch. Thank you, my young friend--you have strong
arms, and you may lift me a little higher yet. So--now I can bear it;
nay, I am well content, I am to be envied--for the moon shows me your
dear face, my child, and I see tears on your cheeks, tears for me, a
surly old man. Aye, it is good, it is very good to die thus.”

“Oh, father, father!” cried Klea. “You must not speak so. You must live,
you must not die; for see, Publius here asks me to be his wife, and the
Immortals only can know how glad I am to go with him, and Irene is
to stay with us, and be my sister and his. That must make you happy,
father.--But tell us, pray tell us where the wound hurts that the
murderer gave you?”

“Children, children,” murmured the anchorite, and a happy smile parted
his lips. “The gracious gods are merciful in permitting me to see
that--aye, merciful to me, and to effect that end I would have died
twenty deaths.”

Klea pressed his now cold hand to her lips as he spoke and again asked,
though hardly able to control her voice for tears:

“But the wound, father--where is the wound?” “Let be, let be,” replied
Serapion. “It is acrid poison, not a dagger or dart that has undone
my strength. And I can depart in peace, for I am no longer needed for
anything. You, Publius, must now take my place with this child, and will
do it better than I. Klea, the wife of Publius Scipio! I indeed have
dreamt that such a thing might come to pass, and I always knew, and have
said to myself a thousand times that I now say to you my son: This girl
here, this Klea is of a good sort, and worthy only of the noblest.
I give her to you, my son Publius, and now join your hands before me
here--for I have always been like a father to her.”

“That you have indeed,” sobbed Klea. “And it was no doubt for my sake,
and to protect me, that you quitted your retreat, and have met your
death.”

“It was fate, it was fate,” stammered the old man.

“The assassins were in ambush for me,” cried Publius, seizing Serapion’s
hand, “the murderers who fell on you instead of me. Once more, where is
your wound?”

“My destiny fulfils itself,” replied the recluse. “No locked-up cell, no
physician, no healing herb can avail against the degrees of Fate. I am
dying of a serpent’s sting as it was foretold at my birth; and if I had
not gone out to seek Klea a serpent would have slipped into my cage, and
have ended my life there. Give me your hands, my children, for a deadly
chill is creeping over me, and its cold hand already touches my heart.”

For a few minutes his voice failed him, and then he said softly:

“One thing I would fain ask of you. My little possessions, which were
intended for you and Irene, you will now use to bury me. I do not wish
to be burnt, as they did with my father--no, I should wish to be finely
embalmed, and my mummy to be placed with my mother’s. If indeed we may
meet again after death--and I believe we shall--I would rather see her
once more than any one, for she loved me so much--and I feel now as if
I were a child again, and could throw my arms round her neck. In another
life, perhaps, I may not be the child of misfortune that I have been
in this--in another life--now it grips my heart--in another----Children
whatever joys have smiled on me in this, children, it was to you I have
owed it--Klea, to you--and there is my little Irene too----”

These were the last words of Serapion the recluse; he fell back with a
deep sigh and was dead. Klea and Publius tenderly closed his faithful
eyes.




CHAPTER XXIII.

The unwonted tumult that had broken the stillness of the night had not
been unobserved in the Greek Serapeum any more than in the Egyptian
temple adjoining the Apis-tombs; but perfect silence once more reigned
in the Necropolis, when at last the great gate of the sanctuary of
Osiris-Apis was thrown open, and a little troop of priests arranged in a
procession came out from it with a vanguard of temple servants, who had
been armed with sacrificial knives and axes.

Publius and Klea, who were keeping faithful watch by the body of their
dead friend, saw them approaching, and the Roman said:

“It would have been even less right in such a night as this to let you
proceed to one of the temples with out my escort than to have let our
poor friend remain unwatched.”

“Once more I assure you,” said Klea eagerly “that we should have thrown
away every chance of fulfilling Serapion’s last wish as he intended, if
during our absence a jackal or a hyena had mutilated his body, and I
am happy to be able at least to prove to my friend, now he is dead, how
grateful I am for all the kindness he showed us while he lived. We ought
to be grateful even to the departed, for how still and blissful has
this hour been while guarding his body. Storm and strife brought us
together--”

“And here,” interrupted Publius, “we have concluded a happy and
permanent treaty of peace for the rest of our lives.”

“I accept it willingly,” replied Klea, looking down, “for I am the
vanquished party.”

“But you have already confessed,” said Publius, “that you were never so
unhappy as when you thought you had asserted your strength against
mine, and I can tell you that you never seemed to me so great and yet so
lovable as when in the midst of your triumph, you gave up the battle for
lost. Such an hour as that, a man experiences but once in his lifetime.
I have a good memory, but if ever I should forget it, and be angry and
passionate--as is sometimes my way--remind me of this spot, or of this
our dead friend, and my hard mood will melt, and I shall remember that
you once were ready to give your life for mine. I will make it easy for
you, for in honor of this man, who sacrificed his life for yours and who
was actually murdered in my stead, I promise to add his name of Serapion
to my own, and I will confirm this vow in Rome. He has behaved to us as
a father, and it behoves me to reverence his memory as though I had been
his son. An obligation was always unendurable to me, and how I shall
ever make full restitution to you for what you have done for me this
night I do not yet know--and yet I should be ready and willing every
day and every hour to accept from you some new gift of love. ‘A debtor,’
says the proverb, ‘is half a prisoner,’ and so I must entreat you to
deal mercifully with your conquerer.”

He took her hand, stroked back the hair from her forehead, and touched
it lightly with his lips. Then he went on:

“Come with me now that we may commit the dead into the hands of these
priests.”

Klea once more bent over the remains of the anchorite, she hung the
amulet he had given her for her journey round his neck, and then
silently obeyed her lover. When they came up with the little procession
Publius informed the chief priest how he had found Serapion, and
requested him to fetch away the corpse, and to cause it to be prepared
for interment in the costliest manner in the embalming house attached
to their temple. Some of the temple-servants took their places to keep
watch over the body, and after many questions addressed to Publius, and
after examining too the body of the assassin who had been slain, the
priests returned to the temple.

As soon as the two lovers were left alone again Klea seized the Roman’s
hand, and said passionately: “You have spoken many tender words to me,
and I thank you for them; but I am wont always to be honest, and less
than any one could I deceive you. Whatever your love bestows upon me
will always be a free gift, since you owe me nothing at all and I owe
you infinitely much; for I know now that you have snatched my sister
from the clutches of the mightiest in the land while I, when I heard
that Irene had gone away with you, and that murder threatened your life,
believed implicitly that on the contrary you had lured the child away
to become your sweetheart, and then--then I hated you, and then--I must
confess it\--in my horrible distraction I wished you dead!”

“And you think that wish can offend me or hurt me?” said Publius. “No,
my child; it only proves to me that you love me as I could wish to be
loved. Such rage under such circumstances is but the dark shadow cast by
love, and is as inseparable from love as from any tangible body. Where
it is absent there is no such thing as real love present--only an airy
vision, a phantom, a mockery. Such an one as Klea does not love nor hate
by halves; but there are mysterious workings in your soul as in that of
every other woman. How did the wish that you could see me dead turn into
the fearful resolve to let yourself be killed in my stead?”

“I saw the murderers,” answered Klea, “and I was overwhelmed with horror
of them and of their schemes, and of all that had to do with them; I
would not destroy Irene’s happiness, and I loved you even more deeply
than I hated you; and then--but let us not speak of it.”

“Nay-tell me all.”

“Then there was a moment--”

“Well, Klea?”

“Then--in these last hours, while we have been sitting hand in hand by
the body of poor Serapion, and hardly speaking, I have felt it all over
again--then the midnight hymn of the priests fell upon my heart, and as
I lifted up my soul in prayer at their pious chant I felt as if all my
inmost heart had been frozen and hardened, and was reviving again to new
life and tenderness and warmth. I could not help thinking of all that
is good and right, and I made up my mind to sacrifice myself for you and
for Irene’s happiness far more quickly and easily than I could give it
up afterwards. My father was one of the followers of Zeno--”

“And you,” interrupted Publius, “thought you were acting in accordance
with the doctrine of the Stoa. I also am familiar with it, but I do not
know the man who is so virtuous and wise that he can live and act, as
that teaching prescribes, in the heat of the struggle of life, or who
is the living representative in flesh and blood of the whole code of
ethics, not sinning against one of its laws and embodying it in himself.
Did you ever hear of the peace of mind, the lofty indifference and
equanimity of the Stoic sages? You look as if the question offended you,
but you did not by any means know how to attain that magnanimity, for
I have seen you fail in it; indeed it is contrary to the very nature of
woman, and--the gods be thanked--you are not a Stoic in woman’s dress,
but a woman--a true woman, as you should be. You have learned nothing
from Zeno and Chrysippus but what any peasant girl might learn from an
honest father, to be true I mean and to love virtue. Be content with
that; I am more than satisfied.”

“Oh, Publius,” exclaimed the girl, grasping her friend’s hand. “I
understand you, and I know that you are right. A woman must be miserable
so long as she fancies herself strong, and imagines and feels that she
needs no other support than her own firm will and determination, no
other counsel than some wise doctrines which she accepts and adheres to.
Before I could call you mine, and went on my own way, proud of my own
virtue, I was--I cannot bear to think of it--but half a soul, and took
it for a whole; but now--if now fate were to snatch you from me, I
should still know where to seek the support on which I might lean in
need and despair. Not in the Stoa, not in herself can a woman find such
a stay, but in pious dependence on the help of the gods.”

“I am a man,” interrupted Publius, “and yet I sacrifice to them and
yield ready obedience to their decrees.”

“But,” cried Klea, “I saw yesterday in the temple of Serapis the meanest
things done by his ministers, and it pained me and disgusted me, and I
lost my hold on the divinity; but the extremest anguish and deepest love
have led me to find it again. I can no longer conceive of the power
that upholds the universe as without love nor of the love that makes men
happy as other than divine. Any one who has once prayed for a being they
love as I prayed for you in the desert can never again forget how to
pray. Such prayers indeed are not in vain. Even if no god can hear them
there is a strengthening virtue in such prayer itself.

“Now I will go contentedly back to our temple till you fetch me, for I
know that the discreetest, wisest, and kindest Beings will watch over
our love.”

“You will not accompany me to Apollodorus and Irene?” asked Publius in
surprise.

“No,” answered Klea firmly. “Rather take me back to the Serapeum. I have
not yet been released from the duties I undertook there, and it will be
more worthy of us both that Asclepiodorus should give you the daughter
of Philotas as your wife than that you should be married to a runaway
serving-maid of Serapis.”

Publius considered for a moment, and then he said eagerly:

“Still I would rather you should come with me. You must be dreadfully
tired, but I could take you on my mule to Apollodorus. I care little for
what men say of me when I am sure I am doing right, and I shall know how
to protect you against Euergetes whether you wish to be readmitted to
the temple or accompany me to the sculptor. But do come--it will be hard
on me to part from you again. The victor does not lay aside the crown
when he has just won it in hard fight.”

“Still I entreat you to take me back to the Serapeum,” said Klea, laying
her hand in that of Publius.

“Is the way to Memphis too long, are you utterly tired out?”

“I am much wearied by agitation and terror, by anxiety and happiness,
still I could very well bear the ride; but I beg of you to take me back
to the temple.”

“What--although you feel strong enough to remain with me, and in spite
of my desire to conduct you at once to Apollodorus and Irene?” asked
Publius astonished, and he withdrew his hand. “The mule is waiting out
there. Lean on my arm. Come and do as I request you.”

“No, Publius, no. You are my lord and master, and I will always obey you
unresistingly. In one thing only let me have my own way, now and in the
future. As to what becomes a woman I know better than you, it is a thing
that none but a woman can decide.”

Publius made no reply to these words, but he kissed her, and threw his
arm round her; and so, clasped in each other’s embrace, they reached the
gate of the Serapeum, there to part for a few hours.

Klea was let into the temple, and as soon as she had learned that little
Philo was much better, she threw herself on her humble bed.

How lonely her room seemed, how intolerably empty without Irene. In
obedience to a hasty impulse she quitted her own bed, lay herself down
on her sister’s, as if that brought her nearer to the absent girl, and
closed her eyes; but she was too much excited and too much exhausted to
sleep soundly. Swiftly-changing visions broke in again and again on her
sincerely devotional thoughts and her restless half-sleep, painting to
her fancy now wondrously bright images, and now most horrible ones--now
pictures of exquisite happiness, and again others of dismal melancholy.
And all the time she imagined she heard distant music and was being
rocked up and down by unseen hands.

Still the image of the Roman overpowered all the rest.

At last a refreshing sleep sealed her eyes more closely, and in her
dream she saw her lover’s house in Rolne, his stately father, his noble
mother--who seemed to her to bear a likeness to her own mother--and the
figures of a number of tall and dignified senators. She felt herself
much embarrassed among all these strangers, who looked enquiringly at
her, and then kindly held out their hands to her. Even the dignified
matron came to meet her with effusion, and clasped her to her breast;
but just as Publius had opened his to her and she flew to his heart,
and she fancied she could feel his lips pressed to hers, the woman, who
called her every morning, knocked at her door and awoke her.

This time she had been happy in her dream and would willingly have slept
again; but she forced herself to rise from her bed, and before the sun
was quite risen she was standing by the Well of the Sun and, not to
neglect her duty, she filled both the jars for the altar of the god.

Tired and half-overcome by sleep, she set the golden vessels in their
place, and sat down to rest at the foot of a pillar, while a priest
poured out the water she had brought, as a drink-offering on the ground.

It was now broad daylight as she looked out into the forecourt through
the many-pillared hall of the temple; the early sunlight played round
the columns, and its slanting rays, at this hour, fell through the tall
doorway far into the great hall which usually lay in twilight gloom.

The sacred spot looked very solemn in her eyes, sublime, and as it were
reconsecrated, and obeying an irresistible impulse she leaned against a
column, and lifting up her arms, and raising her eyes, she uttered her
thankfulness to the god for his loving kindness, and found but one thing
to pray for, namely that he would preserve Publius and Irene, and all
mankind, from sorrow and anxiety and deception.

She felt as if her heart had till now been benighted and dark, and had
just disclosed some latent light--as if it had been withered and dry,
and was now blossoming in fresh verdure and brightly-colored flowers.

To act virtuously is granted even to those who, relying on themselves.
earnestly strive to lead moral, just and honest lives; but the happy
union of virtue and pure inner happiness is solemnized only in the heart
which is able to seek and find a God--be it Serapis or Jehovah.

At the door of the forecourt Klea was met by Asclepiodorus, who desired
her to follow him. The high-priest had learned that she had secretly
quitted the temple: when she was alone with him in a quiet room he
asked her gravely and severely, why she had broken the laws and left
the sanctuary without his permission. Klea told him, that terror for
her sister had driven her to Memphis, and that she there had heard that
Publics Cornelius Scipio, the Roman who had taken up her father’s cause,
had saved Irene from king Euergetes, and placed her in safety, and that
then she had set out on her way home in the middle of the night.

The high-priest seemed pleased at her news, and when she proceeded to
inform him that Serapion had forsaken his cell out of anxiety for her,
and had met his death in the desert, he said:

“I knew all that, my child. May the gods forgive the recluse, and may
Serapis show him mercy in the other world in spite of his broken oath!
His destiny had to be fulfilled. You, child, were born under happier
stars than he, and it is within my power to let you go unpunished. This
I do willingly; and Klea, if my daughter Andromeda grows up, I can only
wish that she may resemble you; this is the highest praise that a father
can bestow on another man’s daughter. As head of this temple I command
you to fill your jars to-day, as usual, till one who is worthy of you
comes to me, and asks you for his wife. I suspect he will not be long to
wait for.”

“How do you know, father,--” asked Klea, coloring.

“I can read it in your eyes,” said Asclepiodorus, and he gazed kindly
after her as, at a sign from him, she quitted the room.

As soon as he was alone he sent for his secretary and said:

“King Philometor has commanded that his brother Euergetes’ birthday
shall be kept to-day in Memphis. Let all the standards be hoisted, and
the garlands of flowers which will presently arrive from Arsinoe be
fastened up on the pylons; have the animals brought in for sacrifice,
and arrange a procession for the afternoon. All the dwellers in the
temple must be carefully attired. But there is another thing; Komanus
has been here, and has promised us great things in Euergetes’ name, and
declares that he intends to punish his brother Philometor for having
abducted a girl--Irene--attached to our temple. At the same time he
requests me to send Klea the water-bearer, the sister of the girl who
was carried off, to Memphis to be examined--but this may be deferred.
For to-day we will close the temple gates, solemnize the festival among
ourselves, and allow no one to enter our precincts for sacrifice and
prayer till the fate of the sisters is made certain. If the kings
themselves make their appearance, and want to bring their troops in, we
will receive them respectfully as becomes us, but we will not give up
Klea, but consign her to the holy of holies, which even Euergetes
dare not enter without me; for in giving up the girl we sacrifice our
dignity, and with that ourselves.”

The secretary bowed, and then announced that two of the prophets of
Osiris-Apis desired to speak with Asclepiodorus.

Klea had met these men in the antechamber as she quitted the
high-priest, and had seen in the hand of one of them the key with which
she had opened the door of the rock-tomb. She had started, and her
conscience urged her to go at once to the priest-smith, and tell him how
ill she had fulfilled her errand.

When she entered his room Krates was sitting at his work with his feet
wrapped up, and he was rejoiced to see her, for his anxiety for her and
for Irene had disturbed his night’s rest, and towards morning his alarm
had been much increased by a frightful dream.

Klea, encouraged by the friendly welcome of the old man, who was usually
so surly, confessed that she had neglected to deliver the key to the
smith in the city, that she had used it to open the Apis-tombs, and had
then forgotten to take it out of the new lock. At this confession the
old man broke out violently, he flung his file, and the iron bolt at
which he was working, on to his work-table, exclaiming:

“And this is the way you executed your commission. It is the first time
I ever trusted a woman, and this is my reward! All this will bring evil
on you and on me, and when it is found out that the sanctuary of Apis
has been desecrated through my fault and yours, they will inflict all
sorts of penance on me, and with very good reason--as for you, they will
punish you with imprisonment and starvation.”

“And yet, father,” Klea calmly replied, “I feel perfectly guiltless,
and perhaps in the same fearful situation you might not have acted
differently.”

“You think so--you dare to believe such a thing?” stormed the old man.
“And if the key and perhaps even the lock have been stolen, and if I
have done all that beautiful and elaborate work in vain?”

“What thief would venture into the sacred tombs?” asked Klea doubtfully.

“What! are they so unapproachable?” interrupted Krates. “Why, a
miserable creature like you even dared to open them. But only wait--only
wait; if only my feet were not so painful--”

“Listen to me,” said the girl, going closer up to the indignant smith.
“You are discreet, as you proved to me only yesterday; and if I were to
tell you all I went through and endured last night you would certainly
forgive me, that I know.”

“If you are not altogether mistaken!” shouted the smith. “Those must be
strange things indeed which could induce me to let such neglect of duty
and such a misdemeanor pass unpunished.”

And strange things they were indeed which the old man now had to hear,
for when Klea had ended her narrative of all that had occurred during
the past night, not her eyes only but those of the old smith too were
wet with tears.

“These accursed legs!” he muttered, as his eyes met the enquiring glance
of the young girl, and he wiped the salt dew from his cheeks with the
sleeve of his coat. “Aye-a swelled foot like mine is painful, child, and
a cripple such as I am is not always strong-minded. Old women grow like
men, and old men grow like women. Ah! old age--it is bad to have such
feet as mine, but what is worse is that memory fades as years advance.
I believe now that I left the key myself in the door of the Apis-tombs
last evening, and I will send at once to Asclepiodorus, so that he may
beg the Egyptians up there to forgive me--they are indebted to me for
many small jobs.”




CHAPTER XXIV.

All the black masses of clouds which during the night had darkened
the blue sky and hidden the light of the moon had now completely
disappeared. The north-east wind which rose towards morning had floated
them away, and Zeus, devourer of the clouds, had swallowed them up to
the very last. It was a glorious morning, and as the sun rose in the
heavens, and pierced and burnt up with augmenting haste the pale
mist that hovered over the Nile, and the vapor that hung--a delicate
transparent veil of bluish-grey bombyx-gauze--over the eastern slopes,
the cool shades of night vanished too from the dusky nooks of the narrow
town which lay, mile-wide, along the western bank of the river. And the
intensely brilliant sunlight which now bathed the streets and houses,
the palaces and temples, the gardens and avenues, and the innumerable
vessels in the harbor of Memphis, was associated with a glow of warmth
which was welcome even there in the early morning of a winter’s day.

Boats’ captains and sailors--were hurrying down to the shore of the Nile
to avail themselves of the northeast breeze to travel southwards against
the current, and sails were being hoisted and anchors heaved, to an
accompaniment of loud singing. The quay was so crowded with ships that
it was difficult to understand how those that were ready could ever
disentangle themselves, and find their way through those remaining
behind; but each somehow found an outlet by which to reach the navigable
stream, and ere long the river was swarming with boats, all sailing
southwards, and giving it the appearance of an endless perspective of
camp tents set afloat.

Long strings of camels with high packs, of more lightly laden asses, and
of dark-colored slaves, were passing down the road to the harbor; these
last were singing, as yet unhurt by the burden of the day, and the
overseers’ whips were still in their girdles.

Ox-carts were being laden or coming down to the landing-place with
goods, and the ship’s captains were already beginning to collect round
the different great merchants--of whom the greater number were Greeks,
and only a few dressed in Egyptian costume--in order to offer their
freight for sale, or to hire out their vessels for some new expedition.

The greatest bustle and noise were at a part of the quay where, under
large tents, the custom-house officials were busily engaged, for most
vessels first cast anchor at Memphis to pay duty or Nile-toll on the
“king’s table.” The market close to the harbor also was a gay scene;
there dates and grain, the skins of beasts, and dried fish were piled
in great heaps, and bleating and bellowing herds of cattle were driven
together to be sold to the highest bidder.

Soldiers on foot and horseback in gaudy dresses and shining armor,
mingled with the busy crowd, like peacocks and gaudy cocks among the
fussy swarm of hens in a farm yard; lordly courtiers, in holiday dresses
of showy red, blue and yellow stuffs, were borne by slaves in litters
or standing on handsome gilt chariots; garlanded priests walked about
in long white robes, and smartly dressed girls were hurrying down to the
taverns near the harbor to play the flute or to dance.

The children that were playing about among this busy mob looked
covetously at the baskets piled high with cakes, which the bakers’ boys
were carrying so cleverly on their heads. The dogs innumerable, put up
their noses as the dealers in such dainties passed near them, and many
of them set up longing howls when a citizen’s wife came by with her
slaves, carrying in their baskets freshly killed fowls, and juicy meats
to roast for the festival, among heaps of vegetables and fruits.

Gardeners’ boys and young girls were bearing garlands of flowers,
festoons and fragrant nosegays, some piled on large trays which they
carried two and two, some on smaller boards or hung on cross poles for
one to carry; at that part of the quay where the king’s barge lay at
anchor numbers of workmen were busily employed in twining festoons of
greenery and flowers round the flag-staffs, and in hanging them with
lanterns.

Long files of the ministers of the god-representing the five phyla or
orders of the priesthood of the whole country--were marching, in holiday
attire, along the harbor-road in the direction of the palace, and the
jostling crowd respectfully made way for them to pass. The gleams of
festal splendor seemed interwoven with the laborious bustle on the quay
like scraps of gold thread in a dull work-a-day garment.

Euergetes, brother of the king, was keeping his birthday in Memphis
to-day, and all the city was to take part in the festivities.

At the first hour after sunrise victims had been sacrificed in the
temple of Ptah, the most ancient, and most vast of the sanctuaries
of the venerable capital of the Pharaohs; the sacred Apis-bull, but
recently introduced into the temple, was hung all over with golden
ornaments; early in the morning Euergetes had paid his devotions to the
sacred beast--which had eaten out of his hand, a favorable augury of
success for his plans; and the building in which the Apis lived, as
well as the stalls of his mother and of the cows kept for him, had been
splendidly decked with flowers.

The citizens of Memphis were not permitted to pursue their avocations or
ply their trades beyond the hour of noon; then the markets, the booths,
the workshops and schools were to be closed, and on the great square in
front of the temple of Ptah, where the annual fair was held, dramas both
sacred and profane, and shows of all sorts were to be seen, heard and
admired by men, women and children--provided at the expense of the two
kings.

Two men of Alexandria, one an AEolian of Lesbos, and the other a Hebrew
belonging to the Jewish community, but who was not distinguishable by
dress or accent from his Greek fellow-citizens, greeted each other on
the quay opposite the landing-place for the king’s vessels, some of
which were putting out into the stream, spreading their purple sails and
dipping their prows inlaid with ivory and heavily gilt.

“In a couple of hours,” said the Jew, “I shall be travelling homewards.
May I offer you a place in my boat, or do you propose remaining here to
assist at the festival and not starting till to-morrow morning? There
are all kinds of spectacles to be seen, and when it is dark a grand
illumination is to take place.”

“What do I care for their barbarian rubbish?” answered the Lesbian.
“Why, the Egyptian music alone drives me to distraction. My business is
concluded. I had inspected the goods brought from Arabia and India by
way of Berenice and Coptos, and had selected those I needed before the
vessel that brought them had moored in the Mariotic harbor, and other
goods will have reached Alexandria before me. I will not stay an hour
longer than is necessary in this horrible place, which is as dismal as
it is huge. Yesterday I visited the gymnasium and the better class of
baths--wretched, I call them! It is an insult to the fish-market and the
horse-ponds of Alexandria to compare them with them.”

“And the theatre!” exclaimed the Jew. “The exterior one can bear to look
at--but the acting! Yesterday they gave the ‘Thals’ of Menander, and
I assure you that in Alexandria the woman who dared to impersonate
the bewitching and cold-hearted Hetaira would have been driven off the
stage--they would have pelted her with rotten apples. Close by me there
sat a sturdy, brown Egyptian, a sugar-baker or something of the kind,
who held his sides with laughing, and yet, I dare swear, did not
understand a word of the comedy. But in Memphis it is the fashion
to know Greek, even among the artisans. May I hope to have you as my
guest?”

“With pleasure, with pleasure!” replied the Lesbian. “I was about to
look out for a boat. Have you done your business to your satisfaction?”

“Tolerably!” answered the Jew. “I have purchased some corn from Upper
Egypt, and stored it in the granaries here. The whole of that row yonder
were to let for a mere song, and so we get off cheaply when we let the
wheat lie here instead of at Alexandria where granaries are no longer to
be had for money.”

“That is very clever!” replied the Greek. “There is bustle enough here
in the harbor, but the many empty warehouses and the low rents prove
how Memphis is going down. Formerly this city was the emporium for all
vessels, but now for the most part they only run in to pay the toll
and to take in supplies for their crews. This populous place has a big
stomach, and many trades drive a considerable business here, but most of
those that fail here are still carried on in Alexandria.”

“It is the sea that is lacking,” interrupted the Jew; “Memphis trades
only with Egypt, and we with the whole world. The merchant who sends
his goods here only load camels, and wretched asses, and flat-bottomed
Nile-boats, while we in our harbors freight fine seagoing vessels. When
the winter-storms are past our house alone sends twenty triremes with
Egyptian wheat to Ostia and to Pontus; and your Indian and Arabian
goods, your imports from the newly opened Ethiopian provinces, take
up less room, but I should like to know how many talents your trade
amounted to in the course of the past year. Well then, farewell till we
meet again on my boat; it is called the Euphrosyne, and lies out there,
exactly opposite the two statues of the old king--who can remember these
stiff barbarian names? In three hours we start. I have a good cook on
board, who is not too particular as to the regulations regarding food by
which my countrymen in Palestine live, and you will find a few new books
and some capital wine from Byblos.”

“Then we need not dread a head-wind,” laughed the Lesbian. “We meet
again in three hours.”

The Israelite waved his hand to his travelling companion, and proceeded
at first along the shore under the shade of an alley of sycamores with
their broad unsymmetrical heads of foliage, but presently he turned
aside into a narrow street which led from the quay to the city. He stood
still for a moment opposite the entrance of the corner house, one side
of which lay parallel to the stream while the other--exhibiting the
front door, and a small oil-shop--faced the street; his attention had
been attracted to it by a strange scene; but he had still much to attend
to before starting on his journey, and he soon hurried on again without
noticing a tall man who came towards him, wearing a travelling-hat and a
cloak such as was usually adapted only for making journeys.

The house at which the Jew had gazed so fixedly was that of Apollodorus,
the sculptor, and the man who was so strangely dressed for a walk
through the city at this hour of the day was the Roman, Publius Scipio.
He seemed to be still more attracted by what was going on in the little
stall by the sculptor’s front door, than even the Israelite had been; he
leaned against the fence of the garden opposite the shop, and stood for
some time gazing and shaking his head at the strange things that were to
be seen within.

A wooden counter supported by the wall of the house-which was used
by customers to lay their money on and which generally held a few
oil-jars-projected a little way into the street like a window-board,
and on this singular couch sat a distinguished looking youth in a light
blue, sleeveless chiton, turning his back on the stall itself, which was
not much bigger than a good sized travelling-chariot. By his side lay a
“Himation”--[A long square cloak, and an indispensable part of the dress
of the Greeks.]--of fine white woolen stuff with a blue border. His legs
hung out into the street, and his brilliant color stood out in wonderful
contrast to the dark skin of a naked Egyptian boy, who crouched at his
feet with a cage full of doves.

The young Greek sitting on the window-counter had a golden fillet on his
oiled and perfumed curls, sandals of the finest leather on his feet, and
even in these humble surroundings looked elegant--but even more merry
than elegant--for the whole of his handsome face was radiant with
smiles while he tied two small rosy-grey turtle doves with ribands
of rose-colored bombyx-silk to the graceful basket in which they were
sitting, and then slipped a costly gold bracelet over the heads of the
frightened birds, and attached it to their wings with a white silk tie.

When he had finished this work he held the basket up, looked at it with
a smile of satisfaction, and he was in the very act of handing it to the
black boy when he caught sight of Publius, who went up to him from the
garden-fence.

“In the name of all the gods, Lysias,” cried the Roman, without greeting
his friend, “what fool’s trick are you at there again! Are you turned
oil-seller, or have you taken to training pigeons?”

“I am the one, and I am doing the other,” answered the Corinthian with
a laugh, for he it was to whom the Roman’s speech was addressed. “How do
you like my nest of young doves? It strikes me as uncommonly pretty, and
how well the golden circlet that links their necks becomes the little
creatures!”

“Here, put out your claws, you black crocodile,” he continued, turning
to his little assistant, “carry the basket carefully into the house, and
repeat what I say, ‘From the love-sick Lysias to the fair Irene’--Only
look, Publius, how the little monster grins at me with his white teeth.
You shall hear that his Greek is far less faultless than his teeth.
Prick up your ears, you little ichneumon--now once more repeat what you
are to say in there--do you see where I am pointing with my finger?--to
the master or to the lady who shall take the doves from you.”

With much pitiful stammering the boy repeated the Corinthian’s message
to Irene, and as he stood there with his mouth wide open, Lysias, who
was an expert at “ducks and drakes” on the water, neatly tossed into it
a silver drachma. This mouthful was much to the little rascal’s taste,
for after he had taken the coin out of his mouth he stood with wide-open
jaws opposite his liberal master, waiting for another throw; Lysias
however boxed him lightly on his ears, and chucked him under the chin,
saying as he snapped the boy’s teeth together:

“Now carry up the birds and wait for the answer.” “This offering is to
Irene, then?” said Publius. “We have not met for a long time; where were
you all day yesterday?”

“It will be far more entertaining to hear what you were about all the
night long. You are dressed as if you had come straight here from Rome.
Euergetes has already sent for you once this morning, and the queen
twice; she is over head and ears in love with you.”

“Folly! Tell me now what you were doing all yesterday.”

“Tell me first where you have been.”

“I had to go some distance and will tell you all about it later, but
not now; and I encountered strange things on my way--aye, I must say
extraordinary things. Before sunrise I found a bed in the inn yonder,
and to my own great surprise I slept so soundly that I awoke only two
hours since.”

“That is a very meagre report; but I know of old that if you do not
choose to speak no god could drag a syllable from you. As regards myself
I should do myself an injury by being silent, for my heart is like an
overloaded beast of burden and talking will relieve it. Ah! Publius,
my fate to-day is that of the helpless Tantalus, who sees juicy pears
bobbing about under his nose and tempting his hungry stomach, and yet
they never let him catch hold of them, only look-in there dwells Irene,
the pear, the peach, the pomegranate, and my thirsting heart is consumed
with longing for her. You may laugh--but to-day Paris might meet Helen
with impunity, for Eros has shot his whole store of arrows into me. You
cannot see them, but I can feel them, for not one of them has he drawn
out of the wound. And the darling little thing herself is not wholly
untouched by the winged boy’s darts. She has confessed so much to me
myself. It is impossible for me to refuse her any thing, and so I was
fool enough to swear a horrible oath that I would not try to see
her till she was reunited to her tall solemn sister, of whom I am
exceedingly afraid. Yesterday I lurked outside this house just as a
hungry wolf in cold weather sneaks about a temple where lambs are being
sacrificed, only to see her, or at least to hear a word from her lips,
for when she speaks it is like the song of nightingales--but all in
vain. Early this morning I came back to the city and to this spot; and
as hanging about forever was of no use, I bought up the stock of the old
oil-seller, who is asleep there in the corner, and settled myself in his
stall, for here no one can escape me, who enters or quits Apollodorus’
house--and, besides, I am only forbidden to visit Irene; she herself
allows me to send her greetings, and no one forbids me, not even
Apollodorus, to whom I spoke an hour ago.”

“And that basket of birds that your dusky errand-boy carried into the
house just now, was such a ‘greeting?”

“Of course--that is the third already. First I sent her a lovely nosegay
of fresh pomegranate-blossoms, and with it a few verses I hammered out
in the course of the night; then a basket of peaches which she likes
very much, and now the doves. And there lie her answers--the dear, sweet
creature! For my nosegay I got this red riband, for the fruit this peach
with a piece bitten out. Now I am anxious to see what I shall get for my
doves. I bought that little brown scamp in the market, and I shall take
him with me to Corinth as a remembrance of Memphis, if he brings me back
something pretty this time. There, I hear the door, that is he; come
here youngster, what have you brought?” Publius stood with his arms
crossed behind his back, hearing and watching the excited speech and
gestures of his friend who seemed to him, to-day more than ever, one of
those careless darlings of the gods, whose audacious proceedings give
us pleasure because they match with their appearance and manner, and
we feel they can no more help their vagaries than a tree can help
blossoming. As soon as Lysias spied a small packet in the boy’s hand he
did not take it from him but snatched up the child, who was by no means
remarkably small, by the leather belt that fastened up his loin-cloth,
tossed him up as if he were a plaything, and set him down on the table
by his side, exclaiming:

“I will teach you to fly, my little hippopotamus! Now, show me what you
have got.”

He hastily took the packet from the hand of the youngster, who looked
quite disconcerted, weighed it in his hand and said, turning to Publius:

“There is something tolerably heavy in this--what can it contain?”

“I am quite inexperienced in such matters,” replied the Roman.

“And I much experienced,” answered Lysias. “It might be, wait-it might
be the clasp of her girdle in here. Feel, it is certainly something
hard.”

Publius carefully felt the packet that the Corinthian held out to him,
with his fingers, and then said with a smile:

“I can guess what you have there, and if I am right I shall be much
pleased. Irene, I believe, has returned you the gold bracelet on a
little wooden tablet.”

“Nonsense!” answered Lysias. “The ornament was prettily wrought and of
some value, and every girl is fond of ornaments.”

“Your Corinthian friends are, at any rate. But look what the wrapper
contains.”

“Do you open it,” said the Corinthian.

Publius first untied a thread, then unfolded a small piece of white
linen, and came at last to an object wrapped in a bit of flimsy, cheap
papyrus. When this last envelope was removed, the bracelet was in fact
discovered, and under it lay a small wax tablet.

Lysias was by no means pleased with this discovery, and looked
disconcerted and annoyed at the return of his gift; but he soon mastered
his vexation, and said turning to his friend, who was not in the least
maliciously triumphant, but who stood looking thoughtfully at the
ground.

“Here is something on the little tablet--the sauce no doubt to the
peppered dish she has set before me.”

“Still, eat it,” interrupted Publius. “It may do you good for the
future.”

Lysias took the tablet in his hand, and after considering it carefully
on both sides he said:

“It belongs to the sculptor, for there is his name. And there--why she
has actually spiced the sauce or, if you like it better the bitter dose,
with verses. They are written more clearly than beautifully, still they
are of the learned sort.”

“Well?” asked the Roman with curiosity, as Lysias read the lines to
himself; the Greek did not look up from the writing but sighed softly,
and rubbing the side of his finely-cut nose with his finger he replied:

“Very pretty, indeed, for any one to whom they are not directly
addressed. Would you like to hear the distich?”

“Read it to me, I beg of you.”

“Well then,” said the Corinthian, and sighing again he read aloud;

     ‘Sweet is the lot of the couple whom love has united;
     But gold is a debt, and needs must at once be restored.’

“There, that is the dose. But doves are not human creatures, and I
know at once what my answer shall be. Give me the fibula, Publius, that
clasps that cloak in which you look like one of your own messengers. I
will write my answer on the wax.”

The Roman handed to Lysias the golden circlet armed with a strong pin,
and while he stood holding his cloak together with his hands, as he
was anxious to avoid recognition by the passers-by that frequented this
street, the Corinthian wrote as follows:

     “When doves are courting the lover adorns himself only;
     But when a youth loves, he fain would adorn his beloved.”

“Am I allowed to hear it?” asked Publius, and his friend at once read
him the lines; then he gave the tablet to the boy, with the bracelet
which he hastily wrapped up again, and desired him to take it back
immediately to the fair Irene. But the Roman detained the lad, and
laying his hand on the Greek’s shoulder, he asked him: “And if the young
girl accepts this gift, and after it many more besides--since you are
rich enough to make her presents to her heart’s content--what then,
Lysias?”

“What then?” repeated the other with more indecision and embarrassment
than was his wont. “Then I wait for Klea’s return home and--Aye! you may
laugh at me, but I have been thinking seriously of marrying this girl,
and taking her with me to Corinth. I am my father’s only son, and for
the last three years he has given me no peace. He is bent on my mother’s
finding me a wife or on my choosing one for myself. And if I took him
the pitch-black sister of this swarthy lout I believe he would be glad.
I never was more madly in love with any girl than with this little
Irene, as true as I am your friend; but I know why you are looking at me
with a frown like Zeus the Thunderer. You know of what consequence our
family is in Corinth, and when I think of that, then to be sure--”

“Then to be sure?” enquired the Roman in sharp, grave tone.

“Then I reflect that a water-bearer--the daughter of an outlawed man, in
our house--”

“And do you consider mine as being any less illustrious in Rome than
your own is in Corinth?” asked Publius sternly.

“On the contrary, Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica. We are important by
our wealth, you by your power and estates.”

“So it is--and yet I am about to conduct Irene’s sister Klea as my
lawful wife to my father’s house.”

“You are going to do that!” cried Lysias springing from his seat, and
flinging himself on the Roman’s breast, though at this moment a party
of Egyptians were passing by in the deserted street. “Then all is well,
then--oh! what a weight is taken off my mind!--then Irene shall be
my wife as sure as I live! Oh Eros and Aphrodite and Father Zeus and
Apollo! how happy I am! I feel as if the biggest of the Pyramids yonder
had fallen off my heart. Now, you rascal, run up and carry to the fair
Irene, the betrothed of her faithful Lysias--mark what I say--carry her
at once this tablet and bracelet. But you will not say it right; I will
write here above my distich: ‘From the faithful Lysias to the fair Irene
his future wife.’ There--and now I think she will not send the thing
back again, good girl that she is! Listen, rascal, if she keeps it you
may swallow cakes to-day out on the Grand Square till you burst--and
yet I have only just paid five gold pieces for you. Will she keep the
bracelet, Publius--yes or no?”

“She will keep it.”

A few minutes later the boy came hurrying back, and pulling the Greek
vehemently by his dress, he cried:

“Come, come with me, into the house.” Lysias with a light and graceful
leap sprang right over the little fellow’s head, tore open the door, and
spread out his arms as he caught sight of Irene, who, though trembling
like a hunted gazelle, flew down the narrow ladder-like stairs to meet
him, and fell on his breast laughing and crying and breathless.

In an instant their lips met, but after this first kiss she tore herself
from his arms, rushed up the stairs again, and then, from the top step,
shouted joyously:

“I could not help seeing you this once! now farewell till Klea comes,
then we meet again,” and she vanished into an upper room.

Lysias turned to his friend like one intoxicated, he threw himself down
on his bench, and said:

“Now the heavens may fall, nothing can trouble me! Ye immortal gods, how
fair the world is!”

“Strange boy!” exclaimed the Roman, interrupting his friend’s rapture.
“You can not stay for ever in this dingy stall.”

“I will not stir from this spot till Klea comes. The boy there shall
fetch me victuals as an old sparrow feeds his young; and if necessary I
will lie here for a week, like the little sardines they preserve in oil
at Alexandria.”

“I hope you will have only a few hours to wait; but I must go, for I am
planning a rare surprise for King Euergetes on his birthday, and must
go to the palace. The festival is already in full swing. Only listen how
they are shouting and calling down by the harbor; I fancy I can hear the
name of Euergetes.”

“Present my compliments to the fat monster! May we meet again
soon--brother-in-law!”




CHAPTER XXV.

King Euergetes was pacing restlessly up and down the lofty room which
his brother had furnished with particular magnificence to be his
reception-room. Hardly had the sun risen on the morning of his birthday
when he had betaken himself to the temple of Ptah with a numerous
suite--before his brother Philometor could set out--in order to
sacrifice there, to win the good graces of the high-priest of the
sanctuary, and to question of the oracle of Apis. All had fallen out
well, for the sacred bull had eaten out of his hand; and yet he would
have been more glad--though it should have disdained the cake he offered
it, if only Eulaeus had brought him the news that the plot against the
Roman’s life had been successful.

Gift after gift, addresses of congratulation from every district of the
country, priestly decrees drawn up in his honor and engraved on tablets
of hard stone, lay on every table or leaned against the walls of the
vast ball which the guests had just quitted. Only Hierax, the king’s
friend, remained with him, supporting himself, while he waited for some
sign from his sovereign, on a high throne made of gold and ivory and
richly decorated with gems, which had been sent to the king by the
Jewish community of Alexandria.

The great commander knew his master well and knew too that it was not
prudent to address him when he looked as he did now. But Euergetes
himself was aware of the need for speech, and he began, without pausing
in his walk or looking at his dignified friend:

“Even the Philobasilistes have proved corrupt; my soldiers in the
citadel are more numerous and are better men too than those that have
remained faithful to Philometor, and there ought to be nothing more for
me to do but to stir up a brief clatter of swords on shields, to spring
upon the throne, and to have myself proclaimed king; but I will never go
into the field with the strongest division of the enemy in my rear.
My brother’s head is on my sister’s shoulders, and so long as I am not
certain of her--”

A chamberlain rushed into the room as the king spoke, and interrupted
him by shouting out:

“Queen Cleopatra.”

A smile of triumph flashed across the features of the young giant; he
flung himself with an air of indifference on to a purple divan, and
desired that a magnificent lyre made of ivory, and presented to him by
his sister, should be brought to him; on it was carved with wonderful
skill and delicacy a representation of the first marriage, that of
Cadmus with Harmonia, at which all the gods had attended as guests.

Euergetes grasped the chords with wonderful vigor and mastery, and began
to play a wedding march, in which eager triumph alternated with tender
whisperings of love and longing.

The chamberlain, whose duty it was to introduce the queen to her
brother’s presence, wished to interrupt this performance of his
sovereign’s; but Cleopatra held him back, and stood listening at the
door with her children till Euergetes had brought the air to a rapid
conclusion with a petulant sweep of the strings, and a loud and
ear-piercing discord; then he flung his lute on the couch and rose with
well-feigned surprise, going forward to meet the queen as if, absorbed
in playing, he had not heard her approach.

He greeted his sister affectionately, holding out both his hands to her,
and spoke to the children--who were not afraid of him, for he knew how
to play madcap games with them like a great frolicsome boy--welcoming
them as tenderly as if he were their own father.

He could not weary of thanking Cleopatra for her thoughtful present--so
appropriate to him, who like Cadmus longed to boast of having mastered
Harmonia, and finally--she not having found a word to say--he took her
by the hand to exhibit to her the presents sent him by her husband and
from the provinces. But Cleopatra seemed to take little pleasure in all
these things, and said:

“Yes, everything is admirable, just as it has always been every year for
the last twenty years; but I did not come here to see but to listen.”

Her brother was radiant with satisfaction; she on the contrary was
pale and grave, and, could only now and then compel herself to a forced
smile.

“I fancied,” said Euergetes, “that your desire to wish me joy was
the principal thing that had brought you here, and, indeed, my vanity
requires me to believe it. Philometor was with me quite early, and
fulfilled that duty with touching affection. When will he go into the
banqueting-hall?”

“In half an hour; and till then tell me, I entreat you, what yesterday
you--”

“The best events are those that are long in preparing,” interrupted
her brother. “May I ask you to let the children, with their attendants,
retire for a few minutes into the inner rooms?”

“At once!” cried Cleopatra eagerly, and she pushed her eldest boy, who
clamorously insisted on remaining with his uncle, violently out of the
door without giving his attendant time to quiet him or take him in her
arms.

While she was endeavoring, with angry scolding and cross words, to
hasten the children’s departure, Eulaeus came into the room. Euergetes,
as soon as he saw him, set every limb with rigid resolve, and drew
breath so deeply that his broad chest heaved high, and a strong
respiration parted his lips as he went forward to meet the eunuch,
slowly but with an enquiring look.

Eulaeus cast a significant glance at Hierax and Cleopatra, went quite
close up to the king, whispered a few words into his ear, and answered
his brief questions in a low voice.

“It is well,” said Euergetes at last, and with a decisive gesture of his
hand he dismissed Eulaeus and his friend from the room.

Then he stood, as pale as death, his teeth set in his under-lip, and
gazing blankly at the ground.

He had his will, Publius Cornelius Scipio lived no more; his ambition
might reach without hindrance the utmost limits of his desires, and yet
he could not rejoice; he could not escape from a deep horror of himself,
and he struck his broad forehead with his clenched fists. He was face to
face with his first dastardly murder.

“And what news does Eulaeus bring?” asked Cleopatra in anxious
excitement, for she had never before seen her brother like this; but he
did not hear these words, and it was not till she had repeated them with
more insistence that he collected himself, stared at her from head to
foot with a fixed, gloomy expression, and then, letting his hand fall
on her shoulder so heavily that her knees bent under her and she gave a
little cry, asked her in a low but meaning tone:

“Are you strong enough to bear to hear great news?”

“Speak,” she said in a low voice, and her eyes were fixed on his lips
while she pressed her hand on her heart. Her anxiety to hear fettered
her to him, as with a tangible tie, and he, as if he must burst it by
the force of his utterance, said with awful solemnity, in his deepest
tones and emphasizing every syllable:

“Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica is dead.”

At these words Cleopatra’s pale cheeks were suddenly dyed with a crimson
glow, and clenching her little hands she struck them together, and
exclaimed with flashing eyes:

“I hoped so!”

Euergetes withdrew a step from his sister, and said: “You were right.
It is not only among the race of gods that the most fearful of all are
women!”

“What have you to say?” retorted Cleopatra. “And am I to believe that a
toothache has kept the Roman away from the banquet yesterday, and again
from coming to see me to-day? Am I to repeat, after you, that he died of
it? Now, speak out, for it rejoices my heart to hear it; where and how
did the insolent hypocrite meet his end?”

“A serpent stung him,” replied Euergetes, turning from his sister. “It
was in the desert, not far from the Apis-tombs.”

“He had an assignation in the Necropolis at midnight--it would seem to
have begun more pleasantly than it ended?”

Euergetes nodded assent to the question, and added gravely:

“His fate overtook him--but I cannot see anything very pleasing in the
matter.”

“No?” asked the queen. “And do you think that I do not know the asp that
ended that life in its prime? Do you think that I do not know, who set
the poisoned serpent on the Roman? You are the assassin, and Eulaeus and
his accomplices have helped you! Only yesterday I would have given my
heart’s blood for Publius, and would rather have carried you to the
grave than him; but to-day, now that I know the game that the wretch has
been playing with me, I would even have taken on myself the bloody deed
which, as it is, stains your hands. Not even a god should treat your
sister with such contempt--should insult her as he has done--and
go unpunished! Another has already met the same fate, as you
know--Eustorgos, Hipparchon of Bithynia, who, while he seemed to be
dying of love for me, was courting Kallistrata my lady in waiting;
and the wild beasts and serpents exercised their dark arts on him too.
Eulaeus’ intelligence has fallen on you, who are powerful, like a
cold hand on your heart; in me, the weak woman, it rouses unspeakable
delight. I gave him the best of all a woman has to bestow, and he dared
to trample it in the dust; and had I no right to require of him that he
should pour out the best that he had, which was his life, in the same
way as he had dared to serve mine, which is my love? I have a right to
rejoice at his death. Aye! the heavy lids now close those bright eyes
which could be falser than the stern lips that were so apt to praise
truth. The faithless heart is forever still which could scorn the love
of a queen--and for what? For whom? Oh, ye pitiful gods!”

With these words the queen sobbed aloud, hastily lifting her hands
to cover her eyes, and ran to the door by which she had entered her
brother’s rooms.

But Euergetes stood in her way, and said sternly and positively:

“You are to stay here till I return. Collect yourself, for at the next
event which this momentous day will bring forth it will be my turn to
laugh while your blood shall run cold.” And with a few swift steps he
left the hall.

Cleopatra buried her face in the soft cushions of the couch, and wept
without ceasing, till she was presently startled by loud cries and the
clatter of arms. Her quick wit told her what was happening. In frantic
haste she flew to the door but it was locked; no shaking, no screaming,
no thumping seemed to reach the ears of the guard whom she heard
monotonously walking up and down outside her prison.

And now the tumult and clang of arms grew louder and louder, and the
rattle of drums and blare of trumpets began to mingle with the sound.
She rushed to the window in mortal fear, and looked down into the
palace-yard; at that same instant the door of the great banqueting-hall
was flung open, and a flying crowd streamed out in distracted
confusion--then another, and a third--all troops in King Philometor’s
uniform. She ran to the door of the room into which she had thrust her
children; that too was locked. In her desperation she once more sprang
to the window, shouted to the flying Macedonians to halt and make a
stand--threatening and entreating; but no one heard her, and their
number constantly increased, till at length she saw her husband standing
on the threshold of the great hall with a gaping wound on his forehead,
and defending himself bravely and stoutly with buckler and sword against
the body-guard of his own brother, who were pressing him sorely. In
agonized excitement she shouted encouraging words to him, and he seemed
to hear her, for with a strong sweep of his shield he struck his nearest
antagonist to the earth, sprang with a mighty leap into the midst of his
flying adherents, and vanished with them through the passage which led
to the palace-stables.

The queen sank fainting on her knees by the window, and, through the
gathering shades of her swoon her dulled senses still were conscious
of the trampling of horses, of a shrill trumpet-blast, and at last of a
swelling and echoing shout of triumph with cries of, “Hail: hail to the
son of the Sun--Hail to the uniter of the two kingdoms; Hail to the King
of Upper and Lower Egypt, to Euergetes the god.”

But at the last words she recovered consciousness entirely and started
up. She looked down into the court again, and there saw her brother
borne along on her husband’s throne-litter by dignitaries and nobles.
Side by side with the traitor’s body-guard marched her own and
Philometor’s Philobasilistes and Diadoches.

The magnificent train went out of the great court of the palace, and
then--as she heard the chanting of priests--she realized that she had
lost her crown, and knew whither her faithless brother was proceeding.

She ground her teeth as her fancy painted all that was now about to
happen. Euergetes was being borne to the temple of Ptah, and proclaimed
by its astonished chief-priests, as King of Upper and Lower Egypt, and
successor to Philometor. Four pigeons would be let fly in his presence
to announce to the four quarters of the heavens that a new sovereign
had mounted the throne of his fathers, and amid prayer and sacrifice a
golden sickle would be presented to him with which, according to ancient
custom, he would cut an ear of corn.

Betrayed by her brother, abandoned by her husband, parted from her
children, scorned by the man she had loved, dethroned and powerless,
too weak and too utterly crushed to dream of revenge--she spent two
interminably long hours in the keenest anguish of mind, shut up in her
prison which was overloaded with splendor and with gifts. If poison had
been within her reach, in that hour she would unhesitatingly have put
an end to her ruined life. Now she walked restlessly up and down, asking
herself what her fate would be, and now she flung herself on the couch
and gave herself up to dull despair.

There lay the lyre she had given to her brother; her eye fell on the
relievo of the marriage of Cadmus and Harmonia, and on the figure of a
woman who was offering a jewel to the bride. The bearer of the gift
was the goddess of love, and the ornament she gave--so ran the
legend--brought misfortune on those who inherited it. All the darkest
hours of her life revived in her memory, and the blackest of them all
had come upon her as the outcome of Aphrodite’s gifts. She thought with
a shudder of the murdered Roman, and remembered the moment when Eulaeus
had told her that her Bithynian lover had been killed by wild beasts.
She rushed from one door to another--the victim of the avenging
Eumenides--shrieked from the window for rescue and help, and in that one
hour lived through a whole year of agonies and terrors.

At last--at last, the door of the room was opened, and Euergetes came
towards her, clad in the purple, with the crown of the two countries on
his grand head, radiant with triumph and delight.

“All hail to you, sister!” he exclaimed in a cheerful tone, and lifting
the heavy crown from his curling hair. “You ought to be proud to-day,
for your own brother has risen to high estate, and is now King of Upper
and Lower Egypt.”

Cleopatra turned from him, but he followed her and tried to take her
hand. She however snatched it away, exclaiming:

“Fill up the measure of your deeds, and insult the woman whom you have
robbed and made a widow. It was with a prophecy on your lips that you
went forth just now to perpetrate your greatest crime; but it falls on
your own head, for you laugh over our misfortune--and it cannot regard
me, for my blood does not run cold; I am not overwhelmed nor hopeless,
and I shall--”

“You,” interrupted Euergetes, at first with a loud voice, which
presently became as gentle as though he were revealing to her the
prospect of a future replete with enjoyment, “You shall retire to your
roof-tent with your children, and there you shall be read to as much as
you like, eat as many dainties as you can, wear as many splendid dresses
as you can desire, receive my visits and gossip with me as often as
my society may seem agreeable to you--as yours is to me now and at all
times. Besides all this you may display your sparkling wit before as
many Greek and Jewish men of letters or learning as you can command,
till each and all are dazzled to blindness. Perhaps even before that you
may win back your freedom, and with it a full treasury, a stable full
of noble horses, and a magnificent residence in the royal palace on
the Bruchion in gay Alexandria. It depends only on how soon our brother
Philometor--who fought like a lion this morning--perceives that he is
more fit to be a commander of horse, a lute-player, an attentive host
of word-splitting guests--than the ruler of a kingdom. Now, is it
not worthy of note to those who, like you and me, sister, love to
investigate the phenomena of our spiritual life, that this man--who in
peace is as yielding as wax, as week as a reed--is as tough and as keen
in battle as a finely tempered sword? We hacked bravely at each other’s
shields, and I owe this slash here on my shoulder to him. If Hierax--who
is in pursuit of him with his horsemen--is lucky and catches him in
time, he will no doubt give up the crown of his own free will.”

“Then he is not yet in your power, and he had time to mount a horse!”
 cried Cleopatra, her eyes sparkling with satisfaction; “then all is
not yet lost for us. If Philometor can but reach Rome, and lay our case
before the Senate--”

“Then he might certainly have some prospect of help from the Republic,
for Rome does not love to see a strong king on the throne of Egypt,”
 said Euergetes. “But you have lost your mainstay by the Tiber, and I
am about to make all the Scipios and the whole gens Cornelia my stanch
allies, for I mean to have the deceased Roman burnt with the finest
cedar-wood and Arabian spices; sacrifices shall be slaughtered at the
same time as if he had been a reigning king, and his ashes shall be sent
to Ostia and Rome in the costliest specimen of Vasa murrina that graces
my treasure-house, and on a ship specially fitted, and escorted by the
noblest of my friends. The road to the rampart of a hostile city lies
over corpses, and I, as general and king--”

Euergetes suddenly broke off in his sentence, for a loud noise and
vehement talking were heard outside the door. Cleopatra too had not
failed to observe it, and listened with alert attention; for on such a
day and in these apartments every dialogue, every noise in the king’s
antechamber might be of grave purport.

Euergetes did not deceive himself in this matter any more than his
sister, and he went towards the door holding the sacrificial sickle,
which formed part of his regalia, in his right hand. But he had not
crossed the room when Eulaeus rushed in, as pale as death, and calling
out to his sovereign:

“The murderers have betrayed us; Publius Scipio is alive, and insists on
being admitted to speak with you.”

The king’s armed hand fell by his side, and for a moment he gazed
blankly into vacancy, but the next instant he had recovered himself, and
roared in a voice which filled the room like rolling thunder:

“Who dares to hinder the entrance of my friend Publius Cornelius Scipio?
And are you still here, Eulaeus--you scoundrel and you villain! The
first case that I, as King of Upper and Lower Egypt, shall open
for trial will be that which this man--who is your foe and my
friend--proposes to bring against you. Welcome! most welcome on my
birthday, my noble friend!”

The last words were addressed to Publius, who now entered the room with
stately dignity, and clad in the ample folds of the white toga worn by
Romans of high birth. He held a sealed roll or despatch in his right
hand, and, while he bowed respectfully to Cleopatra, he seemed entirely
to overlook the hands King Euergetes held out in welcome. After his
first greeting had been disdained by the Roman, Euergetes would not have
offered him a second if his life had depended on it. He crossed his arms
with royal dignity, and said:

“I am grieved to receive your good wishes the last of all that have been
offered me on this happy day.”

“Then you must have changed your mind,” replied Publius, drawing up his
slight figure, which was taller than the king’s, “You have no lack of
docile instruments, and last night you were fully determined to receive
my first congratulations in the realm of shades.”

“My sister,” answered Euergetes, shrugging his shoulders, “was only
yesterday singing the praises of your uncultured plainness of speech;
but to-day it is your pleasure to speak in riddles like an Egyptian
oracle.”

“They cannot, however, be difficult to solve by you and your minions,”
 replied Publius coldly, as he pointed to Eulaeus. “The serpents which
you command have powerful poisons and sharp fangs at their disposal;
this time, however, they mistook their victim, and have sent a poor
recluse of Serapis to Hades instead of one of their king’s guests.”

“Your enigma is harder than ever,” cried the king. “My intelligence at
least is unequal to solve it, and I must request you to speak in less
dark language or else to explain your meaning.”

“Later, I will,” said Publius emphatically, “but these things concern
myself alone, and I stand here now commissioned by the State of Rome
which I serve. To-day Juventius Thalna will arrive here as ambassador
from the Republic, and this document from the Senate accredits me as its
representative until his arrival.”

Euergetes took the sealed roll which Publius offered to him. While he
tore it open, and hastily looked through its contents, the door was
again thrown open and Hierax, the king’s trusted friend, appeared on the
threshold with a flushed face and hair in disorder.

“We have him!” he cried before he came in. “He fell from his horse near
Heliopolis.”

“Philometor?” screamed Cleopatra, flinging herself upon Hierax. “He fell
from his horse--you have murdered him?”

The tone in which the words were said, so full of grief and horror that
the general said compassionately:

“Calm yourself, noble lady; your husband’s wound in the forehead is not
dangerous. The physicians in the great hall of the temple of the Sun
bound it up, and allowed me to bring him hither on a litter.”

Without hearing Hierax to the end Cleopatra flew towards the door, but
Euergetes barred her way and gave his orders with that decision which
characterized him, and which forbade all contradiction:

“You will remain here till I myself conduct you to him. I wish to have
you both near me.”

“So that you may force us by every torment to resign the throne!” cried
Cleopatra. “You are in luck to-day, and we are your prisoners.”

“You are free, noble queen,” said the Roman to the poor woman, who was
trembling in every limb. “And on the strength of my plenipotentiary
powers I here demand the liberty of King Philometor, in the name of the
Senate of Rome.”

At these words the blood mounted to King Euergetes’ face and eyes, and,
hardly master of himself, he stammered out rather than said:

“Popilius Laenas drew a circle round my uncle Antiochus, and threatened
him with the enmity of Rome if he dared to overstep it. You might excel
the example set you by your bold countryman--whose family indeed was far
less illustrious than yours--but I--I--”

“You are at liberty to oppose the will of Rome,” interrupted Publius
with dry formality, “but, if you venture on it, Rome, by me, will
withdraw her friendship. I stand here in the name of the Senate, whose
purpose it is to uphold the treaty which snatched this country from the
Syrians, and by which you and your brother pledged yourselves to divide
the realm of Egypt between you. It is not in my power to alter what has
happened here; but it is incumbent on me so to act as to enable Rome
to distribute to each of you that which is your due, according to the
treaty ratified by the Republic.

“In all questions which bear upon that compact Rome alone must decide,
and it is my duty to take care that the plaintiff is not prevented from
appearing alive and free before his protectors. So, in the name of the
Senate, King Euergetes, I require you to permit King Philometor
your brother, and Queen Cleopatra your sister, to proceed hence,
whithersoever they will.” Euergetes, breathing hard in impotent fury,
alternately doubling his fists, and extending his quivering fingers,
stood opposite the Roman who looked enquiringly in his face with cool
composure; for a short space both were silent. Then Euergetes, pushing
his hands through his hair, shook his head violently from side to side,
and exclaimed:

“Thank the Senate from me, and say that I know what we owe to it, and
admire the wisdom which prefers to see Egypt divided rather than united
in one strong hand--Philometor is free, and you also Cleopatra.”

For a moment he was again silent, then he laughed loudly, and cried to
the queen:

“As for you sister--your tender heart will of course bear you on the
wings of love to the side of your wounded husband.”

Cleopatra’s pale cheeks had flushed scarlet at the Roman’s speech; she
vouchsafed no answer to her brother’s ironical address, but advanced
proudly to the door. As she passed Publius she said with a farewell wave
of her pretty hand.

“We are much indebted to the Senate.”

Publius bowed low, and she, turning away from him, quitted the room.

“You have forgotten your fan, and your children!” the king called
after her; but Cleopatra did not hear his words, for, once outside her
brother’s apartment, all her forced and assumed composure flew to the
winds; she clasped her hands on her temples, and rushed down the broad
stairs of the palace as if she were pursued by fiends.

When the sound of her steps had died away, Euergetes turned to the Roman
and said:

“Now, as you have fulfilled what you deem to be your duty, I beg of you
to explain the meaning of your dark speeches just now, for they were
addressed to Euergetes the man, and not the king. If I understood you
rightly you meant to imply that your life had been attempted, and that
one of those extraordinary old men devoted to Serapis had been murdered
instead of you.”

“By your orders and those of your accomplice Eulaeus,” answered Publius
coolly.

“Eulaeus, come here!” thundered the king to the trembling courtier, with
a fearful and threatening glare in his eyes. “Have you hired murderers
to kill my friend--this noble guest of our royal house--because he
threatened to bring your crimes to light?”

“Mercy!” whimpered Eulaeus sinking on his knees before the king.

“He confesses his crime!” cried Euergetes; he laid his hand on the
girdle of his weeping subordinate, and commanded Hierax to hand him over
without delay to the watch, and to have him hanged before all beholders
by the great gate of the citadel. Eulaeus tried to pray for mercy and
to speak, but the powerful officer, who hated the contemptible wretch,
dragged him up, and out of the room.

“You were quite right to lay your complaint before me,” said Euergetes
while Eulaeus cries and howls were still audible on the stairs. “And you
see that I know how to punish those who dare to offend a guest.”

“He has only met with the portion he has deserved for years,” replied
Publius. “But now that we stand face to face, man to man, I must close
my account with you too. In your service and by your orders Eulaeus set
two assassins to lie in wait for me--”

“Publius Cornelius Scipio!” cried the king, interrupting his enemy in an
ominous tone; but the Roman went on, calmly and quietly:

“I am saying nothing that I cannot support by witnesses; and I have
truly set forth, in two letters, that king Euergetes during the past
night has attempted the life of an ambassador from Rome. One of these
despatches is addressed to my father, the other to Popilius Lamas, and
both are already on their way to Rome. I have given instructions that
they are to be opened if, in the course of three months reckoned from
the present date, I have not demanded them back. You see you must needs
make it convenient to protect my life, and to carry out whatever I may
require of you. If you obey my will in everything I may demand, all that
has happened this night shall remain a secret between you and me and
a third person, for whose silence I will be answerable; this I promise
you, and I never broke my word.”

“Speak,” said the king flinging himself on the couch, and plucking the
feathers from the fan Cleopatra had forgotten, while Publius went on
speaking.

“First I demand a free pardon for Philotas of Syracuse, ‘relative of
the king,’ and president of the body of the Chrematistes, his immediate
release, with his wife, from their forced labor, and their return from
the mines.”

“They both are dead,” said Euergetes, “my brother can vouch for it.”

“Then I require you to have it declared by special decree that Philotas
was condemned unjustly, and that he is reinstated in all the dignities
he was deprived of. I farther demand that you permit me and my friend
Lysias of Corinth, as well as Apollodorus the sculptor, to quit Egypt
without let or hindrance, and with us Klea and Irene, the daughters of
Philotas, who serve as water-bearers in the temple of Serapis.--Do you
hesitate as to your reply?”

“No,” answered the king, and he tossed up his hand. “For this once I
have lost the game.”

“The daughters of Philotas, Klea and Irene,” continued Publius with
imperturbable coolness, “are to have the confiscated estates of their
parents restored to them.”

“Then your sweetheart’s beauty does not satisfy you!” interposed
Euergetes satirically.

“It amply satisfies me. My last demand is that half of this wealth shall
be assigned to the temple of Serapis, so that the god may give up his
serving-maidens willingly, and without raising any objections. The other
half shall be handed over to Dicearchus, my agent in Alexandria, because
it is my will that Klea and Irene shall not enter my own house or that
of Lysias in Corinth as wives, without the dowry that beseems their
rank. Now, within one hour, I must have both the decree and the act
of restitution in my hands, for as soon as Juventius Thalna arrives
here--and I expect him, as I told you this very day--we propose to leave
Memphis, and to take ship at Alexandria.”

“A strange conjuncture!” cried Euergetes. “You deprive me alike of
my revenge and my love, and yet I see myself compelled to wish you a
pleasant journey. I must offer a sacrifice to Poseidon, to the Cyprian
goddess, and to the Dioscurides that they may vouchsafe your ship a
favorable voyage, although it will carry the man who in the future, can
do us more injury at Rome by his bitter hostility, than any other.”

“I shall always take the part of which ever of you has justice on his
side.”

Publius quitted the room with a proud wave of his hand, and Euergetes,
as soon as the door had closed behind the Roman, sprang from his couch,
shook his clenched fist in angry threat, and cried:

You, you obstinate fellow and your haughty patrician clan may do me
mischief enough by the Tiber; and yet perhaps I may win the game in
spite of you!

“You cross my path in the name of the Roman Senate. If Philometor waits
in the antechambers of consuls and senators we certainly may chance
to meet there, but I shall also try my luck with the people and the
tribunes.

“It is very strange! This head of mine hits upon more good ideas in an
hour than a cool fellow like that has in a year, and yet I am beaten by
him--and if I am honest I can not but confess that it was not his luck
alone, but his shrewdness that gained the victory. He may be off as
soon as he likes with his proud Hera--I can find a dozen Aphrodites in
Alexandria in her place!

“I resemble Hellas and he Rome, such as they are at present. We flutter
in the sunshine, and seize on all that satisfies our intellect or
gratifies our senses: they gaze at the earth, but walk on with a firm
step to seek power and profit. And thus they get ahead of us, and yet--I
would not change with them.”


     ETEXT EDITOR’S BOOKMARKS:

     A subdued tone generally provokes an equally subdued answer
     A mere nothing in one man’s life, to another may be great
     A debtor, says the proverb, is half a prisoner
     Air of a professional guide
     And what is great--and what is small
     Before you serve me up so bitter a meal (the truth)
     Behold, the puny Child of Man
     Blind tenderness which knows no reason
     By nature she is not and by circumstances is compelled to be
     Deceit is deceit
     Desire to seek and find a power outside us
     Evolution and annihilation
     Flattery is a key to the heart
     Hold pleasure to be the highest good
     If you want to catch mice you must waste bacon
     Inquisitive eyes are intrusive company
     Man is the measure of all things
     Man works with all his might for no one but himself
     Many a one would rather be feared than remain unheeded
     Museum of Alexandria and the Library
     Not yet fairly come to the end of yesterday
     Nothing permanent but change
     Nothing so certain as that nothing is certain
     Old women grow like men, and old men grow like women
     One hand washes the other
     Prefer deeds to words
     Priests that they should instruct the people to be obedient
     The altar where truth is mocked at
     They get ahead of us, and yet--I would not change with them
     Virtues are punished in this world
     What are we all but puny children?
     Who can be freer than he who needs nothing
     Who only puts on his armor when he is threatened






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sisters, Complete, by Georg Ebers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SISTERS, COMPLETE ***

***** This file should be named 5466-0.txt or 5466-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/5/4/6/5466/

Produced by David Widger


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
