The Project Gutenberg EBook Cleopatra, by Georg Ebers, Volume 5.
#39 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: Cleopatra, Volume 5.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5477]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 21, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLEOPATRA, BY GEORG EBERS, V5 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





CLEOPATRA

By Georg Ebers

Volume 5.



CHAPTER XII.

Barine had been an hour in the palace.  The magnificently furnished room
to which she was conducted was directly above the council chamber, and
sometimes, in the silence of the night, the voice of the Queen or the
loud cheers of men were distinctly heard.

Barine listened without making the slightest effort to catch the meaning
of the words which reached her ears.  She longed only for something to
divert her thoughts from the deep and bitter emotion which filled her
soul.  Ay, she was roused to fury, and yet she felt how completely this
passionate resentment contradicted her whole nature.

True, the shameless conduct of Philostratus during their married life had
often stirred the inmost depths of her placid, kindly spirit, and after
wards his brother Alexas had come to drive her, by his disgraceful
proposals, to the verge of despair; rage was added to the passionate
agitation of her soul, and for this she had cause to rejoice--but for
this mighty resentment during the time of struggle she might have,
perhaps, succumbed from sheer weariness and the yearning desire to rest.

At last, at last, she and her friends, by means of great sacrifices, had
succeeded in releasing her from these tortures.  Philostratus's consent
to liberate her was purchased.  Alexas's persecution had ceased long
before; he had first been sent away as envoy by his patron Antony, and
afterwards been compelled to accompany him to the war.

How she had enjoyed the peaceful days in her mother's house!  How quickly
the bright cheerfulness which she had supposed lost had returned to her
soul!--and to-day Fate had blessed her with the greatest happiness life
had ever offered.  True, she had had only a few brief hours in which to
enjoy it, for the attack of the unbridled boys and the wound inflicted
upon her lover had cast a heavy shadow on her bliss.

Her mother had again proved to be in the right when she so confidently
predicted a second misfortune which would follow the first only too soon.

Barine had been torn at midnight from her peaceful home and her wounded
lover's bedside.  This was done by the Queen's command, and, full of
angry excitement, she said to herself that the men were right who cursed
tyranny because it transformed free human beings into characterless
chattels.

There could be nothing good awaiting her; that was proved by the
messengers whom Cleopatra had sent to summon her at this unprecedented
hour.  They were her worst enemies: Iras, who desired to wed her lover--
Dion had told her so after the assault--and Alexas, whose suit she had
rejected in a way which a man never forgives.

She had already learned Iras's feelings.  The slender figure with the
narrow head, long, delicate nose, small chin, and pointed fingers, seemed
to her like a long, sharp thorn.  This strange comparison had entered her
head as Iras stood rigidly erect, reading aloud in a shrill, high voice
the Queen's command.  Everything about this hard, cold face appeared as
sharp as a sting, and ready to destroy her.

Her removal from her mother's house to the royal palace had been swift
and simple.

After the attack--of which she saw little, because, overpowered by fear
and horror, she closed her eyes--she had driven home with her lover,
where the leech had bandaged his injuries, and Berenike had quickly and
carefully transformed her own sleeping chamber into a sick-room.

Barine, after changing her dress, did not leave Dion's side.  She had
attired herself carefully, for she knew his delight in outward adornment.
When she returned from her grandparents, before sunset, she was alone
with him, and he, kissing her arm, had murmured that wherever the Greek
tongue was spoken there was not one more beautiful.  The gem was worthy
of its loveliness.  So she had opened her baggage to take out the circlet
which Antony had given, and it again enclasped her arm when she entered
the sick-room.

Because Dion had told her that he deemed her fairest in the simple white
robe she had worn a few days before, when there were no guests save
himself and Gorgias, and she had sung until after midnight his favourite
songs as though all were intended for him alone, her choice had fallen
upon this garment.  And she rejoiced that she had worn it--the wounded
man's eyes rested upon her so joyously when she sat down opposite to him.

The physician had forbidden him to talk, and urged him to sleep if
possible.  So Barine only held his hand in silence, whispering, whenever
he opened his eyes, a tender word of love and encouragement.

She had remained with him for hours, leaving her place at his side merely
to give him his medicine, or, with her mother's aid, place poultices on
his wounds.

When his manly face was distorted by suffering, she shared his pain; but
during most of the time a calm, pleasant sense of happiness pervaded her
mind.  She felt safe and sheltered in the possession of the man whom she
loved, though fully aware of the perils which threatened him, and,
perhaps, her also.  But the assurance of his love completely filled her
heart and cast every care entirely into the shade.  Many men had seemed
estimable and agreeable, a few even desirable husbands, but Dion was the
first to awaken love in her ardent but by no means passionate soul.  She
regarded the experiences of the past few days as a beautiful miracle.
How she had yearned and pined until the most fervent desire of her heart
was fulfilled!  Now Dion had offered her his love, and nothing could rob
her of it.

Gorgias and the sons of her uncle Arius had disturbed her a short time.
After they had gone with a good report, Berenike had entreated her
daughter to lie down and let her take her place.  But Barine would not
leave her lover's couch, and had just loosed her hair to brush it again
and fasten the thick, fair braids around her head, when, two hours after
midnight, some one knocked loudly on the window shutters.  Berenike was
in the act of removing the poultice, so Barine herself went into the
atrium to wake the doorkeeper.

But the old man was not asleep, and had anticipated her.  She recognized,
with a low cry of terror, the first person who entered the lighted
vestibule--Alexas.  Iras followed, her head closely muffled, for the
storm was still howling through the streets.  Last of all a lantern-
bearer crossed the threshold.

The Syrian saluted the startled young beauty with a formal bow, but Iras,
without a greeting or even a single word of preparation, delivered the
Queen's command, and then read aloud, by the light of the lantern, what
Cleopatra had scrawled upon the wax tablet.

When Barine, pallid and scarcely able to control her emotion, requested
the messengers who had arrived at so late an hour to enter, in order to
give her time to prepare for the night drive and take leave of her
mother, Iras vouchsafed no reply, but, as if she had the right to rule
the house, merely ordered the doorkeeper to bring his mistress's cloak
without delay.

While the old man, with trembling knees, moved away, Iras asked if the
wounded Dion was in the dwelling; and Barine, her self-control restored
by the question, answered, with repellent pride, that the Queen's orders
did not command her to submit to an examination in her own house.

Iras shrugged her shoulders and said, sneeringly, to Alexas:

"In truth, I asked too much.  One who attracts so many men of all ages
can scarcely be expected to know the abode of each individual."

"The heart has a faithful memory," replied the Syrian in a tone of
correction, but Iras echoed, contemptuously, "The heart!"

Then all were silent until, instead of the doorkeeper, Berenike herself
came hurrying in, bringing the cloak.  With pallid face and bloodless
lips she wrapped it around her daughter's shoulders, whispering, amid
floods of tears, almost inaudible words of love and encouragement, which
Iras interrupted by requesting Barine to follow her to the carriage.

The mother and daughter embraced and kissed each other, then the closed
equipage bore the persecuted woman through the storm and darkness to
Lochias.

Not a word was exchanged between Barine and the Queen's messengers until
they reached the room where the former was to await Cleopatra; but here
Iras again endeavoured to induce her to speak.  At the first question,
however, Barine answered that she had no information to give.

The room was as bright as if it were noonday, though the lights flickered
constantly, for the wind found its way through the thin shutters closing
the windows on both sides of the corner room, and a strong, cold draught
swept in.  Barine wrapped her cloak more closely around her; the storm
which howled about the sea-washed palace harmonized with the vehement
agitation of her soul.  Whether she had looked within or without, there
was nothing which could have soothed her save the assurance of being
loved--an assurance that held fear at bay.  Now, indignation prevented
dread from overpowering her, yet calm consideration could not fail to
show her that danger threatened on every hand.  The very manner in which
Iras and Alexas whispered together, without heeding her presence, boded
peril, for courtiers show such contempt only to those whom they know are
threatened with the indifference or resentment of the sovereign.  Barine,
during her married life with a man devoid of all delicacy of feeling, and
with a disposition as evil as his tongue was ready, had learned to endure
many things which were hard to bear; yet when, after a remark from Iras
evidently concerning her, she heard Alexas laugh, she was compelled to
exert the utmost self-restraint to avoid telling her enemy how utterly
she despised the cowardly cruelty of her conduct.  But she succeeded in
keeping silent.  Still, the painful constraint she imposed on herself
must find vent in some way, and, as the tortured anguish of her soul
reached its height, large tears rolled down her cheeks.

These, too, were noticed by her enemy and made the target of her wit; but
this time the sarcasm failed to produce its effect upon the Syrian, for,
instead of laughing, he grew grave, and whispered something which seemed
to Barine a reproof or a warning.  Iras's reply was merely a contemptuous
shrug of the shoulders.

Barine had noticed long before that her mother, in her fear and
bewilderment, had brought her own cloak instead of her daughter's, and
this circumstance also did not seem to her foe too trivial for a sneer.

But the childish insolence that seemed to have taken possession of one
who usually by no means lacked dignity, was merely the mask beneath which
she concealed her own suffering.  A grave motive was the source of the
mirth by which she affected to be moved at the sight of her enemy's
cloak.  The grey, ill-fitting garment disfigured Barine, and she desired
that the Queen should feel confident of surpassing her rival even in
outward charms.  No one, not even Cleopatra, could dispense with a
protecting wrap in this cold draught, and nothing suited her better than
the purple mantle in whose delicate woollen fabric black and gold dragons
and griffins were embroidered.  Iras had taken care that it lay ready.
Barine could not fail to appear like a beggar in comparison, though
Alexas said that her blue kerchief was marvellously becoming.

He was a base-minded voluptuary, who, aided by rich gifts of mind and
wide knowledge, had shunned no means of ingratiating himself with Antony,
the most lavish of patrons.  The repulse which this man, accustomed to
success, had received from Barine had been hard to forget, yet he did not
resign the hope of winning her.  Never had she seemed more desirable than
in her touching weakness.  Even base natures are averse to witnessing the
torture of the defenceless, and when Iras had aimed another poisoned
shaft at her, he ventured, at the risk of vexing his ally, to say, under
his breath:

"Condemned criminals are usually granted, before their end, a favourite
dish.  I have no cause to wish Barine anything good; but I would not
grudge that.  You, on the contrary, seem to delight in pouring wormwood
on her last mouthful."

"Certainly," she answered, her eyes sparkling brightly.  "Malice is the
purest of pleasures; at least to me, when exercised on this woman."

The Syrian, with a strange smile, held out his hand, saying: "Keep your
good-will towards me, Iras."

"Because," she retorted with a  sneer, "evil may follow my enmity.  I
think so, too.  I am not especially sensitive concerning myself, but
whoever dares"--here she raised her voice--"to harm one whom I--Just
listen to the cheers!  How she carries all hearts with her!  Though Fate
had made her a beggar, she would still be peerless among women.  She is
like the sun.  The clouds which intrude upon her pathway of radiance are
consumed and disappear."

While uttering the last sentence she had turned towards Barine, whose ear
the sharp voice again pierced like a thorn, as she commanded her to
prepare for the examination.

Almost at the same moment the door, caught by the wind, closed with a
loud bang.  The "introducer"--[Marshal of the court.]--had opened it,
and, after a hasty glance, exclaimed:

"The audience will not be given in this meeting place for all the winds
of heaven!  Her Majesty desires to receive her late visitor in the Hall
of Shells."

With these words he bowed courteously to Barine, and ushered her and her
two companions through several corridors and apartments into a well-
heated anteroom.

Here even the windows were thoroughly protected from the storm.  Several
body-guards and pages belonging to the corps of the "royal boys" stood
waiting to receive them.

"This is comfortable."  said Alexas, turning to Iras.  "Was the winter we
have just experienced intended to fill us with twofold gratitude for the
delights of the mild spring in this blessed room?"

"Perhaps so," she answered sullenly, and then added in a low tone: "Here
at Lochias the seasons do not follow their usual course.  They change
according to the pleasure of the supreme will.  Instead of four, the
Egyptians, as you know, have but three; in the palaces on the Nile they
are countless.  What is the meaning of this sudden entry of summer?
Winter would have pleased me better."

The Queen--Iras knew not why--had changed her arrangements for Barine's
reception.  This vexed her, and her features assumed a gloomy,
threatening expression as the young beauty, casting aside her cloak and
kerchief, stood awaiting Cleopatra in a white robe of fine material and
perfect fit.  The thick, fair braids, wound simply around her shapely
head, gave her an appearance of almost childish youth, and the sight made
Iras feel as if she, and Cleopatra also, were outwitted.

In the dimly lighted atrium of the house near the Paneum garden, she had
noticed only that Barine wore something white.  Had it been merely a
night robe, so much the better.  But she might have appeared in her
present garb at the festival of Isis.  The most careful deliberation
could have selected nothing more suitable or becoming.  And did this vain
woman go to rest with costly gold ornaments?  Else how did the circlet
chance to be on her arm?  Each of Cleopatra's charms seemed to Iras, who
knew them all, like a valuable possession of her own.  To see even the
least of them surpassed by another vexed her; and to behold in yonder
woman a form which she could not deny was no less beautiful, enraged,
nay, pierced her to the heart.

Since she had known that because of Barine she could hope for nothing
more from the man to whose love she believed she possessed a claim dating
from their childhood, she had hated the young beauty.  And now to the
many things which contributed to increase her hostile mood, was added the
disagreeable consciousness that during the last few hours she had treated
her contemptibly.  Had she only seen earlier what her foe's cloak
concealed, she would have found means to give her a different appearance.
But she must remain as she was; for Chairman had already entered.  Other
hours, however, would follow, and if the next did not decide the fate of
the woman whom she hated, future ones should.

For this purpose she did not need the aid of Charmian, her uncle
Archibius's sister, who had hitherto been a beloved associate and
maternal friend.  But what had happened?  Iras fancied that her pleasant
features wore a repellent expression which she had never seen before.
Was this also the singer's fault?  And what was the cause?

The older woman's manner decided the question whether she should still
bestow upon her returned relative the love of a grateful niece.  No, she
would no longer put any restraint upon herself.  Charmian should feel
that she (Iras) considered any favour shown to her foe an insult.  To
work against her secretly was not in her nature.  She had courage to show
an enemy her aversion, and she did not fear Charmian enough to pursue a
different course.  She knew that the artist Leonax, Barine's father, had
been Charmian's lover; but this did not justify her favouring the woman
who had robbed her niece of the heart of the man whom she--as Charmian
knew--had loved from childhood.

Charmian had just had a long conversation with her brother, and had
also learned in the palace that Barine had been summoned to the Queen's
presence in the middle of the night; so, firmly persuaded that evil was
intended to the young woman who had already passed through so many
agitating scenes of joy and sorrow, she entered the waiting-room, and her
pleasant though no longer youthful face, framed in smooth, grey hair, was
greeted by Barine as the shipwrecked mariner hails the sight of land.

All the emotions which had darkened and embittered her soul were soothed.
She hastened towards her friend's sister, as a frightened child seeks its
mother, and Charmian perceived what was stirring in her heart.

It would not do, under existing circumstances, to kiss her in the palace,
but she drew Leonax's daughter towards her to show Iras that she was
ready to extend a protecting hand over the persecuted woman.  But Barine
gazed at her with pleading glances, beseeching aid, whispering amid her
tears: "Help me, Charmian.  She has tortured, insulted, humiliated me
with looks and words--so cruelly, so spitefully!  Help me; I can bear no
more."

Charmian shook her kind head and urged her in a whisper to calm herself.
She had robbed Iras of her lover; she should remember that.  Cost what it
might, she must not shed another tear.  The Queen was gracious.  She,
Charmian, would aid her.  Everything would depend on showing herself to
Cleopatra as she was, not as slander represented her.  She must answer
her as she would Archibius or herself.

The kindly woman, as she spoke, stroked her brow and eyes with maternal
tenderness, and Barine felt as if goodness itself had quelled the tempest
in her soul.  She gazed around her as though roused from a troubled
dream, and now for the first time perceived the richly adorned room in
which she stood, the admiring glances of the boys in the Macedonian corps
of pages, and the bright fire blazing cheerily on the hearth.  The
howling of the storm increased the pleasant sense of being under a firm
roof, and Iras, who had whispered to the "introducer" at the door, no
longer seemed like a sharp thorn or a spiteful demon, but a woman by no
means destitute of charm, who repulsed her, but on whom she had inflicted
the keenest pang a woman's heart can suffer.  Then she again thought of
her wounded lover at home, and remembered that, whatever might happen,
his heart did not belong to Iras, but to her alone.  Lastly, she recalled
Archibius's description of Cleopatra's childhood, and this remembrance
was followed by the conviction that the omnipotent sovereign would be
neither cruel nor unjust, and that it would depend upon herself to win
her favour.  Charmian, too, was the Queen's confidante; and if the manner
of Iras and Alexas had alarmed her, Charmian's might well inspire
confidence.

All these thoughts darted through her brain with the speed of lightning.
Only a brief time for consideration remained; for, even as she bowed her
head on the bosom of her friend, the "introducer" entered the room,
crying, "Her illustrious Majesty will expect those whom she summoned in a
few minutes!"

Soon after a chamberlain appeared, waving a fan of ostrich feathers and,
preceded by the court official, they passed through several brilliantly
lighted, richly furnished rooms.

Barine again breathed freely and moved with head erect; and when the
wide, lofty folding doors of ebony, against whose deep black surface the
inlaid figures of Tritons, mermaids, shells, fish, and sea monsters were
sharply relieved, she beheld a glittering, magnificent scene, for the
hall which Cleopatra had chosen for her reception was completely covered
with various marine forms, from the shells to coral and starfish.

A wide, lofty structure, composed of masses of stalactites and unhewn
blocks of stone, formed a deep grotto at the end of the hall, whence
peered the gigantic head of a monster whose open jaws formed the
fireplace of the chimney.  Logs of fragrant Arabian wood were blazing
brightly on the hearth, and the dragon's ruby glass eyes diffused a red
light through the apartment which, blended with the rays of the white and
pink lamps in the shape of lotus flowers fastened among gold and silver
tendrils and groups of sedges on the walls and ceiling, filling the
spacious apartment with the soft light whose roseate hue was specially
becoming to Cleopatra's waxen complexion.

Several stewards and cup-bearers, the master of the hunt, chamberlains,
female attendants, eunuchs, and other court officials were awaiting the
Queen, and pages who belonged to the Macedonian cadet corps of royal boys
stood sleepily, with drooping heads, around the small throne of gold,
coral, and amber which, placed opposite to the chimney, awaited the
sovereign.

Barine had already seen this magnificent hall, and others still more
beautiful in the Sebasteum, and the splendour therefore neither excited
nor abashed her; only she would fain have avoided the numerous train of
courtiers.  Could it be Cleopatra's intention to question her before the
eyes of all these men, women, and boys?

She no longer felt afraid, but her heart still throbbed quickly.  It had
beat in the same way in her girlhood, when she was asked to sing in the
presence of strangers.

At last she heard doors open, and an invisible hand parted the heavy
curtains at her right.  She expected to see the Regent, the Keeper of the
Seal, and the whole brilliantly adorned train of attendants who always
surrounded the Queen on formal occasions, enter the magnificent hall.
Else why had it been selected as the scene of this nocturnal trial?

But what was this?

While she was still recalling the display at the Adonis festival, the
curtains began to close again.  The courtiers around the throne
straightened their bowed figures, the pages forgot their fatigue, and all
joined in the Greek salutation of welcome, and the "Life! happiness!
health!" with which the Egyptians greeted their sovereign.

The woman of middle height who now appeared before the curtain, and who,
as she crossed the wide hall alone and unattended, seemed to Barine even
smaller than when surrounded by the gay throng at the Adonis festival,
must be the Queen.  Ay, it was she!

Iras was already standing by her side, and Charmian was approaching with
the "introducer."  The women rendered her various little services thus
Iras took from her shoulders the purple mantle, with its embroidery of
black and gold dragons.  What an exquisite masterpiece of the loom it
must be!

All the dangers against which she must defend herself flashed swiftly
through Barine's mind; yet, for an instant, she felt the foolish feminine
desire to see and handle the costly mantle.

But Iras had already laid it on the arm of one of the waiting maids, and
Cleopatra now glanced around her, and with a youthful, elastic step
approached the throne.

Once more the feeling of timidity which she had had in her girlhood
overpowered Barine, but with it came the memory of the garden of
Epicurus, and Archibius's assurance that she, too, would have left the
Queen with her heart overflowing with warm enthusiasm had not a
disturbing influence interposed between them.

Yet, had this disturbing influence really existed?  No.  It was created
solely by Cleopatra's jealous imagination.  If she would only permit her
to speak freely now, she should hear that Antony cared as little for her
as she, Barine, for the boy Caesarion.  What prevented her from
confessing that her heart was another's?  Iras had no one to blame save
herself if she spoke the truth pitilessly in her presence.

Cleopatra now turned to the "introducer," waving her hand towards the
throne and those who surrounded it.

Ay, she was indeed beautiful.  How bright and clear was the light of her
large eyes, in spite of the harassing days through which she had passed
and the present night of watching!

Cleopatra's heart was still elated by the reception of her bold idea of
escape, and she approached Barine with gentler feelings and intentions.
She had chosen a pleasanter room for the interview than the one Iras had
selected.  She desired a special environment to suit each mood, and as
soon as she saw the group of courtiers who surrounded the throne she
ordered their dismissal.

The "introducer," to carry out the usual ceremonial, had commanded their
presence in the audience chamber, but their attendance had given the
meeting a form which was now distasteful to the Queen.  She wished to
question, not to condemn.

At so happy an hour it was a necessity of her nature to be gracious.
Perhaps she had been unduly anxious concerning this singer.  It even
seemed probable; for a man who loved her like Antony could scarcely yearn
for the favour of another woman.  This view had been freshly confirmed by
a brief conversation with the chief Inspector of Sacrifices, an estimable
old man, who, after hearing how Antony had hurried in pursuit of her at
Actium, raised his eyes and hands as if transported with rapture,
exclaiming: "Unhappy Queen!  Yet happiest of women!  No one was ever so
ardently beloved; and when the tale is told of the noble Trojan who
endured such sore sufferings for a woman's sake, future generations will
laud the woman whose resistless spell constrained the greatest man of his
day, the hero of heroes, to cast aside victory, fame, and the hope of the
world's sovereignty, as mere worthless rubbish."

Posterity, whose verdict she dreaded--this wise old reader of the future
was right--must extol her as the most fervently beloved, the most
desirable of women.

And Mark Antony?  Even had the magic power of Nektanebus's goblet forced
him to follow her and to leave the battle, there still remained his will,
a copy of which--received from Rome--Zeno, the Keeper of the Seal, had
showed to her at the close of the council.  "Wherever he might die," so
ran the words, "he desired to be buried by the side of Cleopatra."
Octavianus had wrested it from the Vestal Virgins, to whose care it had
been entrusted, in order to fill the hearts of Roman citizens and matrons
with indignation against his foe.  The plot had succeeded, but the
document had reminded Cleopatra that her heart had given this man the
first of its flowers, that love for him had been the sunshine of her
life.  So, with head erect, she had crossed the threshold where she was
to meet the woman who had ventured to sow tares in her garden.  She
intended to devote only a short time to the interview, which she
anticipated with the satisfaction of the strong who are confident of
victory.

As she approached the throne, her train left the hall; the only persons
who remained were Charmian, Iras, Zeno, the Keeper of the Seal, and the
"introducer."

Cleopatra cast a rapid glance at the throne, to which an obsequious
gesture of the courtier's hand invited her; but she remained standing,
gazing keenly at Barine.

Was it the coloured rays from the ruby eyes of the dragon in the
fireplace which shed the roseate glow on Cleopatra's cheeks?  It
certainly enhanced the beauty of a face now only too frequently pallid
and colourless, when rouge did not lend its aid; but Barine understood
Archibius's ardent admiration for this rare woman, when Cleopatra, with a
faint smile, requested her to approach.

Nothing more winning could be imagined than the frank kindness, wholly
untinged by condescending pride, of this powerful sovereign.

The less Barine had expected such a reception the more deeply it moved
her; nay, her eyes grew dim with grateful emotion, which lent them so
beautiful a lustre, she looked so lovely in her glad surprise, that
Cleopatra thought the months which had elapsed since her first meeting
with the singer had enhanced her charms.  And how young she was!  The
Queen swiftly computed the years which Barine must have lived as the
wife of Philostratus, and afterwards as the attractive mistress of a
hospitable house, and found it difficult to reconcile the appearance of
this blooming young creature with the result of the calculation.

She was surprised, too, to note the aristocratic bearing whose possession
no one could deny the artist's daughter.  This was apparent even in her
dress, yet Iras had roused her in the middle of the night, and certainly
had given her no time for personal adornment.

She had expected lack of refinement and boldness, in the woman who was
said to have attracted so many men, but even the most bitter prejudice
could have detected no trace of it.  On the contrary, the embarrassment
which she could not yet wholly subdue lent her an air of girlish
timidity.  All in all, Barine was a charming creature, who bewitched men
by her vivacity, her grace, and her exquisite voice, not by coquetry and
pertness.  That she possessed unusual mental endowments Cleopatra did not
believe.  Barine had only one advantage over her--youth.

Time had not yet robbed the former of a single charm, while from the
Queen he had wrested many; their number was known only to herself and her
confidantes, but at this hour she did not miss them.

Barine, with a low, modest bow, advanced towards the Queen, who commenced
the conversation by graciously apologizing for the late hour at which she
had summoned her.  "But," she added, "you belong to the ranks of the
nightingales, who during the night most readily and exquisitely reveal to
us what stirs their hearts--"

Barine gazed silently at the floor a moment, and when she raised her eyes
her voice was faint and timid.  "I sing, it is true, your Majesty, but I
have nothing else in common with the birds.  The wings which, when a
child, bore me wherever I desired, have lost their strength.  They do not
wholly refuse their service, but they now require favourable hours to
move."

"I should not have expected that in the time of your youth, your most
beautiful possession," replied the Queen.  "Yet it is well.  I too--how
long ago it seems!--was a child, and my imagination outstripped even the
flight of the eagle.  It could dare the risk unpunished.  Now----Whoever
has reached mature life is wise to let these wings remain idle.  The
mortal who ventures to use them may easily approach too near the sun,
and, like Icarus, the wax will melt from his pinions.  Let me tell you
this: To the child the gift of imagination is nourishing bread.  In later
years we need it only as salt, as spice, as stimulating wine.  Doubtless
it points out many paths, and shows us their end; but, of a hundred
rambles to which it summons him, scarcely one pleases the mature man.  No
troublesome parasite is more persistently and sharply rebuffed.  Who can
blame the ill-treated friend if it is less ready to serve us as the years
go on?  The wise man will keep his ears ever open, but rarely lend it his
active hand.  To banish it from life is to deprive the plant of blossoms,
the rose of its fragrance, the sky of its stars."

"I have often said the same things to myself, though in a less clear and
beautiful form, when life has been darkened," replied Barine, with a
faint blush; for she felt that these words were doubtless intended to
warn her against cherishing too aspiring wishes.  "But, your Majesty,
here also the gods place you, the great Queen, far above us.  We should
often find existence bare indeed but for the fancy which endows us with
imaginary possessions.  You have the power to secure a thousand things
which to us common mortals only the gift of imagination pictures as
attainable."

"You believe that happiness is like wealth, and that the happiest person
is the one who receives the largest number of the gifts of fortune,"
answered the Queen.  "The contrary, I think, can be easily proved.  The
maxim that the more we have the less we need desire, is also false,
though in this world there are only a certain number of desirable things.
He who already possesses one of ten solidi which are to be divided, ought
really to desire only nine, and therefore would be poorer by a wish than
another who has none.  True, it cannot be denied that the gods have
burdened or endowed me with a greater number of perishable gifts than you
and many others.  You seem to set a high value upon them.  Doubtless
there may be one or another which you could appropriate only by the aid
of the imagination.  May I ask which seems to you the most desirable?"

"Spare me the choice, I beseech you," replied Barine in an embarrassed
tone.  "I need nothing from your treasures, and, as for the other
possessions  I lack many things; but it is uncertain how the noblest and
highest gifts in the possession of the marvellously endowed favourite of
the gods would suit the small, commonplace ones I call mine, and I know
not--"

"A sensible doubt!" interrupted the Queen.  "The lame man, who desired a
horse, obtained one, and on his first ride broke his neck.  The only
blessing--the highest of all--which surely bestows happiness can neither
be given away nor transferred from one to another.  He who has gained it
may be robbed of it the next moment."

The last sentence had fallen from the Queen's lips slowly and
thoughtfully, but Barine, remembering Archibius's tale, said modestly,
"You are thinking of the chief good mentioned by Epicurus--perfect peace
of mind."

Cleopatra's eyes sparkled with a brighter light as she asked eagerly,
"Do you, the granddaughter of a philosopher, know the system of the
master?"

"Very superficially, your Majesty.  My intellect is far inferior to
yours.  It is difficult for me thoroughly to comprehend all the details
of any system of philosophy."

"Yet you have attempted it?"

"Others endeavoured to introduce me into the doctrines of the Stoics.
I have forgotten most of what I learned; only one thing lingered in my
memory, and I know why--because it pleased me."

"And that?"

"Was the wise law of living according to the dictates of our own natures.
The command to shun everything contradictory to the simple fundamental
traits of our own characters pleased me, and wherever I saw affectation,
artificiality, and mannerism I was repelled, while from my grandfather's
teaching I drew the principle that I could do nothing better than to
remain, so far as life would permit, what I had been as a child ere I had
heard the first word of philosophy, or felt the constraint which society
and its forms impose."

"So the system of the Stoics leads to this end also!" cried the Queen
gaily, and, turning to the companion of her own studies, she added:
"Did you hear, Charmian?  If we had only succeeded in perceiving the
wisdom and calm, purposeful order of existence which the Stoics, amid so
much that is perverse, unhealthy, and provocative of contradiction,
nevertheless set above everything else!  How can I, in order to live
wisely, imitate Nature, when in her being and action I encounter so much
that is contradictory to my human reason, which is a part of the divine?"

Here she hesitated, and the expression of her face suddenly changed.

She had advanced close to Barine and, while standing directly in front of
her, her eyes had rested on the gem which adorned her arm above the
elbow.

Was it this which agitated Cleopatra so violently that her voice lost its
bewitching melody, as she went on in a harsh, angry tone?--"So that is
the source of all this misfortune.  Even as a child I detested that sort
of arbitrary judgment which passes under the mask of stern morality.
There is an example!  Do you hear the howling of the storm?  In human
nature, as well as in the material world, there are tempests and
volcanoes which bring destruction, and, if the original character of any
individual is full of such devastating forces, like the neighbourhood of
Vesuvius or Etna, the goal to which his impulses would lead him is
clearly visible.  Ay, the Stoic is not allowed to destroy the harmony and
order of things in existence, any more than to disturb those which are
established by the state.  But to follow our natural impulses wherever
they lead us is so perilous a venture, that whoever has the power to fix
a limit to it betimes is in duty bound to do so.  This power is mine, and
I will use it!"

Then, with iron severity, she asked: "As it seems to be one of the
demands of your nature, woman, to allure and kindle the hearts of all who
bear the name of man, even though they have not yet donned the garb of
the Ephebi, so, too, you seem to appear to delight in idle ornaments.
Or," and as she spoke she touched Barine's shoulder"--or why should you
wear, during the hours of slumber, that circlet on your arm?"

Barine had watched with increasing anxiety the marked change in the
manner and language of the Queen.  She now beheld a repetition of what
she had experienced at the Adonis festival, but this time she knew what
had roused Cleopatra's jealousy.  She, Barine, wore on her arm a gift
from Antony.  With pallid face she strove to find a fitting answer, but
ere she could do so Iras advanced to the side of the incensed Queen,
saying: "That circlet is the counterpart of the one your august husband
bestowed upon you.  The singer's must also be a gift from Mark Antony.
Like every one else in the world, she deems the noble Imperator the
greatest man of his day.  Who can blame her for prizing it so highly that
she does not remove it even while she sleeps?"

Again Barine felt as if a thorn had pierced her; but though the
resentment which she had previously experienced once more surged hotly
within her heart, she forced herself to maintain seemly external
composure, and struggled for some word in answer; but she found none
suitable, and remained silent.

She had told the truth.  From early youth she had followed the impulses
of her own nature without heeding the opinion of mortals, as the
teachings of the Stoics directed, and she had been allowed to do so
because this nature was pure, truthful, alive to the beautiful, and,
moreover, free from those unbridled, volcanic impulses to which the Queen
alluded.  The cheerful patience of her soul had found ample satisfaction
in the cultivation of her art, and in social intercourse with men who
permitted her to share their own intellectual life.  Today she had
learned that the first great passion of her heart had met with a
response.  Now she was bound to her lover, and knew herself to be pure
and guiltless, far better entitled to demand respect from sterner judges
of morality than the woman who condemned her, or the spiteful Iras, who
had not ceased to offer her love to Dion.

The sorrowful feeling of being misunderstood and unjustly condemned,
mingled with fear of the terrible fate to which she might be sentenced by
the omnipotent sovereign, whose clear intellect was clouded by jealousy
and the resentment of a mother's wounded heart, paralyzed her tongue.
Besides, she was confused by the angry emotion which the sight of Iras
awakened.  Twice, thrice she strove to utter a few words of explanation,
defence, but her voice refused to obey her will.

When Charmian at last approached to encourage her, it was too late; the
indignant Queen had turned away, exclaiming to Iras: "let her be taken
back to Lochias.  Her guilt is proved; but it does not become the injured
person, the accuser, to award the punishment.  This must be left to the
judges before whom we will bring her."

Then Barine once more recovered the power of speech.  How dared Cleopatra
assert that she was convicted of a crime, without hearing her defence?

As surely as she felt her own innocence she must succeed in proving it,
and with this consciousness she cried out to the Queen in a tone of
touching entreaty: "O your Majesty, do not leave me without hearing me!
As truly as I believe in your justice, I can ask you to listen to me once
more.  Do not give me up to the woman who hates me because the man whom
she--"

Here Cleopatra interrupted her.  Royal dignity forbade her to hear one
woman's jealous accusation of another, but, with the subtle discernment
with which women penetrate one another's moods, she heard in Barine's
piteous appeal a sincere conviction that she was too severely condemned.
Doubtless she also had reason to believe in Iras's hate, and Cleopatra
knew how mercilessly she pursued those who had incurred her displeasure.
She had rejected and still shuddered at her advice to remove the singer
from her path; for an inner voice warned her not to burden her soul now
with a fresh crime, which would disturb its peace.  Besides, she had at
first been much attracted by this charming, winning creature; but the
irritating thought that Antony had bestowed the same gift upon the
sovereign and the artist's daughter still so incensed her, that it taxed
to the utmost her graciousness and self-control as, without addressing
any special person, she exclaimed, glancing back into the hall: "This
examination will be followed by another.  When the time comes, the
accused must appear before the judges; therefore she must remain at
Lochias and in custody.  It is my will that no harm befalls her.  You are
her friend, Charmian.  I will place her in your charge.  Only"--here she
raised her voice--"on pain of my anger, do not allow her by any
possibility to leave the palace, even for a moment, or to hold
intercourse with any person save yourself."

With these words she passed out of the hall and went into her own
apartments.  She had turned the night into day, not only to despatch
speedily matters which seemed to her to permit of no delay, but even more
because, since the battle of Actium, she dreaded the restless hours upon
her lonely couch.  They seemed endless; and though before she had
remembered with pleasure the unprecedented display and magnificence with
which she had surrounded her love-life with Antony, she now in these
hours reproached herself for having foolishly squandered the wealth of
her people.  The present appeared unbearable, and from the future a host
of black cares pressed upon her.

The following days were overcrowded with business details.

Half of her nights were spent in the observatory.  She had not asked
again for Barine.  On the fifth night she permitted Alexas to conduct her
once more to the little observatory which had been erected for her father
at Lochias, and Antony's favourite knew how to prove that a star which
had long threatened her planet was that of the woman whom she seemed to
have forgotten as completely as she had ignored his former warning
against this very foe.

The Queen denied this, but Alexas eagerly continued: "The night after
your return home your kindness was again displayed in its inexhaustible
and--to us less noble souls--incomprehensible wealth.  Deeply agitated,
we watched during the memorable examination the touching spectacle of the
greatest heart making itself the standard by which to measure what is
petty and ignoble.  But ere the second trial takes place the wanderers
above, who know the future, bid me warn you once more; for that woman's
every look was calculated, every word had its fixed purpose, every tone
of her voice was intended to produce a certain effect.  Whatever she said
or may yet say had no other design than to deceive my royal mistress.  As
yet there have been no definite questions and answers.  But you will have
her examined, and then----What may she not make of the story of Mark
Antony, Barine, and the two armlets?  Perhaps it will be a masterpiece."

"Do you know its real history?" asked Cleopatra, clasping her fingers
more closely around the pencil in her hand.

"If I did," replied Alexas, smiling significantly, "the receiver of
stolen goods should not betray the thief."

"Not even if the person who has been robbed--the Queen--commands you to
give up the dishonestly acquired possession?"

"Unfortunately, even then I should be forced to withhold obedience; for
consider, my royal mistress, there are but two great luminaries around
which my dark life revolves.  Shall I betray the moon, when I am sure of
gaining nothing thereby save to dim the warm light of the sun?"

"That means that your revelations would wound me, the sun?"

"Unless your lofty soul is too great to be reached by shadows which
surround less noble women with an atmosphere of indescribable torture."

"Do you intend to render your words more attractive by the veil with
which you shroud them?  It is transparent, and dims the vision very
little.  My soul, you think, should be free from jealousy and the other
weaknesses of my sex.  There you are mistaken.  I am a woman, and wish to
remain one.  As Terence's Chremes says he is a human being, and nothing
human is unknown to him, I do not hesitate to confess all feminine
frailties.  Anubis told me of a queen in ancient times who would not
permit the inscriptions to record 'she,' but 'he came,' or 'he, the
ruler, conquered.'  Fool!  Whatever concerns me, my womanhood is not less
lofty than the crown.  I was a woman ere I became Queen.  The people
prostrate themselves before my empty litters; but when, in my youth, I
wandered in disguise with Antony through the city streets and visited
some scene of merrymaking, while the men gazed admiringly at me, and we
heard voices behind us murmur, 'A  handsome couple!'  I returned home
full of joy and pride.  But there was something greater still for the
woman to learn, when the heart in the breast of the Queen forgot throne
and sceptre and, in the hours consecrated to Eros, tasted joys known to
womanhood alone.  How can you men, who only command and desire,
understand the happiness of sacrifice?  I am a woman; my birth does not
exalt me above any feeling of my sex; and what I now ask is not as Queen
but as woman."

"If that is the case," Alexas answered with his hand upon his heart, "you
impose silence upon me; for were I to confess to the woman Cleopatra what
agitates my soul, I should be guilty of a double crime--I would violate a
promise and betray the friend who confided his noble wife to my
protection."

"Now the darkness is becoming too dense for me," replied Cleopatra,
raising her head with repellent pride.  "Or, if I choose to raise the
veil, I must point out to you the barriers--

"Which surround the Queen," replied the Syrian with an obsequious bow.
"There you behold the fact.  It is an impossibility to separate the woman
from the princess.  So far as I am concerned, I do not wish to anger the
former against the presumptuous adorer, and I desire to yield to the
latter the obedience which is her due.  Therefore I entreat you to
forget the armlet and its many painful associations, and pass to the
consideration of other matters.  Perhaps the fair Barine will voluntarily
confess everything, and even add how she managed to ensnare the amiable
son of the greatest of men, and the most admirable of mothers, the young
King Caesarion."

Cleopatra's eyes flashed more brightly, and she angrily exclaimed:
"I found the boy just now as though he were possessed by demons.  He was
ready to tear the bandage from his wound, if he were refused the woman
whom he loved.  A magic potion was the first thought, and his tutor of
course attributes everything to magic arts.  Charmian, on the contrary,
declares that his visits annoyed and even alarmed Barine.  Nothing except
a rigid investigation can throw light upon this subject.  We will await
the Imperator's return.  Do you think that he will again seek the singer?
You are his most trusted confidant.  If you desire his best good, and
care for my favour, drop your hesitation and answer this question."

The Syrian assumed the manner of a man who had reached a decision, and
answered firmly: "Certainly he will, unless you prevent him.  The
simplest way would be--"

"Well?"

"To inform him, as soon as he lands, that she is no longer to be found.
I should be especially happy to receive this commission from my royal
sun."

"And do you think it would dim the light of your moon a little, were he
to seek her here in vain?"

"As surely as that the contrary would be the case if he were always as
gratefully aware of the peerless brilliancy of his sun as it deserves.
Helios suffers no other orb to appear so long as he adorns the heavens.
His lustre quenches all the rest.  Let my sun so decree, and Barine's
little star will vanish."

"Enough!  I know your aim now.  But a human life is no small thing, and
this woman, too, is the child of a mother.  We must consider, earnestly
consider, whether our purpose cannot be gained without proceeding to
extremes.  This must be done with zeal and a kindly intention--But I--
Now, when the fate of this country, my own, and the children's is hanging
in the balance, when I have not fifteen minutes at my command, and there
is no end of writing and consulting, I can waste no time on such
matters."

"The reflective mind must be permitted to use its mighty wings
unimpeded," cried the Syrian eagerly.  "Leave the settlement of minor
matters to trustworthy friends."

Here they were  interrupted  by  the "introducer," who announced the
eunuch Mardion.  He had come on business which, spite of the late hour,
permitted no delay.

Alexas accompanied the Queen to the tablinum, where they found the
eunuch.  A slave attended him, carrying a pouch filled with letters which
had just been brought by two messengers from Syria.  Among them were some
which must be answered without delay.  The Keeper of the Seal and the
Exegetus were also waiting.  Their late visit was due to the necessity of
holding a conference in relation to the measures to be adopted to calm
the excited citizens.  All the galleys which had escaped from the battle
had entered the harbour the day before, wreathed with garlands as if a
great victory had been won.  Loud acclamations greeted them, yet tidings
of the defeat at Actium spread with the swiftness of the wind.  Crowds
were now gathering, threatening demonstrations had been made in front of
the Sebasteum, and on the square of the Serapeum the troops had been
compelled to interfere, and blood had flowed.

There lay the letters.  Zeno remarked that more papers conferring
authority were required for the work on the canal, and the Exegetus
earnestly besought definite instruction.

"It is much--much,"  murmured  Cleopatra.  Then, drawing herself up to
her full height, she exclaimed, "Well, then, to work!"

But Alexas did not permit her to do this at once.  Humbly advancing as
she took her seat at the large writing-table, he whispered: "And with all
this, must my royal mistress devote time and thought to the destroyer of
her peace.  To disturb your Majesty with this trifle is a crime; yet it
must be committed, for should the affair remain unheeded longer, the
trickling rivulet may become a mountain torrent--"

Here Cleopatra, whose glance had just rested upon a fateful letter from
King Herod, turned her face half towards her husband's favourite,
exclaiming curtly, with glowing cheeks, "Presently."

"Then she glanced rapidly over the letter, pushed it excitedly aside, and
dismissed the waiting Syrian with the impatient words: "Attend to the
trial and the rest.  No injustice, but no untimely mildness.  I will look
into this unpleasant matter myself before the Imperator returns."

"And the authority?"  asked the Syrian, with another low bow.

"You have it.  If you need a written one, apply to Zeno.  We will discuss
the affair further at some less busy hour."

The Syrian retired; but Cleopatra turned to the eunuch and, flushed with
emotion, cried, pointing to the King of Judea's letter:  "Did you ever
witness baser ingratitude?  The rats think the ship is sinking, and it is
time to leave it.  If we succeed in keeping above water, they will return
in swarms; and this must, must, must be done, for the sake of this
beloved country and her independence.  Then the children, the children!
All our powers must now be taxed, every expedient must be remembered and
used.  We will hammer each feeble hope until it becomes the strong steel
of certainty.  We will transform night into day.  The canal will save the
fleet.  Mark Antony will find in Africa Pinarius Scarpus with untouched
loyal legions.  The gladiators are faithful to us.  We can easily make
them ours, and my brain is seething with other plans.  But first we will
attend to the Alexandrians.  No violence!"

This exclamation was followed by order after order, and the promise that,
if necessary, she would show herself to the people.

The Exegetus was filled with admiration as he received the clear,
sagacious directions.  After he had retired with his companions, the
Queen again turned to the Regent, saying: "We did wisely to make the
people happy at first with tidings of victory.  The unexpected news of
terrible disaster might have led them to some unprecedented deed of
madness.  Disappointment is a more common pain, for which less powerful
remedies will suffice.  Besides, many things could be arranged ere they
knew that I was here.  How much we have accomplished already, Mardion!
But I have not even granted myself the joy of seeing my children.  I was
forced to defer the pleasure of the companionship of my oldest friends,
even Archibius.  When he comes again he will be admitted.  I have given
the order.  He knows Rome thoroughly.  I must hear his opinion of pending
negotiations."

She shivered as she spoke, and pressing her hand upon her brow,
exclaimed: "Octavianus victor, Cleopatra vanquished!  I, who was
everything to Caesar, beseeching mercy from his heir.  I, a petitioner to
Octavia's brother!  Yet, no, no!  There are still a hundred chances of
avoiding the horrible doom.  But whoever wishes to compel the field to
bear fruits must dig sturdily, draw the buckets from the well, plough,
and sow the seed.  To work, then, to work!  When Antony returns he must
find all things ready.  The first success will restore his lost energy.
I glanced through yonder letter while talking with the Exegetus; now I
will dictate the answer."

So she sat reading, writing, and dictating, listening, answering, and
giving orders, until the east brightened with the approach of dawn, the
morning star grew pale, and the Regent, utterly exhausted, entreated her
to consider her own health and his years, and permit him a few hours'
rest.

Then she, too, allowed herself to be led into her darkened chamber, and
this time a friendly, dreamless slumber closed her weary eyes and held
her captive until roused by the loud shouts of the multitude, who had
heard of the Queen's return and flocked to Lochias.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Without heeding the opinion of mortals





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CLEOPATRA, BY GEORG EBERS, V5 ***

*********This file should be named 5477.txt or 5477.zip **********

This eBook was produced by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
