The Project Gutenberg EBook of The House of the Wolf, by Stanley Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The House of the Wolf
       A Romance

Author: Stanley Weyman

Posting Date: November 19, 2008 [EBook #2041]
Release Date: January, 2000

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF ***














Note:

In this Etext, text in italics has been written in capital letters.

Many French words in the text have accents, etc. which have been
omitted.





THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF

A Romance


by

STANLEY WEYMAN




CONTENTS.


 CHAP.

    I.--WARE WOLF!
   II.--THE VIDAME'S THREAT.
  III.--THE ROAD TO PARIS.
   IV.--ENTRAPPED!
    V.--A PRIEST AND A WOMAN.
   VI.--MADAME'S FRIGHT.
  VII.--A YOUNG KNIGHT ERRANT.
 VIII.--THE PARISIAN MATINS.
   IX.--THE HEAD OF ERASMUS.
    X.--HAU, HAU, HUGUENOTS!
   XI.--A NIGHT OF SORROW.
  XII.--JOY IN THE MORNING.



INTRODUCTION.

The following is a modern English version of a curious French memoir,
or fragment of autobiography, apparently written about the year 1620 by
Anne, Vicomte de Caylus, and brought to this country--if, in fact, the
original ever existed in England--by one of his descendants after the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes.  This Anne, we learn from other
sources, was a principal figure at the Court of Henry IV., and,
therefore, in August, 1572, when the adventures here related took
place, he and his two younger brothers, Marie and Croisette, who shared
with him the honour and the danger, must have been little more than
boys. From the tone of his narrative, it appears that, in reviving old
recollections, the veteran renewed his youth also, and though his story
throws no fresh light upon the history of the time, it seems to possess
some human interest.




THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF.



CHAPTER I.

WARE WOLF!

I had afterwards such good reason to look back upon and remember the
events of that afternoon, that Catherine's voice seems to ring in my
brain even now.  I can shut my eyes and see again, after all these
years, what I saw then--just the blue summer sky, and one grey angle of
the keep, from which a fleecy cloud was trailing like the smoke from a
chimney.  I could see no more because I was lying on my back, my head
resting on my hands. Marie and Croisette, my brothers, were lying by me
in exactly the same posture, and a few yards away on the terrace,
Catherine was sitting on a stool Gil had brought out for her.  It was
the second Thursday in August, and hot.  Even the jackdaws were silent.
I had almost fallen asleep, watching my cloud grow longer and longer,
and thinner and thinner, when Croisette, who cared for heat no more
than a lizard, spoke up sharply, "Mademoiselle," he said, "why are you
watching the Cahors road?"

I had not noticed that she was doing so.  But something in the keenness
of Croisette's tone, taken perhaps with the fact that Catherine did not
at once answer him, aroused me; and I turned to her.  And lo!  she was
blushing in the most heavenly way, and her eyes were full of tears, and
she looked at us adorably.  And we all three sat up on our elbows, like
three puppy dogs, and looked at her.  And there was a long silence.
And then she said quite simply to us, "Boys, I am going to be married
to M. de Pavannes."

I fell flat on my back and spread out my arms.  "Oh, Mademoiselle!" I
cried reproachfully.

"Oh, Mademoiselle!" cried Marie.  And he fell flat on his back, and
spread out his arms and moaned.  He was a good brother, was Marie, and
obedient.

And Croisette cried, "Oh, mademoiselle!"  too.  But he was always
ridiculous in his ways.  He fell flat on his back, and flopped his arms
and squealed like a pig.

Yet he was sharp.  It was he who first remembered our duty, and went to
Catherine, cap in hand, where she sat half angry and half confused, and
said with a fine redness in his cheeks, "Mademoiselle de Caylus, our
cousin, we give you joy, and wish you long life; and are your servants,
and the good friends and aiders of M. de Pavannes in all quarrels, as--"

But I could not stand that.  "Not so fast, St. Croix de Caylus" I said,
pushing him aside--he was ever getting before me in those days--and
taking his place.  Then with my best bow I began, "Mademoiselle, we
give you joy and long life, and are your servants and the good friends
and aiders of M. de Pavannes in all quarrels, as--as--"

"As becomes the cadets of your house," suggested Croisette, softly.

"As becomes the cadets of your house," I repeated.  And then Catherine
stood up and made me a low bow and we all kissed her hand in turn,
beginning with me and ending with Croisette, as was becoming.
Afterwards Catherine threw her handkerchief over her face--she was
crying--and we three sat down, Turkish fashion, just where we were, and
said "Oh, Kit!"  very softly.

But presently Croisette had something to add.  "What will the Wolf
say?"  he whispered to me.

"Ah!  To be sure!"  I exclaimed aloud.  I had been thinking of myself
before; but this opened quite another window.  "What will the Vidame
say, Kit?"

She dropped her kerchief from her face, and turned so pale that I was
sorry I had spoken--apart from the kick Croisette gave me. "Is M. de
Bezers at his house?"  she asked anxiously.

"Yes," Croisette answered.  "He came in last night from St. Antonin,
with very small attendance."

The news seemed to set her fears at rest instead of augmenting them as
I should have expected.  I suppose they were rather for Louis de
Pavannes, than for herself.  Not unnaturally, too, for even the Wolf
could scarcely have found it in his heart to hurt our cousin.  Her
slight willowy figure, her pale oval face and gentle brown eyes, her
pleasant voice, her kindness, seemed to us boys and in those days, to
sum up all that was womanly.  We could not remember, not even Croisette
the youngest of us--who was seventeen, a year junior to Marie and
myself--we were twins--the time when we had not been in love with her.

But let me explain how we four, whose united ages scarce exceeded
seventy years, came to be lounging on the terrace in the holiday
stillness of that afternoon.  It was the summer of 1572.  The great
peace, it will be remembered, between the Catholics and the Huguenots
had not long been declared; the peace which in a day or two was to be
solemnized, and, as most Frenchmen hoped, to be cemented by the
marriage of Henry of Navarre with Margaret of Valois, the King's
sister.  The Vicomte de Caylus, Catherine's father and our guardian,
was one of the governors appointed to see the peace enforced; the
respect in which he was held by both parties--he was a Catholic, but no
bigot, God rest his soul!--recommending him for this employment.  He
had therefore gone a week or two before to Bayonne, his province.  Most
of our neighbours in Quercy were likewise from home, having gone to
Paris to be witnesses on one side or the other of the royal wedding.
And consequently we young people, not greatly checked by the presence
of good-natured, sleepy Madame Claude, Catherine's duenna, were
disposed to make the most of our liberty; and to celebrate the peace in
our own fashion.

We were country-folk.  Not one of us had been to Pau, much less to
Paris.  The Vicomte held stricter views than were common then, upon
young people's education; and though we had learned to ride and shoot,
to use our swords and toss a hawk, and to read and write, we knew
little more than Catherine herself of the world; little more of the
pleasures and sins of court life, and not one-tenth as much as she did
of its graces.  Still she had taught us to dance and make a bow.  Her
presence had softened our manners; and of late we had gained something
from the frank companionship of Louis de Pavannes, a Huguenot whom the
Vicomte had taken prisoner at Moncontour and held to ransom.  We were
not, I think, mere clownish yokels.

But we were shy.  We disliked and shunned strangers.  And when old Gil
appeared suddenly, while we were still chewing the melancholy cud of
Kit's announcement, and cried sepulchrally, "M. le Vidame de Bezers to
pay his respects to Mademoiselle!"--Well, there was something like a
panic, I confess!

We scrambled to our feet, muttering, "The Wolf!"  The entrance at
Caylus is by a ramp rising from the gateway to the level of the
terrace.  This sunken way is fenced by low walls so that one may
not--when walking on the terrace--fall into it.  Gil had spoken before
his head had well risen to view, and this gave us a moment, just a
moment.  Croisette made a rush for the doorway into the house; but
failed to gain it, and drew himself up behind a buttress of the tower,
his finger on his lip.  I am slow sometimes, and Marie waited for me,
so that we had barely got to our legs--looking, I dare say, awkward and
ungainly enough--before the Vidame's shadow fell darkly on the ground
at Catherine's feet.

"Mademoiselle!"  he said, advancing to her through the sunshine, and
bending over her slender hand with a magnificent grace that was born of
his size and manner combined, "I rode in late last night from Toulouse;
and I go to-morrow to Paris.  I have but rested and washed off the
stains of travel that I may lay my--ah!"

He seemed to see us for the first time and negligently broke off in his
compliment; raising himself and saluting us.  "Ah," he continued
indolently, "two of the maidens of Caylus, I see.  With an odd pair of
hands apiece, unless I am mistaken, Why do you not set them spinning,
Mademoiselle?"  and he regarded us with that smile which--with other
things as evil--had made him famous.

Croisette pulled horrible faces behind his back.  We looked hotly at
him; but could find nothing to say.

"You grow red!"  he went on, pleasantly--the wretch!--playing with us
as a cat does with mice.  "It offends your dignity, perhaps, that I bid
Mademoiselle set you spinning?  I now would spin at Mademoiselle's
bidding, and think it happiness!"

"We are not girls!"  I blurted out, with the flush and tremor of a
boy's passion.  "You had not called my godfather, Anne de Montmorenci a
girl, M. le Vidame!"  For though we counted it a joke among ourselves
that we all bore girls' names, we were young enough to be sensitive
about it.

He shrugged his shoulders.  And how he dwarfed us all as he stood there
dominating our terrace!  "M. de Montmorenci was a man," he said
scornfully.  "M. Anne de Caylus is--"

And the villain deliberately turned his great back upon us, taking his
seat on the low wall near Catherine's chair.  It was clear even to our
vanity that he did not think us worth another word--that we had passed
absolutely from his mind.  Madame Claude came waddling out at the same
moment, Gil carrying a chair behind her.  And we--well we slunk away
and sat on the other side of the terrace, whence we could still glower
at the offender.

Yet who were we to glower at him?  To this day I shake at the thought
of him.  It was not so much his height and bulk, though he was so big
that the clipped pointed fashion of his beard a fashion then new at
court--seemed on him incongruous and effeminate; nor so much the
sinister glance of his grey eyes--he had a slight cast in them; nor the
grim suavity of his manner, and the harsh threatening voice that
permitted of no disguise. It was the sum of these things, the great
brutal presence of the man--that was overpowering--that made the great
falter and the poor crouch.  And then his reputation!  Though we knew
little of the world's wickedness, all we did know had come to us linked
with his name.  We had heard of him as a duellist, as a bully, an
employer of bravos.  At Jarnac he had been the last to turn from the
shambles.  Men called him cruel and vengeful even for those days--gone
by now, thank God!--and whispered his name when they spoke of
assassinations; saying commonly of him that he would not blench before
a Guise, nor blush before the Virgin.

Such was our visitor and neighbour, Raoul de Mar, Vidame de Bezers.  As
he sat on the terrace, now eyeing us askance, and now paying Catherine
a compliment, I likened him to a great cat before which a butterfly has
all unwittingly flirted her prettiness.  Poor Catherine!  No doubt she
had her own reasons for uneasiness; more reasons I fancy than I then
guessed.  For she seemed to have lost her voice.  She stammered and
made but poor replies; and Madame Claude being deaf and stupid, and we
boys too timid after the rebuff we had experienced to fill the gap, the
conversation languished.  The Vidame was not for his part the man to
put himself out on a hot day.

It was after one of these pauses--not the first but the longest--that I
started on finding his eyes fixed on mine.  More, I shivered.  It is
hard to describe, but there was a look in the Vidame's eyes at that
moment which I had never seen before.  A look of pain almost:  of dumb
savage alarm at any rate.  From me they passed slowly to Marie and
mutely interrogated him.  Then the Vidame's glance travelled back to
Catherine, and settled on her.

Only a moment before she had been but too conscious of his presence.
Now, as it chanced by bad luck, or in the course of Providence,
something had drawn her attention elsewhere.  She was unconscious of
his regard.  Her own eyes were fixed in a far-away gaze.  Her colour
was high, her lips were parted, her bosom heaved gently.

The shadow deepened on the Vidame's face.  Slowly he took his eyes from
hers, and looked northwards also.

Caylus Castle stands on a rock in the middle of the narrow valley of
that name.  The town clusters about the ledges of the rock so closely
that when I was a boy I could fling a stone clear of the houses.  The
hills are scarcely five hundred yards distant on either side, rising in
tamer colours from the green fields about the brook.  It is possible
from the terrace to see the whole valley, and the road which passes
through it lengthwise. Catherine's eyes were on the northern extremity
of the defile, where the highway from Cahors descends from the uplands.
She had been sitting with her face turned that way all the afternoon.

I looked that way too.  A solitary horseman was descending the steep
track from the hills.

"Mademoiselle!"  cried the Vidame suddenly.  We all looked up. His tone
was such that the colour fled from Kit's face.  There was something in
his voice she had never heard in any voice before--something that to a
woman was like a blow. "Mademoiselle," he snarled, "is expecting news
from Cahors, from her lover.  I have the honour to congratulate M. de
Pavannes on his conquest."

Ah!  he had guessed it!  As the words fell on the sleepy silence, an
insult in themselves, I sprang to my feet, amazed and angry, yet
astounded by his quickness of sight and wit.  He must have recognized
the Pavannes badge at that distance.  "M. le Vidame," I said
indignantly--Catherine was white and voiceless--"M. le Vidame--" but
there I stopped and faltered stammering.  For behind him I could see
Croisette; and Croisette gave me no sign of encouragement or support.

So we stood face to face for a moment; the boy and the man of the
world, the stripling and the ROUE.  Then the Vidame bowed to me in
quite a new fashion.  "M. Anne de Caylus desires to answer for M. de
Pavannes?"  he asked smoothly; with a mocking smoothness.

I understood what he meant.  But something prompted me--Croisette said
afterwards that it was a happy thought, though now I know the crisis to
have been less serious than he fancied to answer, "Nay, not for M. de
Pavannes.  Rather for my cousin."  And I bowed.  "I have the honour on
her behalf to acknowledge your congratulations, M. le Vidame.  It
pleases her that our nearest neighbour should also be the first outside
the family to wish her well.  You have divined truly in supposing that
she will shortly be united to M. de Pavannes."

I suppose--for I saw the giant's colour change and his lip quiver as I
spoke--that his previous words had been only a guess.  For a moment the
devil seemed to be glaring through his eyes; and he looked at Marie and
me as a wild animal at its keepers.  Yet he maintained his cynical
politeness in part.  "Mademoiselle desires my congratulations?"  he
said, slowly, labouring with each word it seemed.  "She shall have them
on the happy day.  She shall certainly have them then.  But these are
troublous times.  And Mademoiselle's betrothed is I think a Huguenot,
and has gone to Paris.  Paris--well, the air of Paris is not good for
Huguenots, I am told."

I saw Catherine shiver; indeed she was on the point of fainting, I
broke in rudely, my passion getting the better of my fears. "M. de
Pavannes can take care of himself, believe me," I said brusquely.

"Perhaps so," Bezers answered, his voice like the grating of steel on
steel.  "But at any rate this will be a memorable day for Mademoiselle.
The day on which she receives her first congratulations--she will
remember it as long as she lives!  Oh, yes, I will answer for that, M.
Anne," he said looking brightly at one and another of us, his eyes more
oblique than ever, "Mademoiselle will remember it, I am sure!"

It would be impossible to describe the devilish glance he flung at the
poor sinking girl as he withdrew, the horrid emphasis he threw into
those last words, the covert deadly threat they conveyed to the dullest
ears.  That he went then, was small mercy.  He had done all the evil he
could do at present.  If his desire had been to leave fear behind him,
he had certainly succeeded.

Kit crying softly went into the house; her innocent coquetry more than
sufficiently punished already.  And we three looked at one another with
blank faces, It was clear that we had made a dangerous enemy, and an
enemy at our own gates.  As the Vidame had said, these were troublous
times when things were done to men--ay, and to women and
children--which we scarce dare to speak of now.  "I wish the Vicomte
were here," Croisette said uneasily after we had discussed several
unpleasant contingencies.

"Or even Malines the steward," I suggested.

"He would not be much good," replied Croisette.

"And he is at St. Antonin, and will not be back this week. Father
Pierre too is at Albi."

"You do not think," said Marie, "that he will attack us?"

"Certainly not!" Croisette retorted with contempt.  "Even the Vidame
would not dare to do that in time of peace.  Besides, he has not half a
score of men here," continued the lad, shrewdly, "and counting old Gil
and ourselves we have as many.  And Pavannes always said that three men
could hold the gate at the bottom of the ramp against a score.  Oh, he
will not try that!"

"Certainly not!" I agreed.  And so we crushed Marie.  "But for Louis de
Pavannes--"

Catherine interrupted me.  She came out quickly looking a different
person; her face flushed with anger, her tears dried.

"Anne!" she cried, imperiously, "what is the matter down below--will
you see?"

I had no difficulty in doing that.  All the sounds of town life came up
to us on the terrace.  Lounging there we could hear the chaffering over
the wheat measures in the cloisters of the market-square, the yell of a
dog, the voice of a scold, the church bell, the watchman's cry.  I had
only to step to the wall to overlook it all.  On this summer afternoon
the town had been for the most part very quiet.  If we had not been
engaged in our own affairs we should have taken the alarm before,
remarking in the silence the first beginnings of what was now a very
respectable tumult.  It swelled louder even as we stepped to the wall.

We could see--a bend in the street laying it open--part of the Vidame's
house; the gloomy square hold which had come to him from his mother.
His own chateau of Bezers lay far away in Franche Comte, but of late he
had shown a preference--Catherine could best account for it,
perhaps--for this mean house in Caylus.  It was the only house in the
town which did not belong to us.  It was known as the House of the
Wolf, and was a grim stone building surrounding a courtyard.  Rows of
wolves' heads carved in stone flanked the windows, whence their bare
fangs grinned day and night at the church porch opposite.

The noise drew our eyes in this direction; and there lolling in a
window over the door, looking out on the street with a laughing eye,
was Bezers himself.  The cause of his merriment--we had not far to look
for it--was a horseman who was riding up the street under difficulties.
He was reining in his steed--no easy task on that steep greasy
pavement--so as to present some front to a score or so of ragged knaves
who were following close at his heels, hooting and throwing mud and
pebbles at him.  The man had drawn his sword, and his oaths came up to
us, mingled with shrill cries of "VIVE LA MESSE!"  and half drowned by
the clattering of the horse's hoofs.  We saw a stone strike him in the
face, and draw blood, and heard him swear louder than before.

"Oh!"  cried Catherine, clasping her hands with a sudden shriek of
indignation, "my letter!  They will get my letter!"

"Death!"  exclaimed Croisette, "She is right!  It is M. de Pavannes'
courier!  This must be stopped!  We cannot stand this, Anne!"

"They shall pay dearly for it, by our Lady!"  I cried swearing myself.
"And in peace time too--the villains!  Gil!  Francis!" I shouted,
"where are you?"

And I looked round for my fowling piece, while Croisette jumped on the
wall, and forming a trumpet with his hands, shrieked at the top of his
voice, "Back!  he bears a letter from the Vicomte!"

But the device did not succeed, and I could not find my gun.  For a
moment we were helpless, and before I could have fetched the gun from
the house, the horseman and the hooting rabble at his heels, had turned
a corner and were hidden by the roofs.

Another turn however would bring them out in front of the gateway, and
seeing this we hurried down the ramp to meet them. I stayed a moment to
tell Gil to collect the servants, and, this keeping me, Croisette
reached the narrow street outside before me.  As I followed him I was
nearly knocked down by the rider, whose face was covered with, dirt and
blood, while fright had rendered his horse unmanageable.  Darting aside
I let him pass--he was blinded and could not see me--and then found
that Croisette--brave lad!  had collared the foremost of the ruffians,
and was beating him with his sheathed sword, while the rest of the
rabble stood back, ashamed, yet sullen, and with anger in their eyes.
A dangerous crew, I thought; not townsmen, most of them.

"Down with the Huguenots!"  cried one, as I appeared, one bolder than
the rest.

"Down with the CANAILLE!"  I retorted, sternly eyeing the ill-looking
ring.  "Will you set yourselves above the king's peace, dirt that you
are?  Go back to your kennels!"

The words were scarcely out of my mouth, before I saw that the fellow
whom Croisette was punishing had got hold of a dagger.  I shouted a
warning, but it came too late.  The blade fell, and--thanks to
God--striking the buckle of the lad's belt, glanced off harmless.  I
saw the steel flash up again--saw the spite in the man's eyes:  but
this time I was a step nearer, and before the weapon fell, I passed my
sword clean through the wretch's body. He went down like a log,
Croisette falling with him, held fast by his stiffening fingers.

I had never killed a man before, nor seen a man die; and if I had
stayed to think about it, I should have fallen sick perhaps.  But it
was no time for thought; no time for sickness.  The crowd were close
upon us, a line of flushed threatening faces from wall to wall.  A
single glance downwards told me that the man was dead, and I set my
foot upon his neck.  "Hounds!  Beasts!"  I cried, not loudly this time,
for though I was like one possessed with rage, it was inward rage, "go
to your kennels!  Will you dare to raise a hand against a Caylus?
Go--or when the Vicomte returns, a dozen of you shall hang in the
market-place!"

I suppose I looked fierce enough--I know I felt no fear, only a strange
exaltation--for they slunk away.  Unwillingly, but with little delay
the group melted, Bezers' following--of whom I knew the dead man was
one--the last to go.  While I still glared at them, lo!  the street was
empty; the last had disappeared round the bend.  I turned to find Gil
and half-a-dozen servants standing with pale faces at my back.
Croisette seized my hand with a sob.  "Oh, my lord," cried Gil,
quaveringly.  But I shook one off, I frowned at the other.

"Take up this carrion!"  I said, touching it with my foot, "And hang it
from the justice-elm.  And then close the gates!  See to it, knaves,
and lose no time."



CHAPTER II.

THE VIDAME'S THREAT.

Croisette used to tell a story, of the facts of which I have no
remembrance, save as a bad dream.  He would have it that I left my
pallet that night--I had one to myself in the summer, being the eldest,
while he and Marie slept on another in the same room--and came to him
and awoke him, sobbing and shaking and clutching him; and begging him
in a fit of terror not to let me go.  And that so I slept in his arms
until morning.  But as I have said, I do not remember anything of this,
only that I had an ugly dream that night, and that when I awoke I was
lying with him and Marie; so I cannot say whether it really happened.

At any rate, if I had any feeling of the kind it did not last long; on
the contrary--it would be idle to deny it--I was flattered by the
sudden respect, Gil and the servants showed me. What Catherine thought
of the matter I could not tell.  She had her letter and apparently
found it satisfactory.  At any rate we saw nothing of her.  Madame
Claude was busy boiling simples, and tending the messenger's hurts.
And it seemed natural that I should take command.

There could be no doubt--at any rate we had none that the assault on
the courier had taken place at the Vidame's instance.  The only wonder
was that he had not simply cut his throat and taken the letter.  But
looking back now it seems to me that grown men mingled some
childishness with their cruelty in those days--days when the religious
wars had aroused our worst passions.  It was not enough to kill an
enemy.  It pleased people to make--I speak literally--a football of his
head, to throw his heart to the dogs.  And no doubt it had fallen in
with the Vidame's grim humour that the bearer of Pavannes' first love
letter should enter his mistress's presence, bleeding and plaistered
with mud. And that the riff-raff about our own gates should have part
in the insult.

Bezers' wrath would be little abated by the issue of the affair, or the
justice I had done on one of his men.  So we looked well to bolts, and
bars, and windows, although the castle is well-nigh impregnable, the
smooth rock falling twenty feet at least on every side from the base of
the walls.  The gatehouse, Pavannes had shown us, might be blown up
with gunpowder indeed, but we prepared to close the iron grating which
barred the way half-way up the ramp.  This done, even if the enemy
should succeed in forcing an entrance he would only find himself caught
in a trap--in a steep, narrow way exposed to a fire from the top of the
flanking walls, as well as from the front.  We had a couple of
culverins, which the Vicomte had got twenty years before, at the time
of the battle of St. Quentin.  We fixed one of these at the head of the
ramp, and placed the other on the terrace, where by moving it a few
paces forward we could train it on Bezers' house, which thus lay at our
mercy.

Not that we really expected an attack.  But we did not know what to
expect or what to fear.  We had not ten servants, the Vicomte having
taken a score of the sturdiest lackeys and keepers to attend him at
Bayonne.  And we felt immensely responsible.  Our main hope was that
the Vidame would at once go on to Paris, and postpone his vengeance.
So again and again we cast longing glances at the House of the Wolf
hoping that each symptom of bustle heralded his departure.

Consequently it was a shock to me, and a great downfall of hopes, when
Gil with a grave face came to me on the terrace and announced that M.
le Vidame was at the gate, asking to see Mademoiselle.

"It is out of the question that he should see her," the old servant
added, scratching his head in grave perplexity.

"Most certainly.  I will see him instead," I answered stoutly. "Do you
leave Francis and another at the gate, Gil.  Marie, keep within sight,
lad.  And let Croisette stay with me."

These preparations made--and they took up scarcely a moment--I met the
Vidame at the head of the ramp.  "Mademoiselle de Caylus," I said,
bowing, "is, I regret to say, indisposed to-day, Vidame."

"She will not see me?"  he asked, eyeing me very unpleasantly.

"Her indisposition deprives her of the pleasure," I answered with an
effort.  He was certainly a wonderful man, for at sight of him,
three-fourths of my courage, and all my importance, oozed out at the
heels of my boots.

"She will not see me.  Very well," he replied, as if I had not spoken.
And the simple words sounded like a sentence of death. "Then, M. Anne,
I have a crow to pick with you.  What compensation do you propose to
make for the death of my servant? A decent, quiet fellow, whom you
killed yesterday, poor man, because his enthusiasm for the true faith
carried him away a little."

"Whom I killed because he drew a dagger on M. St. Croix de Caylus at
the Vicomte's gate," I answered steadily.  I had thought about this of
course and was ready for it.  "You are aware, M. de Bezers," I
continued, "that the Vicomte has jurisdiction extending to life and
death over all persons within the valley?"

"My household excepted," he rejoined quietly.

"Precisely; while they are within the curtilage of your house," I
retorted.  "However as the punishment was summary, and the man had no
time to confess himself, I am willing to--"

"Well?"

"To pay Father Pierre to say ten masses for his soul."

The way the Vidame received this surprised me.  He broke into
boisterous laughter.  "By our Lady, my friend," he cried with rough
merriment, "but you are a joker!  You are indeed.  Masses? Why the man
was a Protestant!"

And that startled me more than anything which had gone before; more
indeed than I can explain.  For it seemed to prove that this man,
laughing his unholy laugh was not like other men.  He did not pick and
choose his servants for their religion.  He was sure that the Huguenot
would stone his fellow at his bidding; the Catholic cry "Vive Coligny!"
I was so completely taken aback that I found no words to answer him,
and it was Croisette who said smartly, "Then how about his enthusiasm
for the true faith, M. le Vidame?"

"The true faith," he answered--"for my servants is my faith." Then a
thought seemed to strike him.  "What is more."  he continued slowly,
"that it is the true and only faith for all, thousands will learn
before the world is ten days older.  Bear my words in mind, boy!  They
will come back to you.  And now hear me," he went on in his usual tone,
"I am anxious to accommodate a neighbour.  It goes without saying that
I would not think of putting you, M. Anne, to any trouble for the sake
of that rascal of mine.  But my people will expect something.  Let the
plaguy fellow who caused all this disturbance be given up to me, that I
may hang him; and let us cry quits."

"That is impossible!"  I answered coolly.  I had no need to ask what he
meant.  Give up Pavannes' messenger indeed!  Never!

He regarded me--unmoved by my refusal--with a smile under which I
chafed, while I was impotent to resent it.  "Do not build too much on a
single blow, young gentleman," he said, shaking his head waggishly.  "I
had fought a dozen times when I was your age. However, I understand
that you refuse to give me satisfaction?"

"In the mode you mention, certainly," I replied.  "But--"

"Bah!"  he exclaimed with a sneer, "business first and pleasure
afterwards!  Bezers will obtain satisfaction in his own way, I promise
you that!  And at his own time.  And it will not be on unfledged
bantlings like you.  But what is this for?"  And he rudely kicked the
culverin which apparently he had not noticed before, "So!  so!
understand," he continued, casting a sharp glance at one and another of
us.  "You looked to be besieged! Why you, booby, there is the shoot of
your kitchen midden, twenty feet above the roof of old Fretis' store!
And open, I will be sworn!  Do you think that I should have come this
way while there was a ladder in Caylus!  Did you take the wolf for a
sheep?"

With that he turned on his heel, swaggering away in the full enjoyment
of his triumph.  For a triumph it was.  We stood stunned; ashamed to
look one another in the face.  Of course the shoot was open.  We
remembered now that it was, and we were so sorely mortified by his
knowledge and our folly, that I failed in my courtesy, and did not see
him to the gate, as I should have done.  We paid for that later.

"He is the devil in person!"  I exclaimed angrily, shaking my fist at
the House of the Wolf, as I strode up and down impatiently.  "I hate
him worse!"

"So do I!"  said Croisette, mildly.  "But that he hates us is a matter
of more importance.  At any rate we will close the shoot."

"Wait a moment!"  I replied, as after another volley of complaints
directed at our visitor, the lad was moving off to see to it. "What is
going on down there?"

"Upon my word, I believe he is leaving us!"  Croisette rejoined sharply.

For there was a noise of hoofs below us, clattering on the pavement.
Half-a-dozen horsemen were issuing from the House of the Wolf, the ring
of their bridles and the sound of their careless voices coming up to us
through the clear morning air Bezers' valet, whom we knew by sight, was
the last of them.  He had a pair of great saddle-bags before him, and
at sight of these we uttered a glad exclamation.  "He is going!"  I
murmured, hardly able to believe my eyes.  "He is going after all!"

"Wait!"  Croisette answered drily.

But I was right.  We had not to wait long.  He WAS going.  In another
moment he came out himself, riding a strong iron-grey horse:  and we
could see that he had holsters to his saddle.  His steward was running
beside him, to take I suppose his last orders.  A cripple, whom the
bustle had attracted from his usual haunt, the church porch, held up
his hand for alms.  The Vidame as he passed, cut him savagely across
the face with his whip, and cursed him audibly.

"May the devil take him!"  exclaimed Croisette in just rage.  But I
said nothing, remembering that the cripple was a particular pet of
Catherine's.  I thought instead of an occasion, not so very long ago,
when the Vicomte being at home, we had had a great hawking party.
Bezers and Catherine had ridden up the street together, and Catherine
giving the cripple a piece of money, Bezers had flung to him all his
share of the game.  And my heart sank.

Only for a moment, however.  The man was gone; or was going at any
rate.  We stood silent and motionless, all watching, until, after what
seemed a long interval, the little party of seven became visible on the
white road far below us--to the northward, and moving in that
direction.  Still we watched them, muttering a word to one another, now
and again, until presently the riders slackened their pace, and began
to ascend the winding track that led to the hills and Cahors; and to
Paris also, if one went far enough.

Then at length with a loud "Whoop!"  we dashed across the terrace,
Croisette leading, and so through the courtyard to the parlour; where
we arrived breathless.  "He is off!"  Croisette cried shrilly.  "He has
started for Paris!  And bad luck go with him!"  And we all flung up our
caps and shouted.

But no answer, such as we expected, came from the women folk. When we
picked up our caps, and looked at Catherine, feeling rather foolish,
she was staring at us with a white face and great scornful eyes.
"Fools!"  she said.  "Fools!"

And that was all.  But it was enough to take me aback.  I had looked to
see her face lighten at our news; instead it wore an expression I had
never seen on it before.  Catherine, so kind and gentle, calling us
fools!  And without cause!  I did not understand it.  I turned
confusedly to Croisette.  He was looking at her, and I saw that he was
frightened.  As for Madame Claude, she was crying in the corner.  A
presentiment of evil made my heart sink like lead.  What had happened?

"Fools!"  my cousin repeated with exceeding bitterness, her foot
tapping the parquet unceasingly.  "Do you think he would have stooped
to avenge himself on YOU?  On you!  Or that he could hurt me one
hundredth part as much here as--as--"  She broke off stammering.  Her
scorn faltered for an instant.  "Bah!  he is a man!  He knows!"  she
exclaimed superbly, her chin in the air, "but you are boys.  You do not
understand!"

I looked amazedly at this angry woman.  I had a difficulty in
associating her with my cousin.  As for Croisette, he stepped forward
abruptly, and picked up a white object which was lying at her feet.

"Yes, read it!"  she cried, "read it!  Ah!"  and she clenched her
little hand, and in her passion struck the oak table beside her, so
that a stain of blood sprang out on her knuckles.  "Why did you not
kill him?  Why did you not do it when you had the chance? You were
three to one," she hissed.  "You had him in your power! You could have
killed him, and you did not!  Now he will kill me!"

Madame Claude muttered something tearfully; something about Pavannes
and the saints.  I looked over Croisette's shoulder, and read the
letter.  It began abruptly without any term of address, and ran thus,
"I have a mission in Paris, Mademoiselle, which admits of no delay,
your mission, as well as my own--to see Pavannes.  You have won his
heart.  It is yours, and I will bring it you, or his right hand in
token that he has yielded up his claim to yours.  And to this I pledge
myself."

The thing bore no signature.  It was written in some red fluid--blood
perhaps--a mean and sorry trick!  On the outside was scrawled a
direction to Mademoiselle de Caylus.  And the packet was sealed with
the Vidame's crest, a wolf's head.

"The coward!  the miserable coward!"  Croisette cried.  He was the
first to read the meaning of the thing.  And his eyes were full of
tears--tears of rage.

For me I was angry exceedingly.  My veins seemed full of fire, as I
comprehended the mean cruelty which could thus torture a girl.

"Who delivered this?"  I thundered.  "Who gave it to Mademoiselle? How
did it reach her hands?  Speak, some one!"

A maid, whimpering in the background, said that Francis had given it to
her to hand to Mademoiselle.

I ground my teeth together, while Marie, unbidden, left the room to
seek Francis--and a stirrup leather.  The Vidame had brought the note
in his pocket no doubt, rightly expecting that he would not get an
audience of my cousin.  Returning to the gate alone he had seen his
opportunity, and given the note to Francis, probably with a small fee
to secure its transmission.

Croisette and I looked at one another, apprehending all this. "He will
sleep at Cahors to-night," I said sullenly.

The lad shook his head and answered in a low voice, "I am afraid not.
His horses are fresh.  I think he will push on.  He always travels
quickly.  And now you know--"

I nodded, understanding only too well.

Catherine had flung herself into a chair.  Her arms lay nerveless on
the table.  Her face was hidden in them.  But now, overhearing us, or
stung by some fresh thought, she sprang to her feet in anguish.  Her
face twitched, her form seemed to stiffen as she drew herself up like
one in physical pain.  "Oh, I cannot bear it!"  she cried to us in
dreadful tones.  "Oh, will no one do anything?  I will go to him!  I
will tell him I will give him up! I will do whatever he wishes if he
will only spare him!"

Croisette went from the room crying.  It was a dreadful sight for
us--this girl in agony.  And it was impossible to reassure her! Not one
of us doubted the horrible meaning of the note, its covert threat.
Civil wars and religious hatred, and I fancy Italian modes of thought,
had for the time changed our countrymen to beasts.  Far more dreadful
things were done then than this which Bezers threatened--even if he
meant it literally--far more dreadful things were suffered.  But in the
fiendish ingenuity of his vengeance on her, the helpless, loving woman,
I thought Raoul de Bezers stood alone.  Alas!  it fares ill with the
butterfly when the cat has struck it down.  Ill indeed!

Madame Claude rose and put her arms round the girl, dismissing me by a
gesture.  I went out, passing through two or three scared servants, and
made at once for the terrace.  I felt as if I could only breathe there.
I found Marie and St. Croix together, silent, the marks of tears on
their faces.  Our eyes met and they told one tale.

We all spoke at the same time.  "When?"  we said.  But the others
looked to me for an answer.

I was somewhat sobered by that, and paused to consider before I
replied.  "At daybreak to-morrow," I decided presently.  "It is an hour
after noon already.  We want money, and the horses are out.  It will
take an hour to bring them in.  After that we might still reach Cahors
to-night, perhaps; but more haste less speed you know.  At daybreak
to-morrow we will start."

They nodded assent.

It was a great thing we meditated.  No less than to go to Paris--the
unknown city so far beyond the hills--and seek out M. de Pavannes, and
warn him.  It would be a race between the Vidame and ourselves; a race
for the life of Kit's suitor.  Could we reach Paris first, or even
within twenty-four hours of Bezers' arrival, we should in all
probability be in time, and be able to put Pavannes on his guard.  It
had been the first thought of all of us, to take such men as we could
get together and fall upon Bezers wherever we found him, making it our
simple object to kill him.  But the lackeys M. le Vicomte had left with
us, the times being peaceful and the neighbours friendly, were
poor-spirited fellows.  Bezers' handful, on the contrary, were reckless
Swiss riders--like master, like men.  We decided that it would be wiser
simply to warn Pavannes, and then stand by him if necessary.

We might have despatched a messenger.  But our servants--Gil excepted,
and he was too old to bear the journey--were ignorant of Paris.  Nor
could any one of them be trusted with a mission so delicate.  We
thought of Pavannes' courier indeed.  But he was a Rochellois, and a
stranger to the capital.  There was nothing for it but to go ourselves.

Yet we did not determine on this adventure with light hearts, I
remember.  Paris loomed big and awesome in the eyes of all of us. The
glamour of the court rather frightened than allured us.  We felt that
shrinking from contact with the world which a country life engenders,
as well as that dread of seeming unlike other people which is peculiar
to youth.  It was a great plunge, and a dangerous which we meditated.
And we trembled.  If we had known more--especially of the future--we
should have trembled more.

But we were young, and with our fears mingled a delicious excitement.
We were going on an adventure of knight errantry in which we might win
our spurs.  We were going to see the world and play men's parts in it!
to save a friend and make our mistress happy!

We gave our orders.  But we said nothing to Catherine or Madame Claude;
merely bidding Gil tell them after our departure.  We arranged for the
immediate despatch of a message to the Vicomte at Bayonne, and charged
Gil until he should hear from him to keep the gates closed, and look
well to the shoot of the kitchen midden.  Then, when all was ready, we
went to our pallets, but it was with hearts throbbing with excitement
and wakeful eyes.

"Anne!  Anne!"  said Croisette, rising on his elbow and speaking to me
some three hours later, "what do you think the Vidame meant this
morning when he said that about the ten days?"

"What about the ten days?"  I asked peevishly.  He had roused me just
when I was at last falling asleep.

"About the world seeing that his was the true faith--in ten days?"

"I am sure I do not know.  For goodness' sake let us go to sleep," I
replied.  For I had no patience with Croisette, talking such nonsense,
when we had our own business to think about.



CHAPTER III.

THE ROAD TO PARIS.

The sun had not yet risen above the hills when we three with a single
servant behind us drew rein at the end of the valley; and easing our
horses on the ascent, turned in the saddle to take a last look at
Caylus--at the huddled grey town, and the towers above it.  A little
thoughtful we all were, I think.  The times were rough and our errand
was serious.  But youth and early morning are fine dispellers of care;
and once on the uplands we trotted gaily forward, now passing through
wide glades in the sparse oak forest, where the trees all leaned one
way, now over bare, wind-swept downs; or once and again descending into
a chalky bottom, where the stream bubbled through deep beds of fern,
and a lonely farmhouse nestled amid orchards.

Four hours' riding, and we saw below us Cahors, filling the bend of the
river.  We cantered over the Vallandre Bridge, which there crosses the
Lot, and so to my uncle's house of call in the square.  Here we ordered
breakfast, and announced with pride that we were going to Paris.

Our host raised his hands.  "Now there!"  he exclaimed, regret in his
voice.  "And if you had arrived yesterday you could have travelled up
with the Vidame de Bezers!  And you a small party--saving your
lordships' presence--and the roads but so-so!"

"But the Vidame was riding with only half-a-dozen attendants also!"  I
answered, flicking my boot in a careless way.

The landlord shook his head.  "Ah, M. le Vidame knows the world!" he
answered shrewdly.  "He is not to be taken off his guard, not he!  One
of his men whispered me that twenty staunch fellows would join him at
Chateauroux.  They say the wars are over, but"--and the good man,
shrugging his shoulders, cast an expressive glance at some fine
flitches of bacon which were hanging in his chimney. "However, your
lordships know better than I do," he added briskly.  "I am a poor man.
I only wish to live at peace with my neighbours, whether they go to
mass or sermon."

This was a sentiment so common in those days and so heartily echoed by
most men of substance both in town and country, that we did not stay to
assent to it; but having received from the worthy fellow a token which
would insure our obtaining fresh cattle at Limoges, we took to the road
again, refreshed in body, and with some food for thought.

Five-and-twenty attendants were more than even such a man as Bezers,
who had many enemies, travelled with in those days; unless accompanied
by ladies.  That the Vidame had provided such a reinforcement seemed to
point to a wider scheme than the one with which we had credited him.
But we could not guess what his plans were; since he must have ordered
his people before he heard of Catherine's engagement.  Either his
jealousy therefore had put him on the alert earlier, or his threatened
attack on Pavannes was only part of a larger plot.  In either case our
errand seemed more urgent, but scarcely more hopeful.

The varied sights and sounds however of the road--many of them new to
us--kept us from dwelling over much on this.  Our eyes were young, and
whether it was a pretty girl lingering behind a troop of gipsies, or a
pair of strollers from Valencia--JONGLEURS they still called
themselves--singing in the old dialect of Provence, or a Norman
horse-dealer with his string of cattle tied head and tail, or the Puy
de Dome to the eastward over the Auvergne hills, or a tattered old
soldier wounded in the wars--fighting for either side, according as
their lordships inclined--we were pleased with all.

Yet we never forgot our errand.  We never I think rose in the
morning--too often stiff and sore--without thinking "To-day or
to-morrow or the next day--" as the case might be--"we shall make all
right for Kit!"  For Kit!  Perhaps it was the purest enthusiasm we were
ever to feel, the least selfish aim we were ever to pursue.  For Kit!

Meanwhile we met few travellers of rank on the road.  Half the nobility
of France were still in Paris enjoying the festivities which were being
held to mark the royal marriage.  We obtained horses where we needed
them without difficulty.  And though we had heard much of the dangers
of the way, infested as it was said to be by disbanded troopers, we
were not once stopped or annoyed.

But it is not my intention to chronicle all the events of this my first
journey, though I dwell on them with pleasure; or to say what I thought
of the towns, all new and strange to me, through which we passed.
Enough that we went by way of Limoges, Chateauroux and Orleans, and
that at Chateauroux we learned the failure of one hope we had formed.
We had thought that Bezers when joined there by his troopers would not
be able to get relays; and that on this account we might by travelling
post overtake him; and possibly slip by him between that place and
Paris.  But we learned at Chateauroux that his troop had received fresh
orders to go to Orleans and await him there; the result being that he
was able to push forward with relays so far.  He was evidently in hot
haste.  For leaving there with his horses fresh he passed through
Angerville, forty miles short of Paris, at noon, whereas we reached it
on the evening of the same day--the sixth after leaving Caylus.

We rode into the yard of the inn--a large place, seeming larger in the
dusk--so tired that we could scarcely slip from our saddles.  Jean, our
servant, took the four horses, and led them across to the stables, the
poor beasts hanging their heads, and following meekly.  We stood a
moment stamping our feet, and stretching our legs.  The place seemed in
a bustle, the clatter of pans and dishes proceeding from the windows
over the entrance, with a glow of light and the sound of feet hurrying
in the passages.  There were men too, half-a-dozen or so standing at
the doors of the stables, while others leaned from the windows.  One or
two lanthorns just kindled glimmered here and there in the
semi-darkness; and in a corner two smiths were shoeing a horse.

We were turning from all this to go in, when we heard Jean's voice
raised in altercation, and thinking our rustic servant had fallen into
trouble, we walked across to the stables near which he and the horses
were still lingering.  "Well, what is it?"  I said sharply.

"They say that there is no room for the horses," Jean answered
querulously, scratching his head; half sullen, half cowed, a country
servant all over.

"And there is not!"  cried the foremost of the gang about the door,
hastening to confront us in turn.  His tone was insolent, and it needed
but half an eye to see that his fellows were inclined to back him up.
He stuck his arms akimbo and faced us with an impudent smile.  A
lanthorn on the ground beside him throwing an uncertain light on the
group, I saw that they all wore the same badge.

"Come," I said sternly, "the stables are large, and your horses cannot
fill them.  Some room must be found for mine."

"To be sure!  Make way for the king!"  he retorted.  While one jeered
"VIVE LE ROI!"  and the rest laughed.  Not good-humouredly, but with a
touch of spitefulness.

Quarrels between gentlemen's servants were as common then as they are
to-day.  But the masters seldom condescended to interfere. "Let the
fellows fight it out," was the general sentiment.  Here, however, poor
Jean was over-matched, and we had no choice but to see to it ourselves.

"Come, men, have a care that you do not get into trouble," I urged,
restraining Croisette by a touch, for I by no means wished to have a
repetition of the catastrophe which had happened at Caylus.  "These
horses belong to the Vicomte de Caylus.  If your master be a friend of
his, as may very probably be the case, you will run the risk of getting
into trouble."

I thought I heard, as I stopped speaking, a subdued muttering, and
fancied I caught the words, "PAPEGOT!  Down with the Guises!" But the
spokesman's only answer aloud was "Cock-a-doodle-doo!"
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!"  he repeated, flapping his arms in defiance. "Here
is a cock of a fine hackle!"  And so on, and so forth, while he turned
grinning to his companions, looking for their applause.

I was itching to chastise him, and yet hesitating, lest the thing
should have its serious side, when a new actor appeared.  "Shame, you
brutes!"  cried a shrill voice above us in the clouds it seemed.  I
looked up, and saw two girls, coarse and handsome, standing at a window
over the stable, a light between them.  "For shame!  Don't you see that
they are mere children?  Let them be," cried one.

The men laughed louder than ever; and for me, I could not stand by and
be called a child.  "Come here," I said, beckoning to the man in the
doorway.  "Come here, you rascal, and I will give you the thrashing you
deserve for speaking to a gentleman!"

He lounged forward, a heavy fellow, taller than myself and six inches
wider at the shoulders.  My heart failed me a little as I measured him.
But the thing had to be done.  If I was slight, I was wiry as a hound,
and in the excitement had forgotten my fatigue.  I snatched from Marie
a loaded riding-whip he carried, and stepped forward.

"Have a care, little man!"  cried the girl gaily--yet half in pity, I
think.  "Or that fat pig will kill you!"

My antagonist did not join in the laugh this time.  Indeed it struck me
that his eye wandered and that he was not so ready to enter the ring as
his mates were to form it.  But before I could try his mettle, a hand
was laid on my shoulder.  A man appearing from I do not know
where--from the dark fringe of the group, I suppose--pushed me aside,
roughly, but not discourteously.

"Leave this to me!"  he said, coolly stepping before me.  "Do not dirty
your hands with the knave, master.  I am pining for work and the job
will just suit me!  I will fit him for the worms before the nuns above
can say an AVE!"

I looked at the newcomer.  He was a stout fellow; not over tall, nor
over big; swarthy, with prominent features.  The plume of his bonnet
was broken, but he wore it in a rakish fashion; and altogether he
swaggered with so dare-devil an air, clinking his spurs and swinging
out his long sword recklessly, that it was no wonder three or four of
the nearest fellows gave back a foot.

"Come on!"  he cried, boisterously, forming a ring by the simple
process of sweeping his blade from side to side, while he made the
dagger in his left hand flash round his head.  "Who is for the game?
Who will strike a blow for the little Admiral?  Will you come one, two,
three at once; or all together?  Anyway, come on, you--" And he closed
his challenge with a volley of frightful oaths, directed at the group
opposite.

"It is no quarrel of yours," said the big man, sulkily; making no show
of drawing his sword, but rather drawing back himself.

"All quarrels are my quarrels!  and no quarrels are your quarrels. That
is about the truth, I fancy!"  was the smart retort; which our champion
rendered more emphatic by a playful lunge that caused the big bully to
skip again.

There was a loud laugh at this, even among the enemy's backers. "Bah,
the great pig!"  ejaculated the girl above.  "Spit him!" and she spat
down on the whilom Hector--who made no great figure now.

"Shall I bring you a slice of him, my dear?"  asked my rakehelly
friend, looking up and making his sword play round the shrinking
wretch.  "Just a tit-bit, my love?"  he added persuasively.  "A
mouthful of white liver and caper sauce?"

"Not for me, the beast!"  the girl cried, amid the laughter of the yard.

"Not a bit?  If I warrant him tender?  Ladies' meat?"

"Bah!  no!"  and she stolidly spat down again.

"Do you hear?  The lady has no taste for you," the tormentor cried.
"Pig of a Gascon!"  And deftly sheathing his dagger, he seized the big
coward by the ear, and turning him round, gave him a heavy kick which
sent him spinning over a bucket, and down against the wall.  There the
bully remained, swearing and rubbing himself by turns; while the victor
cried boastfully, "Enough of him.  If anyone wants to take up his
quarrel, Blaise Bure is his man.  If not, let us have an end of it.
Let someone find stalls for the gentlemen's horses before they catch a
chill; and have done with it.  As for me," he added, and then he turned
to us and removed his hat with an exaggerated flourish, "I am your
lordship's servant to command."

I thanked him with a heartiness, half-earnest, half-assumed.  His cloak
was ragged, his trunk hose, which had once been fine enough, were
stained, and almost pointless, He swaggered inimitably, and had
led-captain written large upon him.  But he had done us a service, for
Jean had no further trouble about the horses.  And besides one has a
natural liking for a brave man, and this man was brave beyond question.

"You are from Orleans," he said respectfully enough, but as one
asserting a fact, not asking a question.

"Yes," I answered, somewhat astonished, "Did you see us come in?"

"No, but I looked at your boots, gentlemen," he replied.  "White dust,
north; red dust, south.  Do you see?"

"Yes, I see," I said, with admiration.  "You must have been brought up
in a sharp school, M. Bure."

"Sharp masters make sharp scholars," he replied, grinning.  And that
answer I had occasion to remember afterwards.

"You are from Orleans, also?"  I asked, as we prepared to go in.

"Yes, from Orleans too, gentlemen.  But earlier in the day.  With
letters--letters of importance!"  And bestowing something like a wink
of confidence on us, he drew himself up, looked sternly at the
stable-folk, patted himself twice on the chest, and finally twirled his
moustaches, and smirked at the girl above, who was chewing straws.

I thought it likely enough that we might find it hard to get rid of
him.  But this was not so.  After listening with gratification to our
repeated thanks, he bowed with the same grotesque flourish, and marched
off as grave as a Spaniard, humming--

  "Ce petit homme tant joli!
  Qui toujours cause et toujours rit,
  Qui toujours baise sa mignonne,
  Dieu gard' de mal ce petit homme!"

On our going in, the landlord met us politely, but with curiosity, and
a simmering of excitement also in his manner. "From Paris, my lords?"
he asked, rubbing his hands and bowing low.  "Or from the south?"

"From the south," I answered.  "From Orleans, and hungry and tired,
Master Host."

"Ah!"  he replied, disregarding the latter part of my answer, while his
little eyes twinkled with satisfaction.  "Then I dare swear, my lords,
you have not heard the news?"  He halted in the narrow passage, and
lifting the candle he carried, scanned our faces closely, as if he
wished to learn something about us before he spoke.

"News!"  I answered brusquely, being both tired, and as I had told him,
hungry.  "We have heard none, and the best you can give us will be that
our supper is ready to be served."

But even this snub did not check his eagerness to tell his news. "The
Admiral de Coligny," he said, breathlessly, "you have not heard what
has happened to him?"

"To the admiral?  No, what?"  I inquired rapidly.  I was interested at
last.

For a moment let me digress.  The few of my age will remember, and the
many younger will have been told, that at this time the Italian
queen-mother was the ruling power in France.  It was Catharine de'
Medici's first object to maintain her influence over Charles the
Ninth--her son; who, ricketty, weak, and passionate, was already doomed
to an early grave.  Her second, to support the royal power by balancing
the extreme Catholics against the Huguenots.  For the latter purpose
she would coquet first with one party, then with the other.  At the
present moment she had committed herself more deeply than was her wont
to the Huguenots.  Their leaders, the Admiral Gaspard de Coligny, the
King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, were supposed to be high in
favour, while the chiefs of the other party, the Duke of Guise, and the
two Cardinals of his house, the Cardinal of Lorraine and the Cardinal
of Guise, were in disgrace; which, as it seemed, even their friend at
court, the queen's favourite son, Henry of Anjou, was unable to
overcome.

Such was the outward aspect of things in August, 1572, but there were
not wanting rumours that already Coligny, taking advantage of the
footing given him, had gained an influence over the young king, which
threatened Catharine de' Medici herself.  The admiral, therefore, to
whom the Huguenot half of France had long looked as to its leader, was
now the object of the closest interest to all; the Guise faction,
hating him--as the alleged assassin of the Duke of Guise--with an
intensity which probably was not to be found in the affection of his
friends, popular with the latter as he was.

Still, many who were not Huguenots had a regard for him as a great
Frenchman and a gallant soldier.  We--though we were of the old faith,
and the other side--had heard much of him, and much good.  The Vicomte
had spoken of him always as a great man, a man mistaken, but brave,
honest and capable in his error.  Therefore it was that when the
landlord mentioned him, I forgot even my hunger.

"He was shot, my lords, as he passed through the Rue des Fosses,
yesterday," the man declared with bated breath.  "It is not known
whether he will live or die.  Paris is in an uproar, and there are some
who fear the worst."

"But," I said doubtfully, "who has dared to do this?  He had a safe
conduct from the king himself."

Our host did not answer; shrugging his shoulders instead, he opened the
door, and ushered us into the eating-room.

Some preparations for our meal had already been made at one end of the
long board.  At the other was seated a man past middle age; richly but
simply dressed.  His grey hair, cut short about a massive head, and his
grave, resolute face, square-jawed, and deeply-lined, marked him as one
to whom respect was due apart from his clothes.  We bowed to him as we
took our seats.

He acknowledged the salute, fixing us a moment with a penetrating
glance; and then resumed his meal.  I noticed that his sword and belt
were propped against a chair at his elbow, and a dag, apparently
loaded, lay close to his hand by the candlestick.  Two lackeys waited
behind his chair, wearing the badge we had remarked in the inn yard.

We began to talk, speaking in low tones that we might not disturb him.
The attack on Coligny had, if true, its bearing on our own business.
For if a Huguenot so great and famous and enjoying the king's special
favour still went in Paris in danger of his life, what must be the risk
that such an one as Pavannes ran?  We had hoped to find the city quiet.
If instead it should be in a state of turmoil Bezers' chances were so
much the better; and ours--and Kit's, poor Kit's--so much the worse.

Our companion had by this time finished his supper.  But he still sat
at table, and seemed to be regarding us with some curiosity. At length
he spoke.  "Are you going to Paris, young gentlemen?" he asked, his
tone harsh and high-pitched.

We answered in the affirmative.  "To-morrow?"  he questioned.

"Yes," we answered; and expected him to continue the conversation.  But
instead he became silent, gazing abstractedly at the table; and what
with our meal, and our own talk we had almost forgotten him again, when
looking up, I found him at my elbow, holding out in silence a small
piece of paper.

I started his face was so grave.  But seeing that there were
half-a-dozen guests of a meaner sort at another table close by, I
guessed that he merely wished to make a private communication to us;
and hastened to take the paper and read it.  It contained a scrawl of
four words only--

  "Va chasser l'Idole."

No more.  I looked at him puzzled; able to make nothing out of it.  St.
Croix wrinkled his brow over it with the same result. It was no good
handing it to Marie, therefore.

"You do not understand?"  the stranger continued, as he put the scrap
of paper back in his pouch.

"No," I answered, shaking my head.  We had all risen out of respect to
him, and were standing a little group about him.

"Just so; it is all right then," he answered, looking at us as it
seemed to me with grave good-nature.  "It is nothing.  Go your way.
But--I have a son yonder not much younger than you, young gentlemen.
And if you had understood, I should have said to you, 'Do not go!
There are enough sheep for the shearer!'"

He was turning away with this oracular saying when Croisette touched
his sleeve.  "Pray can you tell us if it be true," the lad said
eagerly, "that the Admiral de Coligny was wounded yesterday?"

"It is true," the other answered, turning his grave eyes on his
questioner, while for a moment his stern look failed him, "It is true,
my boy," he added with an air of strange solemnity.  "Whom the Lord
loveth, He chasteneth.  And, God forgive me for saying it, whom He
would destroy, He first maketh mad."

He had gazed with peculiar favour at Croisette's girlish face, I
thought:  Marie and I were dark and ugly by the side of the boy. But he
turned from him now with a queer, excited gesture, thumping his
gold-headed cane on the floor.  He called his servants in a loud,
rasping voice, and left the room in seeming anger, driving them before
him, the one carrying his dag, and the other, two candles.

When I came down early next morning, the first person I met was Blaise
Bure.  He looked rather fiercer and more shabby by daylight than
candlelight.  But he saluted me respectfully; and this, since it was
clear that he did not respect many people, inclined me to regard him
with favour.  It is always so, the more savage the dog, the more highly
we prize its attentions.  I asked him who the Huguenot noble was who
had supped with us.  For a Huguenot we knew he must be.

"The Baron de Rosny," he answered; adding with a sneer, "He is a
careful man!  If they were all like him, with eyes on both sides of his
head and a dag by his candle--well, my lord, there would be one more
king in France--or one less!  But they are a blind lot:  as blind as
bats."  He muttered something farther in which I caught the word
"to-night."  But I did not hear it all; or understand any of it.

"Your lordships are going to Paris?"  he resumed in a different tone.
When I said that we were, he looked at me in a shamefaced way, half
timid, half arrogant.  "I have a small favour to ask of you then," he
said.  "I am going to Paris myself.  I am not afraid of odds, as you
have seen.  But the roads will be in a queer state if there be anything
on foot in the city, and--well, I would rather ride with you gentlemen
than alone."

"You are welcome to join us," I said.  "But we start in half-an-hour.
Do you know Paris well?"

"As well as my sword-hilt," he replied briskly, relieved I thought by
my acquiescence, "And I have known that from my breeching.  If you want
a game at PAUME, or a pretty girl to kiss, I can put you in the way for
the one or the other."

The half rustic shrinking from the great city which I felt, suggested
to me that our swashbuckling friend might help us if he would.  "Do you
know M. de Pavannes?"  I asked impulsively, "Where he lives in Paris, I
mean?"

"M. Louis de Pavannes?"  quoth he.

"Yes."

"I know--" he replied slowly, rubbing his chin and looking at the
ground in thought--"where he had his lodgings in town a while ago,
before--Ah!  I do know!  I remember," he added, slapping his thigh,
"when I was in Paris a fortnight ago I was told that his steward had
taken lodgings for him in the Rue St. Antoine."

"Good!"  I answered overjoyed.  "Then we want to dismount there, if you
can guide us straight to the house."

"I can," he replied simply.  "And you will not be the worse for my
company.  Paris is a queer place when there is trouble to the fore, but
your lordships have got the right man to pilot you through it."

I did not ask him what trouble he meant, but ran indoors to buckle on
my sword, and tell Marie and Croisette of the ally I had secured.  They
were much pleased, as was natural; so that we took the road in
excellent spirits intending to reach the city in the afternoon.  But
Marie's horse cast a shoe, and it was some time before we could find a
smith.  Then at Etampes, where we stopped to lunch, we were kept an
unconscionable time waiting for it.  And so we approached Paris for the
first time at sunset.  A ruddy glow was at the moment warming the
eastern heights, and picking out with flame the twin towers of Notre
Dame, and the one tall tower of St. Jacques la Boucherie.  A dozen
roofs higher than their neighbours shone hotly; and a great bank of
cloud, which lay north and south, and looked like a man's hand
stretched over the city, changed gradually from blood-red to violet,
and from violet to black, as evening fell.

Passing within the gates and across first one bridge and then another,
we were astonished and utterly confused by the noise and hubbub through
which we rode.  Hundreds seemed to be moving this way and that in the
narrow streets.  Women screamed to one another from window to window.
The bells of half-a-dozen churches rang the curfew.  Our country ears
were deafened.  Still our eyes had leisure to take in the tall houses
with their high-pitched roofs, and here and there a tower built into
the wall; the quaint churches, and the groups of townsfolk--sullen
fellows some of them with a fierce gleam in their eyes--who, standing
in the mouths of reeking alleys, watched us go by.

But presently we had to stop.  A crowd had gathered to watch a little
cavalcade of six gentlemen pass across our path.  They were riding two
and two, lounging in their saddles and chattering to one another,
disdainfully unconscious of the people about them, or the remarks they
excited.  Their graceful bearing and the richness of their dress and
equipment surpassed anything I had ever seen.  A dozen pages and
lackeys were attending them on foot, and the sound of their jests and
laughter came to us over the heads of the crowd.

While I was gazing at them, some movement of the throng drove back
Bure's horse against mine.  Bure himself uttered a savage oath;
uncalled for so far as I could see.  But my attention was arrested the
next moment by Croisette, who tapped my arm with his riding whip.
"Look!"  he cried in some excitement, "is not that he?"

I followed the direction of the lad's finger--as well as I could for
the plunging of my horse which Bure's had frightened--and scrutinized
the last pair of the troop.  They were crossing the street in which we
stood, and I had only a side view of them; or rather of the nearer
rider.  He was a singularly handsome man, in age about twenty-two or
twenty-three with long lovelocks falling on his lace collar and cloak
of orange silk.  His face was sweet and kindly and gracious to a
marvel.  But he was a stranger to me.

"I could have sworn," exclaimed Croisette, "that that was Louis
himself--M. de Pavannes!"

"That?"  I answered, as we began to move again, the crowd melting
before us.  "Oh, dear, no!"

"No!  no!  The farther man!"  he explained.

But I had not been able to get a good look at the farther of the two.
We turned in our saddles and peered after him.  His back in the dusk
certainly reminded me of Louis.  Bure, however, who said he knew M. de
Pavannes by sight, laughed at the idea.  "Your friend," he said, "is a
wider man than that!"  And I thought he was right there--but then it
might be the cut of the clothes. "They have been at the Louvre playing
paume, I'll be sworn!"  he went on.  "So the Admiral must be better.
The one next us was M. de Teligny, the Admiral's son-in-law.  And the
other, whom you mean, was the Comte de la Rochefoucault."

We turned as he spoke into a narrow street near the river, and could
see not far from us a mass of dark buildings which Bure told us was the
Louvre--the king's residence.  Out of this street we turned into a
short one; and here Bure drew rein and rapped loudly at some heavy
gates.  It was so dark that when, these being opened, he led the way
into a courtyard, we could see little more than a tall, sharp-gabled
house, projecting over us against a pale sky; and a group of men and
horses in one corner. Bure spoke to one of the men, and begging us to
dismount, said the footman would show us to M. de Pavannes.

The thought that we were at the end of our long journey, and in time to
warn Louis of his danger, made us forget all our exertions, our fatigue
and stiffness.  Gladly throwing the bridles to Jean we ran up the steps
after the servant.  The thing was done.  Hurrah!  the thing was done!

The house--as we passed through a long passage and up some
steps--seemed full of people.  We heard voices and the ring of arms
more than once.  But our guide, without pausing, led us to a small room
lighted by a hanging lamp.  "I will inform M. de Pavannes of your
arrival," he said respectfully, and passed behind a curtain, which
seemed to hide the door of an inner apartment.  As he did so the clink
of glasses and the hum of conversation reached us.

"He has company supping with him," I said nervously.  I tried to flip
some of the dust from my boots with my whip.  I remembered that this
was Paris.

"He will be surprised to see us," quoth Croisette, laughing--a little
shyly, too, I think.  And so we stood waiting.

I began to wonder as minutes passed by--the gay company we had seen
putting it in my mind, I suppose--whether M. de Pavannes, of Paris,
might not turn out to be a very different person from Louis de
Pavannes, of Caylus; whether the king's courtier would be as friendly
as Kit's lover.  And I was still thinking of this without having
settled the point to my satisfaction, when the curtain was thrust aside
again.  A very tall man, wearing a splendid suit of black and silver
and a stiff trencher-like ruff, came quickly in, and stood smiling at
us, a little dog in his arms.  The little dog sat up and snarled:  and
Croisette gasped. It was not our old friend Louis certainly!  It was
not Louis de Pavannes at all.  It was no old friend at all, It was the
Vidame de Bezers!

"Welcome, gentlemen!"  he said, smiling at us--and never had the cast
been so apparent in his eyes.  "Welcome to Paris, M. Anne!"



CHAPTER IV.

ENTRAPPED!

There was a long silence.  We stood glaring at him, and he smiled upon
us--as a cat smiles.  Croisette told me afterwards that he could have
died of mortification--of shame and anger that we had been so
outwitted.  For myself I did not at once grasp the position.  I did not
understand.  I could not disentangle myself in a moment from the belief
in which I had entered the house--that it was Louis de Pavannes' house.
But I seemed vaguely to suspect that Bezers had swept him aside and
taken his place.  My first impulse therefore--obeyed on the
instant--was to stride to the Vidame's side and grasp his arm.  "What
have you done?"  I cried, my voice sounding hoarsely even in my own
ears.  "What have you done with M. de Pavannes?  Answer me!"

He showed just a little more of his sharp white teeth as he looked down
at my face--a flushed and troubled face doubtless. "Nothing--yet," he
replied very mildly.  And he shook me off.

"Then," I retorted, "how do you come here?"

He glanced at Croisette and shrugged his shoulders, as if I had been a
spoiled child.  "M. Anne does not seem to understand," he said with
mock courtesy, "that I have the honour to welcome him to my house the
Hotel Bezers, Rue de Platriere."

"The Hotel Bezers!  Rue de Platriere!"  I cried confusedly.  "But
Blaise Bure told us that this was the Rue St. Antoine!"

"Ah!"  he replied as if slowly enlightened--the hypocrite!  "Ah! I
see!"  and he smiled grimly.  "So you have made the acquaintance of
Blaise Bure, my excellent master of the horse! Worthy Blaise! Indeed,
indeed, now I understand.  And you thought, you whelps," he continued,
and as he spoke his tone changed strangely, and he fixed us suddenly
with angry eyes, "to play a rubber with me!  With me, you imbeciles!
You thought the wolf of Bezers could be hunted down like any hare!
Then listen, and I will tell you the end of it.  You are now in my
house and absolutely at my mercy.  I have two score men within call who
would cut the throats of three babes at the breast, if I bade them!
Ay," he, added, a wicked exultation shining in his eyes, "they would,
and like the job!"

He was going on to say more, but I interrupted him.  The rage I felt,
caused as much by the thought of our folly as by his arrogance, would
let me be silent no longer.  "First, M. de Bezers, first," I broke out
fiercely, my words leaping over one another in my haste, "a word with
you!  Let me tell you what I think of you!  You are a treacherous
hound, Vidame!  A cur!  a beast!  And I spit upon you!  Traitor and
assassin!"  I shouted, "is that not enough?  Will nothing provoke you?
If you call yourself a gentleman, draw!"

He shook his head; he was still smiling, still unmoved.  "I do not do
my own dirty work," he said quietly, "nor stint my footmen of their
sport, boy."

"Very well!"  I retorted.  And with the words I drew my sword, and
sprang as quick as lightning to the curtain by which he had entered.
"Very well, we will kill you first!"  I cried wrathfully, my eye on his
eye, and every savage passion in my breast aroused, "and take our
chance with the lackeys afterwards! Marie!  Croisette!"  I cried
shrilly, "on him, lads!"

But they did not answer!  They did not move or draw.  For the moment
indeed the man was in my power.  My wrist was raised, and I had my
point at his breast, I could have run him through by a single thrust.
And I hated him.  Oh, how I hated him!  But he did not stir.  Had he
spoken, had he moved so much as an eyelid, or drawn back his foot, or
laid his hand on his hilt, I should have killed him there.  But he did
not stir and I could not do it.  My hand dropped.  "Cowards!"  I cried,
glancing bitterly from him to them--they had never failed me before.
"Cowards!"  I muttered, seeming to shrink into myself as I said the
word.  And I flung my sword clattering on the floor.

"That is better!"  he drawled quite unmoved, as if nothing more than
words had passed, as if he had not been in peril at all. "It was what I
was going to ask you to do.  If the other young gentlemen will follow
your example, I shall be obliged.  Thank you.  Thank you."

Croisette, and a minute later Marie, obeyed him to the letter!  I could
not understand it.  I folded my arms and gave up the game in despair,
and but for very shame I could have put my hands to my face and cried.
He stood in the middle under the lamp, a head taller than the tallest
of us; our master.  And we stood round him trapped, beaten, for all the
world like children.  Oh, I could have cried!  This was the end of our
long ride, our aspirations, our knight-errantry!

"Now perhaps you will listen to me," he went on smoothly, "and hear
what I am going to do.  I shall keep you here, young gentlemen, until
you can serve me by carrying to mademoiselle, your cousin, some news of
her betrothed.  Oh, I shall not detain you long," he added with an evil
smile.  "You have arrived in Paris at a fortunate moment.  There is
going to be a--well, there is a little scheme on foot appointed for
to-night--singularly lucky you are!--for removing some objectionable
people, some friends of ours perhaps among them, M. Anne.  That is all.
You will hear shots, cries, perhaps screams.  Take no notice.  You will
be in no danger.  For M. de Pavannes," he continued, his voice sinking,
"I think that by morning I shall be able to give you a--a more
particular account of him to take to Caylus--to Mademoiselle, you
understand."

For a moment the mask was off.  His face took a sombre brightness.  He
moistened his lips with his tongue as though he saw his vengeance
worked out then and there before him, and were gloating over the
picture.  The idea that this was so took such a hold upon me that I
shrank back, shuddering; reading too in Croisette's face the same
thought--and a late repentance.  Nay, the malignity of Bezers' tone,
the savage gleam of joy in his eyes appalled me to such an extent that
I fancied for a moment I saw in him the devil incarnate!

He recovered his composure very quickly, however; and turned carelessly
towards the door.  "If you will follow me," he said, "I will see you
disposed of.  You may have to complain of your lodging--I have other
things to think of to-night than hospitality, But you shall not need to
complain of your supper."

He drew aside the curtain as he spoke, and passed into the next room
before us, not giving a thought apparently to the possibility that we
might strike him from behind.  There certainly was an odd quality
apparent in him at times which seemed to contradict what we knew of him.

The room we entered was rather long than wide, hung with tapestry, and
lighted by silver lamps.  Rich plate, embossed, I afterwards learned,
by Cellini the Florentine--who died that year I remember--and richer
glass from Venice, with a crowd of meaner vessels filled with meats and
drinks covered the table; disordered as by the attacks of a numerous
party.  But save a servant or two by the distant dresser, and an
ecclesiastic at the far end of the table, the room was empty.

The priest rose as we entered, the Vidame saluting him as if they had
not met that day.  "You are welcome M. le Coadjuteur," he said; saying
it coldly, however, I thought.  And the two eyed one another with
little favour; rather as birds of prey about to quarrel over the spoil,
than as host and guest.  Perhaps the Coadjutor's glittering eyes and
great beak-like nose made me think of this.

"Ho!  ho!"  he said, looking piercingly at us--and no doubt we must
have seemed a miserable and dejected crew enough.  "Who are these?  Not
the first-fruits of the night, eh?"

The Vidame looked darkly at him.  "No," he answered brusquely. "They
are not.  I am not particular out of doors, Coadjutor, as you know, but
this is my house, and we are going to supper. Perhaps you do not
comprehend the distinction.  Still it exists--for me," with a sneer.

This was as good as Greek to us.  But I so shrank from the priest's
malignant eyes, which would not quit us, and felt so much disgust
mingled with my anger that when Bezers by a gesture invited me to sit
down, I drew back.  "I will not eat with you," I said sullenly;
speaking out of a kind of dull obstinacy, or perhaps a childish
petulance.

It did not occur to me that this would pierce the Vidame's armour.  Yet
a dull red showed for an instant in his cheek, and he eyed me with a
look, that was not all ferocity, though the veins in his great temples
swelled.  A moment, nevertheless, and he was himself again.  "Armand,"
he said quietly to the servant, "these gentlemen will not sup with me.
Lay for them at the other end."

Men are odd.  The moment he gave way to me I repented of my words.  It
was almost with reluctance that I followed the servant to the lower
part of the table.  More than this, mingled with the hatred I felt for
the Vidame, there was now a strange sentiment towards him--almost of
admiration; that had its birth I think in the moment, when I held his
life in my hand, and he had not flinched.

We ate in silence; even after Croisette by grasping my hand under the
table had begged me not to judge him hastily.  The two at the upper end
talked fast, and from the little that reached us, I judged that the
priest was pressing some course on his host, which the latter declined
to take.

Once Bezers raised his voice.  "I have my own ends to serve!"  he broke
out angrily, adding a fierce oath which the priest did not rebuke, "and
I shall serve them.  But there I stop.  You have your own.  Well, serve
them, but do not talk to me of the cause! The cause?  To hell with the
cause!  I have my cause, and you have yours, and my lord of Guise has
his!  And you will not make me believe that there is any other!"

"The king's?"  suggested the priest, smiling sourly.

"Say rather the Italian woman's!"  the Vidame answered
recklessly--meaning the queen-mother, Catharine de' Medici, I supposed.

"Well, then, the cause of the Church?"  the priest persisted.

"Bah!  The Church?  It is you, my friend!"  Bezers rejoined, rudely
tapping his companion--at that moment in the act of crossing
himself--on the chest.  "The Church?"  he continued; "no, no, my
friend.  I will tell you what you are doing.  You want me to help you
to get rid of your branch, and you offer in return to aid me with
mine--and then, say you, there will be no stick left to beat either of
us.  But you may understand once for all"--and the Vidame struck his
hand heavily down among the glasses--"that I will have no interference
with my work, master Clerk!  None!  Do you hear?  And as for yours, it
is no business of mine.  That is plain speaking, is it not?"

The priest's hand shook as he raised a full glass to his lips, but he
made no rejoinder, and the Vidame, seeing we had finished, rose.
"Armand!"  he cried, his face still dark, "take these gentlemen to
their chamber.  You understand?"

We stiffly acknowledged his salute--the priest taking no notice of
us--and followed the servant from the room; going along a corridor and
up a steep flight of stairs, and seeing enough by the way to be sure
that resistance was hopeless.  Doors opened silently as we passed, and
grim fellows, in corslets and padded coats, peered out.  The clank of
arms and murmur of voices sounded continuously about us; and as we
passed a window the jingle of bits, and the hollow clang of a restless
hoof on the flags below, told us that the great house was for the time
a fortress.  I wondered much.  For this was Paris, a city with gates
and guards; the night a short August night.  Yet the loneliest manor in
Quercy could scarcely have bristled with more pikes and musquetoons, on
a winter's night and in time of war.

No doubt these signs impressed us all; and Croisette not least. For
suddenly I heard him stop, as he followed us up the narrow staircase,
and begin without warning to stumble down again as fast as he could.  I
did not know what he was about; but muttering something to Marie, I
followed the lad to see.  At the foot of the flight of stairs I looked
back, Marie and the servant were standing in suspense, where I had left
them.  I heard the latter bid us angrily to return.

But by this time Croisette was at the end of the corridor; and
reassuring the fellow by a gesture I hurried on, until brought to a
standstill by a man opening a door in my face.  He had heard our
returning footsteps, and eyed me suspiciously; but gave way after a
moment with a grunt of doubt I hastened on, reaching the door of the
room in which we had supped in time to see something which filled me
with grim astonishment; so much so that I stood rooted where I was, too
proud at any rate to interfere.

Bezers was standing, the leering priest at his elbow.  And Croisette
was stooping forward, his hands stretched out in an attitude of
supplication.

"Nay, but M. le Vidame," the lad cried, as I stood, the door in my
hand, "it were better to stab her at once than break her heart!  Have
pity on her!  If you kill him, you kill her!"

The Vidame was silent, seeming to glower on the boy.  The priest
sneered.  "Hearts are soon mended--especially women's," he said.

"But not Kit's!"  Croisette said passionately--otherwise ignoring him.
"Not Kit's!  You do not know her, Vidame!  Indeed you do not!"

The remark was ill-timed.  I saw a spasm of anger distort Bezers' face.
"Get up, boy!"  he snarled, "I wrote to Mademoiselle what I would do,
and that I shall do!  A Bezers keeps his word.  By the God above us--if
there be a God, and in the devil's name I doubt it to-night!--I shall
keep mine!  Go!"

His great face was full of rage.  He looked over Croisette's head as he
spoke, as if appealing to the Great Registrar of his vow, in the very
moment in which he all but denied Him.  I turned and stole back the way
I had come; and heard Croisette follow.

That little scene completed my misery.  After that I seemed to take no
heed of anything or anybody until I was aroused by the grating of our
gaoler's key in the lock, and became aware that he was gone, and that
we were alone in a small room under the tiles. He had left the candle
on the floor, and we three stood round it. Save for the long shadows we
cast on the walls and two pallets hastily thrown down in one corner,
the place was empty.  I did not look much at it, and I would not look
at the others.  I flung myself on one of the pallets and turned my face
to the wall, despairing.  I thought bitterly of the failure we had made
of it, and of the Vidame's triumph.  I cursed St. Croix especially for
that last touch of humiliation he had set to it.  Then, forgetting
myself as my anger abated, I thought of Kit so far away at Caylus--of
Kit's pale, gentle face, and her sorrow.  And little by little I
forgave Croisette.  After all he had not begged for us--he had not
stooped for our sakes, but for hers.

I do not know how long I lay at see-saw between these two moods. Or
whether during that time the others talked or were silent, moved about
the room or lay still.  But it was Croisette's hand on my shoulder,
touching me with a quivering eagerness that instantly communicated
itself to my limbs, which recalled me to the room and its shadows.
"Anne!"  he cried.  "Anne!  Are you awake?"

"What is it?"  I said, sitting up and looking at him.

"Marie," he began, "has--"

But there was no need for him to finish.  I saw that Marie was standing
at the far side of the room by the unglazed window; which, being in a
sloping part of the roof, inclined slightly also.  He had raised the
shutter which closed it, and on his tip-toes--for the sill was almost
his own height from the floor--was peering out.  I looked sharply at
Croisette.  "Is there a gutter outside?"  I whispered, beginning to
tingle all over as the thought of escape for the first time occurred to
me.

"No," he answered in the same tone.  "But Marie says he can see a beam
below, which he thinks we can reach."

I sprang up, promptly displaced Marie, and looked out.  When my eyes
grew accustomed to the gloom I discerned a dark chaos of roofs and
gables stretching as far as I could see before me. Nearer, immediately
under the window, yawned a chasm--a narrow street.  Beyond this was a
house rather lower than that in which we were, the top of its roof not
quite reaching the level of my eyes.

"I see no beam," I said.

"Look below!"  quoth Marie, stolidly,

I did so, and then saw that fifteen or sixteen feet below our window
there was a narrow beam which ran from our house to the opposite
one--for the support of both, as is common in towns.  In the shadow
near the far end of this--it was so directly under our window that I
could only see the other end of it--I made out a casement, faintly
illuminated from within.

I shook my head.

"We cannot get down to it," I said, measuring the distance to the beam
and the depth below it, and shivering.

"Marie says we can, with a short rope," Croisette replied.  His eyes
were glistening with excitement.

"But we have no rope!"  I retorted.  I was dull--as usual.  Marie made
no answer.  Surely he was the most stolid and silent of brothers.  I
turned to him.  He was taking off his waistcoat and neckerchief.

"Good!"  I cried.  I began to see now.  Off came our scarves and
kerchiefs also, and fortunately they were of home make, long and
strong.  And Marie had a hank of four-ply yarn in his pocket as it
turned out, and I had some stout new garters, and two or three yards of
thin cord, which I had brought to mend the girths, if need should
arise.  In five minutes we had fastened them cunningly together.

"I am the lightest," said Croisette.

"But Marie has the steadiest head," I objected.  We had learned that
long ago--that Marie could walk the coping-stones of the battlements
with as little concern as we paced a plank set on the ground.

"True," Croisette had to admit.  "But he must come last, because
whoever does so will have to let himself down."

I had not thought of that, and I nodded.  It seemed that the lead was
passing out of my hands and I might resign myself.  Still one thing I
would have.  As Marie was to come last, I would go first. My weight
would best test the rope.  And accordingly it was so decided.

There was no time to be lost.  At any moment we might be interrupted.
So the plan was no sooner conceived than carried out.  The rope was
made fast to my left wrist.  Then I mounted on Marie's shoulders, and
climbed--not without quavering--through the window, taking as little
time over it as possible, for a bell was already proclaiming midnight.

All this I had done on the spur of the moment.  But outside, hanging by
my hands in the darkness, the strokes of the great bell in my ears, I
had a moment in which to think.  The sense of the vibrating depth below
me, the airiness, the space and gloom around, frightened me.  "Are you
ready?"  muttered Marie, perhaps with a little impatience.  He had not
a scrap of imagination, had Marie.

"No!  wait a minute!"  I blurted out, clinging to the sill, and taking
a last look at the bare room, and the two dark figures between me and
the light.  "No!"  I added, hurriedly. "Croisette--boys, I called you
cowards just now.  I take it back! I did not mean it!  That is all!"  I
gasped.  "Let go!"

A warm touch on my hand.  Something like a sob.

The next moment I felt myself sliding down the face of the house, down
into the depth.  The light shot up.  My head turned giddily. I clung,
oh, how I clung to that rope!  Half way down the thought struck me that
in case of accident those above might not be strong enough to pull me
up again.  But it was too late to think of that, and in another second
my feet touched the beam.  I breathed again.  Softly, very gingerly, I
made good my footing on the slender bridge, and, disengaging the rope,
let it go.  Then, not without another qualm, I sat down astride of the
beam, and whistled in token of success.  Success so far!

It was a strange position, and I have often dreamed of it since. In the
darkness about me Paris lay to all seeming asleep.  A veil, and not the
veil of night only, was stretched between it and me; between me, a mere
lad, and the strange secrets of a great city; stranger, grimmer, more
deadly that night than ever before or since.  How many men were
watching under those dimly-seen roofs, with arms in their hands?  How
many sat with murder at heart?  How many were waking, who at dawn would
sleep for ever, or sleeping who would wake only at the knife's edge?
These things I could not know, any more than I could picture how many
boon-companions were parting at that instant, just risen from the dice,
one to go blindly--the other watching him--to his death?  I could not
imagine, thank Heaven for it, these secrets, or a hundredth part of the
treachery and cruelty and greed that lurked at my feet, ready to burst
all bounds at a pistol-shot.  It had no significance for me that the
past day was the 23rd of August, or that the morrow was St.
Bartholomew's feast!

No.  Yet mingled with the jubilation which the possibility of triumph
over our enemy raised in my breast, there was certainly a foreboding.
The Vidame's hints, no less than his open boasts, had pointed to
something to happen before morning--something wider than the mere
murder of a single man.  The warning also which the Baron de Rosny had
given us at the inn occurred to me with new meaning.  And I could not
shake the feeling off.  I fancied, as I sat in the darkness astride of
my beam, that I could see, closing the narrow vista of the street, the
heavy mass of the Louvre; and that the murmur of voices and the tramp
of men assembling came from its courts, with now and again the stealthy
challenge of a sentry, the restrained voice of an officer. Scarcely a
wayfarer passed beneath me:  so few, indeed, that I had no fear of
being detected from below.  And yet unless I was mistaken, a furtive
step, a subdued whisper were borne to me on every breeze, from every
quarter.  And the night was full of phantoms.

Perhaps all this was mere nervousness, the outcome of my position.  At
any rate I felt no more of it when Croisette joined me.  We had our
daggers, and that gave me some comfort.  If we could once gain entrance
to the house opposite, we had only to beg, or in the last resort force
our way downstairs and out, and then to hasten with what speed we might
to Pavannes' dwelling. Clearly it was a question of time only now;
whether Bezers' band or we should first reach it.  And struck by this I
whispered Marie to be quick.  He seemed to be long in coming.

He scrambled down hand over hand at last, and then I saw that he had
not lingered above for nothing.  He had contrived after getting out of
the window to let down the shutter.  And more he had at some risk
lengthened our rope, and made a double line of it, so that it ran round
a hinge of the shutter; and when he stood beside us, he took it by one
end and disengaged it.  Good, clever Marie!

"Bravo!"  I said softly, clapping him on the back.  "Now they will not
know which way the birds have flown!"

So there we all were, one of us, I confess, trembling.  We slid easily
enough along the beam to the opposite house.  But once there in a row
one behind the other with our faces to the wall, and the night air
blowing slantwise--well I am nervous on a height and I gasped.  The
window was a good six feet above the beam, The casement--it was
unglazed--was open, veiled by a thin curtain, and alas!  protected by
three horizontal bars--stout bars they looked.

Yet we were bound to get up, and to get in; and I was preparing to rise
to my feet on the giddy bridge as gingerly as I could, when Marie
crawled quickly over us, and swung himself up to the narrow sill, much
as I should mount a horse on the level.  He held out his foot to me,
and making an effort I reached the same dizzy perch.  Croisette for the
time remained below.

A narrow window-ledge sixty feet above the pavement, and three bars to
cling to!  I cowered to my holdfasts, envying even Croisette.  My legs
dangled airily, and the black chasm of the street seemed to yawn for
me.  For a moment I turned sick.  I recovered from that to feel
desperate.  I remembered that go forward we must, bars or no bars.  We
could not regain our old prison if we would.

It was equally clear that we could not go forward if the inmates should
object.  On that narrow perch even Marie was helpless. The bars of the
window were close together.  A woman, a child, could disengage our
hands, and then--I turned sick again.  I thought of the cruel stones.
I glued my face to the bars, and pushing aside a corner of the curtain,
looked in.

There was only one person in the room--a woman, who was moving about
fully dressed, late as it was.  The room was a mere attic, the
counterpart of that we had left.  A box-bed with a canopy roughly
nailed over it stood in a corner.  A couple of chairs were by the
hearth, and all seemed to speak of poverty and bareness.  Yet the woman
whom we saw was richly dressed, though her silks and velvets were
disordered.  I saw a jewel gleam in her hair, and others on her hands.
When she turned her face towards us--a wild, beautiful face, perplexed
and tear-stained--I knew her instantly for a gentlewoman, and when she
walked hastily to the door, and laid her hand upon it, and seemed to
listen--when she shook the latch and dropped her hands in despair and
went back to the hearth, I made another discovery I knew at once,
seeing her there, that we were likely but to change one prison for
another.  Was every house in Paris then a dungeon?  And did each roof
cover its tragedy?

"Madame!"  I said, speaking softly, to attract her attention. "Madame!"

She started violently, not knowing whence the sound came, and looked
round, at the door first.  Then she moved towards the window, and with
an affrighted gesture drew the curtain rapidly aside.

Our eyes met.  What if she screamed and aroused the house?  What,
indeed?  "Madame," I said again, speaking hurriedly, and striving to
reassure her by the softness of my voice, "we implore your help!
Unless you assist us we are lost."

"You!  Who are you?"  she cried, glaring at us wildly, her hand to her
head.  And then she murmured to herself, "Mon Dieu!  what will become
of me?"

"We have been imprisoned in the house opposite," I hastened to explain,
disjointedly I am afraid.  "And we have escaped.  We cannot get back if
we would.  Unless you let us enter your room and give us shelter--"

"We shall be dashed to pieces on the pavement," supplied Marie, with
perfect calmness--nay, with apparent enjoyment.

"Let you in here?"  she answered, starting back in new terror; "it is
impossible."

She reminded me of our cousin, being, like her pale and dark-haired.
She wore her hair in a coronet, disordered now.  But though she was
still beautiful, she was older than Kit, and lacked her pliant grace.
I saw all this, and judging her nature, I spoke out of my despair.
"Madame," I said piteously, "we are only boys.  Croisette!  Come up!"
Squeezing myself still more tightly into my corner of the ledge, I made
room for him between us.  "See, Madame," I cried, craftily, "will you
not have pity on three boys?"

St. Crois's boyish face and fair hair arrested her attention, as I had
expected.  Her expression grew softer, and she murmured, "Poor boy!"

I caught at the opportunity.  "We do but seek a passage through your
room," I said fervently.  Good heavens, what had we not at stake!  What
if she should remain obdurate?  "We are in trouble--in despair," I
panted.  "So, I believe, are you.  We will help you if you will first
save us.  We are boys, but we can fight for you."

"Whom am I to trust?"  she exclaimed, with a shudder.  "But heaven
forbid," she continued, her eyes on Croisette's face, "that, wanting
help, I should refuse to give it.  Come in, if you will."

I poured out my thanks, and had forced my head between the bars--at
imminent risk of its remaining there--before the words were well out of
her mouth.  But to enter was no easy task after all. Croisette did,
indeed, squeeze through at last, and then by force pulled first one and
then the other of us after him.  But only necessity and that chasm
behind could have nerved us, I think, to go through a process so
painful.  When I stood, at length on the floor, I seemed to be one
great abrasion from head to foot.  And before a lady, too!

But what a joy I felt, nevertheless.  A fig for Bezers now.  He had
called us boys; and we were boys.  But he should yet find that we could
thwart him.  It could be scarcely half-an-hour after midnight; we might
still be in time.  I stretched myself and trod the level door
jubilantly, and then noticed, while doing so, that our hostess had
retreated to the door and was eyeing us timidly--half-scared.

I advanced to her with my lowest bow--sadly missing my sword. "Madame,"
I said, "I am M. Anne de Caylus, and these are my brothers.  And we are
at your service."

"And I," she replied, smiling faintly--I do not know why--"am Madame de
Pavannes, I gratefully accept your offers of service."

"De Pavannes?"  I exclaimed, amazed and overjoyed.  Madame de Pavannes!
Why, she must be Louis' kinswoman!  No doubt she could tell us where he
was lodged, and so rid our task of half its difficulty.  Could anything
have fallen out more happily?  "You know then M. Louis de Pavannes?"  I
continued eagerly.

"Certainly," she answered, smiling with a rare shy sweetness this time.
"Very well indeed.  He is my husband."



CHAPTER V.

A PRIEST AND A WOMAN.

"He is my husband!"

The statement was made in the purest innocence; yet never, as may well
be imagined, did words fall with more stunning force.  Not one of us
answered or, I believe, moved so much as a limb or an eyelid.  We only
stared, wanting time to take in the astonishing meaning of the words,
and then more time to think what they meant to us in particular.

Louis de Pavannes' wife!  Louis de Pavannes married!  If the statement
were true--and we could not doubt, looking in her face, that at least
she thought she was telling the truth--it meant that we had been fooled
indeed!  That we had had this journey for nothing, and run this risk
for a villain.  It meant that the Louis de Pavannes who had won our
boyish admiration was the meanest, the vilest of court-gallants.  That
Mademoiselle de Caylus had been his sport and plaything.  And that we
in trying to be beforehand with Bezers had been striving to save a
scoundrel from his due.  It meant all that, as soon as we grasped it in
the least.

"Madame," said Croisette gravely, after a pause so prolonged that her
smile faded pitifully from her face, scared by our strange looks.
"Your husband has been some time away from you?  He only returned, I
think, a week or two ago?"

"That is so," she answered, naively, and our last hope vanished. "But
what of that?  He was back with me again, and only yesterday--only
yesterday!"  she continued, clasping her hands, "we were so happy."

"And now, madame?"

She looked at me, not comprehending.

"I mean," I hastened to explain, "we do not understand how you come to
be here.  And a prisoner."  I was really thinking that her story might
throw some light upon ours.

"I do not know, myself," she said.  "Yesterday, in the afternoon, I
paid a visit to the Abbess of the Ursulines."

"Pardon me," Croisette interposed quickly, "but are you not of the new
faith?  A Huguenot?"

"Oh, yes," she answered eagerly.  "But the Abbess is a very dear friend
of mine, and no bigot.  Oh, nothing of that kind, I assure you.  When I
am in Paris I visit her once a week.  Yesterday, when I left her, she
begged me to call here and deliver a message."

"Then," I said, "you know this house?"

"Very well, indeed," she replied.  "It is the sign of the 'Hand and
Glove,' one door out of the Rue Platriere.  I have been in Master
Mirepoix's shop more than once before.  I came here yesterday to
deliver the message, leaving my maid in the street, and I was asked to
come up stairs, and still up until I reached this room.  Asked to wait
a moment, I began to think it strange that I should be brought to so
wretched a place, when I had merely a message for Mirepoix's ear about
some gauntlets.  I tried the door; I found it locked.  Then I was
terrified, and made a noise."

We all nodded.  We were busy building up theories--or it might be one
and the same theory--to explain this.  "Yes," I said, eagerly.

"Mirepoix came to me then.  'What does this mean?' I demanded. He
looked ashamed of himself, but he barred my way.  'Only this,' he said
at last, 'that your ladyship must remain here a few hours--two days at
most.  No harm whatever is intended to you. My wife will wait upon you,
and when you leave us, all shall be explained.' He would say no more,
and it was in vain I asked him if he did not take me for some one else;
if he thought I was mad. To all he answered, No.  And when I dared him
to detain me he threatened force.  Then I succumbed.  I have been here
since, suspecting I know not what, but fearing everything."

"That is ended, madame," I answered, my hand on my breast, my soul in
arms for her.  Here, unless I was mistaken, was one more unhappy and
more deeply wronged even than Kit; one too who owed her misery to the
same villain.  "Were there nine glovers on the stairs," I declared
roundly, "we would take you out and take you home!  Where are your
husband's apartments?"

"In the Rue de Saint Merri, close to the church.  We have a house
there."

"M. de Pavannes," I suggested cunningly, "is doubtless distracted by
your disappearance."

"Oh, surely," she answered with earnest simplicity, while the tears
sprang to her eyes.  Her innocence--she had not the germ of a
suspicion--made me grind my teeth with wrath.  Oh, the base wretch!
The miserable rascal!  What did the women see, I wondered--what had we
all seen in this man, this Pavannes, that won for him our hearts, when
he had only a stone to give in return?

I drew Croisette and Marie aside, apparently to consider how we might
force the door.  "What is the meaning of this?"  I said softly,
glancing at the unfortunate lady.  "What do you think, Croisette?"

I knew well what the answer would be.

"Think!"  he cried with fiery impatience.  "What can any one think
except that that villain Pavannes has himself planned his wife's
abduction?  Of course it is so!  His wife out of the way he is free to
follow up his intrigues at Caylus.  He may then marry Kit or--Curse
him!"

"No," I said sternly, "cursing is no good.  We must do something more.
And yet--we have promised Kit, you see, that we would save him--we must
keep our word.  We must save him from Bezers at least."

Marie groaned.

But Croisette took up the thought with ardour.  "From Bezers?" he
cried, his face aglow.  "Ay, true!  So we must!  But then we will draw
lots, who shall fight him and kill him."

I extinguished him by a look.  "We shall fight him in turn," I said,
"until one of us kill him.  There you are right.  But your turn comes
last.  Lots indeed!  We have no need of lots to learn which is the
eldest."

I was turning from him--having very properly crushed him--to look for
something which we could use to force the door, when he held up his
hand to arrest my attention.  We listened, looking at one another.
Through the window came unmistakeable sounds of voices. "They have
discovered our flight," I said, my heart sinking.

Luckily we had had the forethought to draw the curtain across the
casement.  Bezers' people could therefore, from their window, see no
more than ours, dimly lighted and indistinct.  Yet they would no doubt
guess the way we had escaped, and hasten to cut off our retreat below.
For a moment I looked at the door of our room, half-minded to attack
it, and fight our way out, taking the chance of reaching the street
before Bezers' folk should have recovered from their surprise and gone
down.  But then I looked at Madame.  How could we ensure her safety in
the struggle? While I hesitated the choice was taken from us.  We heard
voices in the house below, and heavy feet on the stairs.

We were between two fires.  I glanced irresolutely round the bare
garret, with its sloping roof, searching for a better weapon.  I had
only my dagger.  But in vain.  I saw nothing that would serve.  "What
will you do?"  Madame de Pavannes murmured, standing pale and trembling
by the hearth, and looking from one to another.  Croisette plucked my
sleeve before I could answer, and pointed to the box-bed with its
scanty curtains.  "If they see us in the room," he urged softly, "while
they are half in and half out, they will give the alarm.  Let us hide
ourselves yonder. When they are inside--you understand?"

He laid his hand on his dagger.  The muscles of the lad's face grew
tense.  I did understand him.  "Madame," I said quickly, "you will not
betray us?"

She shook her head.  The colour returned to her cheek, and the
brightness to her eyes.  She was a true woman.  The sense that she was
protecting others deprived her of fear for herself.

The footsteps were on the topmost stair now, and a key was thrust with
a rasping sound into the lock.  But before it could be turned--it
fortunately fitted ill--we three had jumped on the bed and were
crouching in a row at the head of it, where the curtains of the alcove
concealed, and only just concealed us, from any one standing at the end
of the room near the door.

I was the outermost, and through a chink could see what passed. One,
two, three people came in, and the door was closed behind them.  Three
people, and one of them a woman!  My heart--which had been in my
mouth--returned to its place, for the Vidame was not one.  I breathed
freely; only I dared not communicate my relief to the others, lest my
voice should be heard.  The first to come in was the woman closely
cloaked and hooded.  Madame de Pavannes cast on her a single doubtful
glance, and then to my astonishment threw herself into her arms,
mingling her sobs with little joyous cries of "Oh, Diane!  oh, Diane!"

"My poor little one!"  the newcomer exclaimed, soothing her with tender
touches on hair and shoulder.  "You are safe now.  Quite safe!"

"You have come to take me away?"

"Of course we have!"  Diane answered cheerfully, still caressing her.
"We have come to take you to your husband.  He has been searching for
you everywhere.  He is distracted with grief, little one."

"Poor Louis!"  ejaculated the wife.

"Poor Louis, indeed!"  the rescuer answered.  "But you will see him
soon.  We only learned at midnight where you were.  You have to thank
M. le Coadjuteur here for that.  He brought me the news, and at once
escorted me here to fetch you."

"And to restore one sister to another," said the priest silkily, as he
advanced a step.  He was the very same priest whom I had seen two hours
before with Bezers, and had so greatly disliked! I hated his pale face
as much now as I had then.  Even the errand of good on which he had
come could not blind me to his thin-lipped mouth, to his mock humility
and crafty eyes.  "I have had no task so pleasant for many days," added
he, with every appearance of a desire to propitiate.

But, seemingly, Madame de Pavannes had something of the same feeling
towards him which I had myself; for she started at the sound of his
voice, and disengaging herself from her sister's arms--it seemed it was
her sister--shrank back from the pair. She bowed indeed in
acknowledgment of his words.  But there was little gratitude in the
movement, and less warmth.  I saw the sister's face--a brilliantly
beautiful face it was--brighter eyes and lips and more lovely auburn
hair I have never seen--even Kit would have been plain and dowdy beside
her--I saw it harden strangely.  A moment before, the two had been in
one another's arms.  Now they stood apart, somehow chilled and
disillusionised. The shadow of the priest had fallen upon them--had
come between them.

At this crisis the fourth person present asserted himself. Hitherto he
had stood silent just within the door:  a plain man, plainly dressed,
somewhat over sixty and grey-haired.  He looked disconcerted and
embarrassed, and I took him for Mirepoix--rightly as it turned out.

"I am sure," he now exclaimed, his voice trembling with anxiety, or it
might be with fear, "your ladyship will regret leaving here!  You will
indeed!  No harm would have happened to you. Madame d'O does not know
what she is doing, or she would not take you away.  She does not know
what she is doing!"  he repeated earnestly.

"Madame d'O!"  cried the beautiful Diane, her brown eyes darting fire
at the unlucky culprit, her voice full of angry disdain. "How dare
you--such as you--mention my name?  Wretch!"

She flung the last word at him, and the priest took it up.  "Ay,
wretch!  Wretched man indeed!"  he repeated slowly, stretching out his
long thin hand and laying it like the claw of some bird of prey on the
tradesman's shoulder, which flinched, I saw, under the touch.  "How
dare you--such as you--meddle with matters of the nobility?  Matters
that do not concern you?  Trouble!  I see trouble hanging over this
house, Mirepoix!  Much trouble!"

The miserable fellow trembled visibly under the covert threat. His face
grew pale.  His lips quivered.  He seemed fascinated by the priest's
gaze.  "I am a faithful son of the church," he muttered; but his voice
shook so that the words were scarcely audible.  "I am known to be such!
None better known in Paris, M. le Coadjuteur."

"Men are known by their works!"  the priest retorted.  "Now, now," he
continued, abruptly raising his voice, and lifting his hand in a kind
of exaltation, real or feigned, "is the appointed time! And now is the
day of salvation!  and woe, Mirepoix, woe! woe!  to the backslider, and
to him that putteth his hand to the plough and looketh back to-night!"

The layman cowered and shrank before his fierce denunciation; while
Madame de Pavannes gazed from one to the other as if her dislike for
the priest were so great that seeing the two thus quarrelling, she
almost forgave Mirepoix his offence.  "Mirepoix said he could explain,"
she murmured irresolutely.

The Coadjutor fixed his baleful eyes on him.  "Mirepoix," he said
grimly, "can explain nothing!  Nothing!  I dare him to explain!"

And certainly Mirepoix thus challenged was silent.  "Come," the priest
continued peremptorily, turning to the lady who had entered with him,
"your sister must leave with us at once.  We have no time to lose."

"But what what does it mean!"  Madame de Pavannes said, as though she
hesitated even now.  "Is there danger still?"

"Danger!"  the priest exclaimed, his form seeming to swell, and the
exaltation I had before read in his voice and manner again asserting
itself.  "I put myself at your service, Madame, and danger disappears!
I am as God to-night with powers of life and death!  You do not
understand me?  Presently you shall.  But you are ready.  We will go
then.  Out of the way, fellow!"  he thundered, advancing upon the door.

But Mirepoix, who had placed himself with his back to it, to my
astonishment did not give way.  His full bourgeois face was pale; yet
peeping through my chink, I read in it a desperate resolution.  And
oddly--very oddly, because I knew that, in keeping Madame de Pavannes a
prisoner, he must be in the wrong--I sympathised with him.  Low-bred
trader, tool of Pavannes though he was, I sympathised with him, when he
said firmly:

"She shall not go!"

"I say she shall!"  the priest shrieked, losing all control over
himself.  "Fool!  Madman!  You know not what you do!"  As the words
passed his lips, he made an adroit forward movement, surprised the
other, clutched him by the arms, and with a strength I should never
have thought lay in his meagre frame, flung him some paces into the
room.  "Fool!"  he hissed, shaking his crooked fingers at him in
malignant triumph.  "There is no man in Paris, do you hear--or woman
either--shall thwart me to-night!"

"Is that so?  Indeed?"

The words, and the cold, cynical voice, were not those of Mirepoix;
they came from behind.  The priest wheeled round, as if he had been
stabbed in the back.  I clutched Croisette, and arrested the cramped
limb I was moving under cover of the noise. The speaker was Bezers!  He
stood in the open door-way, his great form filling it from post to
post, the old gibing smile on his face.  We had been so taken up,
actors and audience alike, with the altercation, that no one had heard
him ascend the stairs.  He still wore the black and silver suit, but it
was half hidden now under a dark riding cloak which just disclosed the
glitter of his weapons.  He was booted and spurred and gloved as for a
journey.

"Is that so?"  he repeated mockingly, as his gaze rested in turn on
each of the four, and then travelled sharply round the room. "So you
will not be thwarted by any man in Paris, to-night, eh? Have you
considered, my dear Coadjutor, what a large number of people there are
in Paris?  It would amuse me very greatly now--and I'm sure it would
the ladies too, who must pardon my abrupt entrance--to see you put to
the test; pitted against--shall we say the Duke of Anjou?  Or M. de
Guise, our great man?  Or the Admiral?  Say the Admiral foot to foot?"

Rage and fear--rage at the intrusion, fear of the intruder--struggled
in the priest's face.  "How do you come here, and what do you want?"
he inquired hoarsely.  If looks and tones could kill, we three,
trembling behind our flimsy screen, had been freed at that moment from
our enemy.

"I have come in search of the young birds whose necks you were for
stretching, my friend!"  was Bezers' answer.  "They have vanished.
Birds they must be, for unless they have come into this house by that
window, they have flown away with wings."

"They have not passed this way," the priest declared stoutly, eager
only to get rid of the other and I blessed him for the words!  "I have
been here since I left you."

But the Vidame was not one to accept any man's statement.  "Thank you;
I think I will see for myself," he answered coolly. "Madame," he
continued, speaking to Madame de Pavannes as he passed her, "permit me."

He did not look at her, or see her emotion, or I think he must have
divined our presence.  And happily the others did not suspect her of
knowing more than they did.  He crossed the floor at his leisure, and
sauntered to the window, watched by them with impatience.  He drew
aside the curtain, and tried each of the bars, and peered through the
opening both up and down, An oath and an expression of wonder escaped
him.  The bars were standing, and firm and strong; and it did not occur
to him that we could have passed between them.  I am afraid to say how
few inches they were apart.

As he turned, he cast a casual glance at the bed--at us; and hesitated.
He had the candle in his hand, having taken it to the window the better
to examine the bars; and it obscured his sight. He did not see us.  The
three crouching forms, the strained white faces, the starting eyes,
that lurked in the shadow of the curtain escaped him.  The wild beating
of our hearts did not reach his ears.  And it was well for him that it
was so.  If he had come up to the bed I think that we should have
killed him, I know that we should have tried.  All the blood in me had
gone to my head, and I saw him through a haze--larger than life.  The
exact spot near the buckle of his cloak where I would strike him,
downwards and inwards, an inch above the collar-bone,--this only I saw
clearly.  I could not have missed it.  But he turned away, his face
darkening, and went back to the group near the door, and never knew the
risk he had run.



CHAPTER VI.

MADAME'S FRIGHT.

And we breathed again.  The agony of suspense, which Bezers' pause had
created, passed away.  But the night already seemed to us as a week of
nights.  An age of experience, an aeon of adventures cut us off--as we
lay shaking behind the curtain--from Caylus and its life.  Paris had
proved itself more treacherous than we had even expected to find it.
Everything and everyone shifted, and wore one face one minute, and one
another.  We had come to save Pavannes' life at the risk of our own; we
found him to be a villain!  Here was Mirepoix owning himself a
treacherous wretch, a conspirator against a woman; we sympathised with
him. The priest had come upon a work of charity and rescue; we loathed
the sound of his voice, and shrank from him, we knew not why, seeming
only to read a dark secret, a gloomy threat in each doubtful word he
uttered.  He was the strangest enigma of all. Why did we fear him?  Why
did Madame de Pavannes, who apparently had known him before, shudder at
the touch of his hand?  Why did his shadow come even between her and
her sister, and estrange them?  so that from the moment Pavannes' wife
saw him standing by Diane's side, she forgot that the latter had come
to save, and looked on her in doubt and sorrow, almost with repugnance.

We left the Vidame going back to the fireplace.  He stooped to set down
the candle by the hearth.  "They are not here," he said, as he
straightened himself again, and looked curiously at his companions.  He
had apparently been too much taken up with the pursuit to notice them
before.  "That is certain, so I have the less time to lose," he
continued.  "But I would--yes, my dear Coadjutor, I certainly would
like to know before I go, what you are doing here.  Mirepoix--Mirepoix
is an honest man.  I did not expect to find you in HIS house.  And two
ladies?  Two!  Fie, Coadjutor.  Ha!  Madame d'O, is it?  My dear lady,"
he continued, addressing her in a whimsical tone, "do not start at the
sound of your own name!  It would take a hundred hoods to hide your
eyes, or bleach your lips to the common colour; I should have known you
at once, had I looked at you.  And your companion?  Pheugh!"

He broke off, whistling softly.  It was clear that he recognised Madame
de Pavannes, and recognised her with astonishment.  The bed creaked as
I craned my neck to see what would follow.  Even the priest seemed to
think that some explanation was necessary, for he did not wait to be
questioned.

"Madame de Pavannes," he said in a dry, husky voice, and without
looking up, "was spirited hither yesterday; and detained against her
will by this good man, who will have to answer for it. Madame d'O
discovered her whereabouts, and asked me to escort her here without
loss of time to enforce her sister's release."

"And her restoration to her distracted husband?"

"Just so," the priest assented, acquiring confidence, I thought.

"And Madame desires to go?"

"Surely!  Why not?"

"Well," the Vidame drawled, his manner such as to bring the blood to
Madame de Pavannes' cheek, "it depends on the person who--to use your
phrase, M. le Coadjuteur--spirited her hither."

"And that," Madame herself retorted, raising her head, while her voice
quivered with indignation and anger, "was the Abbess of the Ursulines.
Your suspicions are base, worthy of you and unworthy of me, M. le
Vidame!  Diane!"  she continued sharply, taking her sister's arm, and
casting a disdainful glance at Bezers, "let us go.  I want to be with
my husband.  I am stifled in this room."

"We are going, little one," Diane murmured reassuringly.  But I noticed
that the speaker's animation, which had been as a soul to her beauty
when she entered the room, was gone.  A strange stillness was it fear
of the Vidame?  had taken its place.

"The Abbess of the Ursulines?"  Bezers continued thoughtfully. "SHE
brought you here, did she?"  There was surprise, genuine surprise, in
his voice.  "A good soul, and, I think I have heard, a friend of yours.
Umph!"

"A very dear friend," Madame answered stiffly.  "Now, Diane!"

"A dear friend!  And she spirited you hither yesterday!" commented the
Vidame, with the air of one solving an anagram. "And Mirepoix detained
you; respectable Mirepoix, who is said to have a well-filled stocking
under his pallet, and stands well with the bourgeoisie.  He is in the
plot.  Then at a very late hour, your affectionate sister, and my good
friend the Coadjutor, enter to save you.  From what?"

No one spoke.  The priest looked down, his cheeks livid with anger.

"From what?"  Bezers continued with grim playfulness.  "There is the
mystery.  From the clutches of this profligate Mirepoix, I suppose.
From the dangerous Mirepoix.  Upon my honour," with a sudden ring of
resolution in his tone, "I think you are safer here; I think you had
better stay where you are, Madame, until morning!  And risk Mirepoix!"

"Oh, no!  no!"  Madame cried vehemently.

"Oh, yes!  yes!"  he replied.  "What do you say, Coadjutor?  Do you not
think so?"

The priest looked down sullenly.  His voice shook as he murmured in
answer, "Madame will please herself.  She has a character, M. le
Vidame.  But if she prefer to stay here--well!"

"Oh, she has a character, has she?"  rejoined the giant, his eyes
twinkling with evil mirth, "and she should go home with you, and my old
friend Madame d'O, to save it!  That is it, is it?  No, no," he
continued when he had had his silent laugh out, "Madame de Pavannes
will do very well here--very well here until morning. We have work to
do.  Come.  Let us go and do it."

"Do you mean it?"  said the priest, starting and looking up with a
subtle challenge--almost a threat--in his tone.

"Yes, I do."

Their eyes met: and seeing their looks, I chuckled, nudging Croisette.
No fear of their discovering us now.  I recalled the old proverb which
says that when thieves fall out, honest men come by their own, and
speculated on the chance of the priest freeing us once for all from M.
de Bezers.

But the two were ill-matched.  The Vidame could have taken up the other
with one hand and dashed his head on the floor.  And it did not end
there.  I doubt if in craft the priest was his equal. Behind a frank
brutality Bezers--unless his reputation belied him--concealed an
Italian intellect.  Under a cynical recklessness he veiled a rare
cunning and a constant suspicion; enjoying in that respect a
combination of apparently opposite qualities, which I have known no
other man to possess in an equal degree, unless it might be his late
majesty, Henry the Great.  A child would have suspected the priest; a
veteran might have been taken in by the Vidame.

And indeed the priest's eyes presently sank.  "Our bargain is to go for
nothing?"  he muttered sullenly.

"I know of no bargain," quoth the Vidame.  "And I have no time to lose,
splitting hairs here.  Set it down to what you like.  Say it is a whim
of mine, a fad, a caprice.  Only understand that Madame de Pavannes
stays.  We go.  And--" he added this, as a sudden thought seemed to
strike him, "though I would not willingly use compulsion to a lady, I
think Madame d'O had better come too."

"You speak masterfully," the priest said with a sneer, forgetting the
tone he had himself used a few minutes before to Mirepoix.

"Just so.  I have forty horsemen over the way," was the dry answer.
"For the moment, I am master of the legions, Coadjutor."

"That is true," Madame d'O said; so softly that I started.  She had
scarcely spoken since Bezers' entrance.  As she spoke now, she shook
back the hood from her face and disclosed the chestnut hair clinging
about her temples--deep blots of colour on the abnormal whiteness of
her skin, "That is true, M. de Bezers," she said.  "You have the
legions.  You have the power.  But you will not use it, I think,
against an old friend.  You will not do us this hurt when I--But
listen."

He would not.  In the very middle of her appeal he cut her short--brute
that he was!  "No Madame!"  he burst out violently, disregarding the
beautiful face, the supplicating glance, that might have moved a stone,
"that is just what I will not do.  I will not listen!  We know one
another.  Is not that enough?"

She looked at him fixedly.  He returned her gaze, not smiling now, but
eyeing her with a curious watchfulness.

And after a long pause she turned from him.  "Very well," she said
softly, and drew a deep, quivering breath, the sound of which reached
us.  "Then let us go."  And without--strangest thing of all--bestowing
a word or look on her sister, who was weeping bitterly in a chair, she
turned to the door and led the way out, a shrug of her shoulders the
last thing I marked.

The poor lady heard her departing step however, and sprang up.  It
dawned upon her that she was being deserted. "Diane!  Diane!"  she
cried distractedly--and I had to put my hand on Croisette to keep him
quiet, there was such fear and pain in her tone--"I will go!  I will
not be left behind in this dreadful place!  Do you hear?  Come back to
me, Diane!"

It made my blood run wildly.  But Diane did not come back. Strange!
And Bezers too was unmoved.  He stood between the poor woman and the
door, and by a gesture bid Mirepoix and the priest pass out before him.
"Madame," he said--and his voice, stern and hard as ever, expressed no
jot of compassion for her, rather such an impatient contempt as a
puling child might elicit--"you are safe here.  And here you will stop!
Weep if you please," he added cynically, "you will have fewer tears to
shed to-morrow."

His last words--they certainly were odd ones--arrested her attention.
She checked her sobs, being frightened I think, and looked up at him.
Perhaps he had spoken with this in view, for while she still stood at
gaze, her hands pressed to her bosom, he slipped quickly out and closed
the door behind him.  I heard a muttering for an instant outside, and
then the tramp of feet descending the stairs.  They were gone, and we
were still undiscovered.

For Madame, she had clean forgotten our presence--of that I am
sure--and the chance of escape we might afford.  On finding herself
alone she gazed a short time in alarmed silence at the door, and then
ran to the window and peered out, still trembling, terrified, silent.
So she remained a while.

She had not noticed that Bezers on going out had omitted to lock the
door behind him.  I had.  But I was unwilling to move hastily.  Some
one might return to see to it before the Vidame left the house.  And
besides the door was not over strong, and if locked would be no
obstacle to the three of us when we had only Mirepoix to deal with.  So
I kept the others where they were by a nudge and a pinch, and held my
breath a moment, straining my ears to catch the closing of the door
below.  I did not hear that. But I did catch a sound that otherwise
might have escaped me, but which now riveted my eyes to the door of our
room.  Some one in the silence, which followed the trampling on the
stairs, had cautiously laid a hand on the latch.

The light in the room was dim.  Mirepoix had taken one of the candles
with him, and the other wanted snuffing.  I could not see whether the
latch moved; whether or no it was rising.  But watching intently, I
made out that the door was being opened--slowly, noiselessly.  I saw
someone enter--a furtive gliding shadow.

For a moment I felt nervous--then I recognised the dark hooded figure.
It was only Madame d'O.  Brave woman!  She had evaded the Vidame and
slipped back to the rescue.  Ha, ha!  We would defeat the Vidame yet!
Things were going better!

But then something in her manner--as she stood holding the door and
peering into the room--something in her bearing startled and frightened
me.  As she came forward her movements were so stealthy that her
footsteps made no sound.  Her dark shadow, moving ahead of her across
the floor, was not more silent than she.  An undefined desire to make a
noise, to give the alarm, seized me.

Half-way across the room she stopped to listen, and looked round,
startled herself, I think, by the silence.  She could not see her
sister, whose figure was blurred by the outlines of the curtain; and no
doubt she was puzzled to think what had become of her. The suspense
which I felt, but did not understand, was so great that at last I
moved, and the bed creaked.

In a moment her face was turned our way, and she glided forwards, her
features still hidden by the hood of her cloak.  She was close to us
now, bending over us.  She raised her hand to her head--to shade her
eyes, as she looked more closely, I supposed, and I was wondering
whether she saw us--whether she took the shapelessness in the shadow of
the curtain for her sister, or could not make it out--I was thinking
how we could best apprise her of our presence without alarming
her--when Croisette dashed my thoughts to the winds!  Croisette, with a
tremendous whoop and a crash, bounded over me on to the floor!

She uttered a gasping cry--a cry of intense, awful fear.  I have the
sound in my ears even now.  With that she staggered back, clutching the
air.  I heard the metallic clang and ring of something falling on the
floor.  I heard an answering cry of alarm from the window; and then
Madame de Pavannes ran forward and caught her in her arms.

It was strange to find the room lately so silent become at once alive
with whispering forms, as we came hastily to light.  I cursed Croisette
for his folly, and was immeasurably angry with him, but I had no time
to waste words on him then.  I hurried to the door to guard it.  I
opened it a hand's breadth and listened. All was quiet below; the house
still.  I took the key out of the lock and put it in my pocket and went
back.  Marie and Croisette were standing a little apart from Madame de
Pavannes, who, hanging over her sister, was by turns bathing her face
and explaining our presence.

In a very few minutes Madame d'O seemed to recover, and sat up. The
first shock of deadly terror had passed, but she was still pale.  She
still trembled, and shrank from meeting our eyes, though I saw her,
when our attention was apparently directed elsewhere, glance at one and
another of us with a strange intentness, a shuddering curiosity.  No
wonder, I thought.  She must have had a terrible fright--one that might
have killed a more timid woman!

"What on earth did you do that for!"  I asked Croisette presently, my
anger certainly not decreasing the more I looked at her beautiful face.
"You might have killed her!"

In charity I supposed his nerves had failed him, for he could not even
now give me a straightforward answer.  His only reply was, "Let us get
away!  Let us get away from this horrible house!" and this he kept
repeating with a shudder as he moved restlessly to and fro.

"With all my heart!"  I answered, looking at him with some contempt.
"That is exactly what we are going to do!"

But all the same his words reminded me of something which in the
excitement of the scene I had momentarily forgotten, and that was our
duty.  Pavannes must still be saved, though not for Kit; rather to
answer to us for his sins.  But he must be saved!  And now that the
road was open, every minute lost was reproach to us. "Yes," I added
roughly, my thoughts turned into a more rugged channel, "you are right.
This is no time for nursing.  We must be going.  Madame de Pavannes," I
went on, addressing myself to her, "you know the way home from here--to
your house!"  "Oh, yes," she cried.

"That is well," I answered.  "Then we will start.  Your sister is
sufficiently recovered now, I think.  And we will not risk any further
delay."

I did not tell her of her husband's danger, or that we suspected him of
wronging her, and being in fact the cause of her detention.  I wanted
her services as a guide.  That was the main point, though I was glad to
be able to put her in a place of safety at the same time that we
fulfilled our own mission.

She rose eagerly.  "You are sure that we can get out?"  she said.

"Sure," I replied with a brevity worthy of Bezers himself.

And I was right.  We trooped down stairs, making as little noise as
possible; with the result that Mirepoix only took the alarm, and came
upon us when we were at the outer door, bungling with the lock.  Then I
made short work of him, checking his scared words of remonstrance by
flashing my dagger before his eyes.  I induced him in the same
fashion--he was fairly taken by surprise--to undo the fastenings
himself; and so, bidding him follow us at his peril, we slipped out one
by one.  We softly closed the door behind us.  And lo!  we were at last
free--free and in the streets of Paris, with the cool night air fanning
our brows.  A church hard by tolled the hour of two; and the strokes
were echoed, before we had gone many steps along the ill-paved way, by
the solemn tones of the bell of Notre Dame.

We were free and in the streets, with a guide who knew the way. If
Bezers had not gone straight from us to his vengeance, we might thwart
him yet.  I strode along quickly, Madame d'O by my side the others a
little way in front.  Here and there an oil-lamp, swinging from a
pulley in the middle of the road, enabled us to avoid some obstacle
more foul than usual, or to leap over a pool which had formed in the
kennel.  Even in my excitement, my country-bred senses rebelled against
the sights, and smells, the noisome air and oppressive closeness of the
streets.

The town was quiet, and very dark where the smoky lamps were not
hanging.  Yet I wondered if it ever slept, for more than once we had to
stand aside to give passage to a party of men, hurrying along with
links and arms.  Several times too, especially towards the end of our
walk, I was surprised by the flashing of bright lights in a courtyard,
the door of which stood half open to right or left.  Once I saw the
glow of torches reflected ruddily in the windows of a tall and splendid
mansion, a little withdrawn from the street.  The source of the light
was in the fore-court, hidden from us by a low wall, but I caught the
murmur of voices and stir of many feet.  Once a gate was stealthily
opened and two armed men looked out, the act and their manner of doing
it, reminding me on the instant of those who had peeped out to inspect
us some hours before in Bezers' house.  And once, nay twice, in the
mouth of a narrow alley I discerned a knot of men standing motionless
in the gloom.  There was an air of mystery abroad, a feeling as of
solemn stir and preparation going on under cover of the darkness, which
awed and unnerved me.

But I said nothing of this, and Madame d'O was equally silent. Like
most countrymen I was ready to believe in any exaggeration of the
city's late hours, the more as she made no remark.  I supposed--shaking
off the momentary impression--that what I saw was innocent and normal.
Besides, I was thinking what I should say to Pavannes when I saw
him--in what terms I should warn him of his peril, and cast his perfidy
in his teeth.  We had hurried along in this way--and in absolute
silence, save when some obstacle or pitfall drew from us an
exclamation--for about a quarter of a mile, when my companion, turning
into a slightly wider street, slackened her speed, and indicated by a
gesture that we had arrived.  A lamp hung over the porch, to which she
pointed, and showed the small side gate half open.  We were close
behind the other three now.  I saw Croisette stoop to enter and as
quickly fall back a pace.  Why?

In a moment it flashed across my mind that we were too late that the
Vidame had been before us.

And yet how quiet it all was.

Then I breathed freely again.  I saw that Croisette had only stepped
back to avoid some one who was coming out--the Coadjutor in fact.  The
moment the entrance was clear, the lad shot in, and the others after
him, the priest taking no notice of them, nor they of him.

I was for going in too, when I felt Madame d'O's hand tighten suddenly
on my arm, and then fall from it.  Apprised of something by this, I
glanced at the priest's face, catching sight of it by chance just as
his eyes met hers.  His face was white--nay it was ugly with
disappointment and rage, bitter snarling rage, that was hardly human.
He grasped her by the arm roughly and twisted her round without
ceremony, so as to draw her a few paces aside; yet not so far that I
could not hear what they said.

"He is not here!"  he hissed.  "Do you understand?  He crossed the
river to the Faubourg St. Germain at nightfall--searching for her.  And
he has not come back!  He is on the other side of the water, and
midnight has struck this hour past!"

She stood silent for a moment as if she had received a blow--silent and
dismayed.  Something serious had happened.  I could see that.

"He cannot recross the river now?"  she said after a time.  "The
gates--"

"Shut!"  he replied briefly.  "The keys are at the Louvre."

"And the boats are on this side?"

"Every boat!"  he answered, striking his one hand on the other with
violence.  "Every boat!  No one may cross until it is over."

"And the Faubourg St. Germain?"  she said in a lower voice.

"There will be nothing done there.  Nothing!"



CHAPTER VII

A YOUNG KNIGHT-ERRANT.

I would gladly have left the two together, and gone straight into the
house.  I was eager now to discharge the errand on which I had come so
far; and apart from this I had no liking for the priest or wish to
overhear his talk.  His anger, however, was so patent, and the rudeness
with which he treated Madame d'O so pronounced that I felt I could not
leave her with him unless she should dismiss me.  So I stood patiently
enough--and awkwardly enough too, I daresay--by the door while they
talked on in subdued tones.  Nevertheless, I felt heartily glad when at
length, the discussion ending Madame came back to me.  I offered her my
arm to help her over the wooden foot of the side gate. She laid her
hand on it, but she stood still.

"M. de Caylus," she said; and at that stopped.  Naturally I looked at
her, and our eyes met.  Hers brown and beautiful, shining in the light
of the lamp overhead looked into mine.  Her lips were half parted, and
one fair tress of hair had escaped from her hood.  "M. de Caylus, will
you do me a favour," she resumed, softly, "a favour for which I shall
always be grateful?"

I sighed.  "Madame," I said earnestly, for I felt the solemnity of the
occasion, "I swear that in ten minutes, if the task I now have in hand
be finished I will devote my life to your service. For the present--"

"Well, for the present?  But it is the present I want, Master
Discretion."

"I must see M. de Pavannes!  I am pledged to it," I ejaculated.

"To see M. de Pavannes?"

"Yes."

I was conscious that she was looking at me with eyes of doubt, almost
of suspicion.

"Why?  Why?"  she asked with evident surprise.  "You have restored--and
nearly frightened me to death in doing it--his wife to her home; what
more do you want with him, most valiant knight-errant?"

"I must see him," I said firmly.  I would have told her all and been
thankful, but the priest was within hearing--or barely out of it; and I
had seen too much pass between him and Bezers to be willing to say
anything before him.

"You must see M. de Pavannes?"  she repeated, gazing at me.

"I must," I replied with decision.

"Then you shall.  That is exactly what I am going to help you to do,"
she exclaimed.  "He is not here.  That is what is the matter.  He went
out at nightfall seeking news of his wife, and crossed the river, the
Coadjutor says, to the Faubourg St. Germain.  Now it is of the utmost
importance that he should return before morning--return here."

"But is he not here?"  I said, finding all my calculations at fault.
"You are sure of it, Madame?"

"Quite sure," she answered rapidly.  "Your brothers will have by this
time discovered the fact.  Now, M. de Caylus, Pavannes must be brought
here before morning, not only for his wife's sake--though she will be
wild with anxiety--but also--"

"I know," I said, eagerly interrupting her, "for his own too! There is
a danger threatening him."

She turned swiftly, as if startled, and I turned, and we looked at the
priest.  I thought we understood one another.  "There is," she answered
softly, "and I would save him from that danger; but he will only be
safe, as I happen to know, here!  Here, you understand!  He must be
brought here before daybreak, M. de Caylus.  He must!  He must!"  she
exclaimed, her beautiful features hardening with the earnestness of her
feelings.  "And the Coadjutor cannot go.  I cannot go.  There is only
one man who can save him, and that is yourself.  There is, above all,
not a moment to be lost."

My thoughts were in a whirl.  Even as she spoke she began to walk back
the way we had come, her hand on my arm; and I, doubtful, and in a
confused way unwilling, went with her.  I did not clearly understand
the position.  I would have wished to go in and confer with Marie and
Croisette; but the juncture had occurred so quickly, and it might be
that time was as valuable as she said, and--well, it was hard for me, a
lad, to refuse her anything when she looked at me with appeal in her
eyes.  I did manage to stammer, "But I do not know Paris.  I could not
find my way, I am afraid, and it is night, Madame."

She released my arm and stopped.  "Night!"  she cried, with a scornful
ring in her voice.  "Night!  I thought you were a man, not a boy!  You
are afraid!"

"Afraid," I said hotly; "we Cayluses are never afraid."

"Then I can tell you the way, if that be your only difficulty. We turn
here.  Now, come in with me a moment," she continued, "and I will give
you something you will need--and your directions."

She had stopped at the door of a tall, narrow house, standing between
larger ones in a street which appeared to me to be more airy and
important than any I had yet seen.  As she spoke, she rang the bell
once, twice, thrice.  The silvery tinkle had scarcely died away the
third time before the door opened silently; I saw no one, but she drew
me into a narrow hall or passage.  A taper in an embossed holder was
burning on a chest. She took it up, and telling me to follow her led
the way lightly up the stairs, and into a room, half-parlour,
half-bedroom--such a room as I had never seen before.  It was richly
hung from ceiling to floor with blue silk, and lighted by the soft rays
of lamps shaded by Venetian globes of delicate hues.  The scent of
cedar wood was in the air, and on the hearth in a velvet tray were some
tiny puppies.  A dainty disorder reigned everywhere. On one table a
jewel-case stood open, on another lay some lace garments, two or three
masks and a fan.  A gemmed riding-whip and a silver-hilted poniard hung
on the same peg.  And, strangest of all, huddled away behind the door,
I espied a plain, black-sheathed sword, and a man's gauntlets.

She did not wait a moment, but went at once to the jewel-case. She took
from it a gold ring--a heavy seal ring.  She held this out to me in the
most matter-of-fact way--scarcely turning, in fact.  "Put it on your
finger," she said hurriedly.  "If you are stopped by soldiers, or if
they will not give you a boat to cross the river, say boldly that you
are on the king's service.  Call for the officer and show that ring.
Play the man.  Bid him stop you at his peril!"

I hastily muttered my thanks, and she as hastily took something from a
drawer, and tore it into strips.  Before I knew what she was doing she
was on her knees by me, fastening a white band of linen round my left
sleeve.  Then she took my cap, and with the same precipitation fixed a
fragment of the stuff in it, in the form of a rough cross.

"There," she said.  "Now, listen, M. de Caylus.  There is more afoot
to-night than you know of.  Those badges will help you across to St.
Germain, but the moment you land tear them off: Tear them off,
remember.  They will help you no longer.  You will come back by the
same boat, and will not need them.  If you are seen to wear them as you
return, they will command no respect, but on the contrary will bring
you--and perhaps me into trouble."

"I understand," I said, "but--"

"You must ask no questions," she retorted, waving one snowy finger
before my eyes.  "My knight-errant must have faith in me, as I have in
him; or he would not be here at this time of night, and alone with me.
But remember this also.  When you meet Pavannes do not say you come
from me.  Keep that in your mind; I will explain the reason afterwards.
Say merely that his wife is found, and is wild with anxiety about him.
If you say anything as to his danger he may refuse to come.  Men are
obstinate."

I nodded a smiling assent, thinking I understood.  At the same time I
permitted myself in my own mind a little discretion. Pavannes was not a
fool, and the name of the Vidame--but, however, I should see.  I had
more to say to him than she knew of.  Meanwhile she explained very
carefully the three turnings I had to take to reach the river, and the
wharf where boats most commonly lay, and the name of the house in which
I should find M. de Pavannes.

"He is at the Hotel de Bailli," she said.  "And there, I think that is
all."

"No, not all," I said hardily.  "There is one thing I have not got.
And that is a sword!"

She followed the direction of my eyes, started, and laughed--a little
oddly.  But she fetched the weapon.  "Take it, and do not," she urged,
"do not lose time.  Do not mention me to Pavannes.  Do not let the
white badges be seen as you return. That is really all.  And now good
luck!"  She gave me her hand to kiss.  "Good luck, my knight-errant,
good luck--and come back to me soon!"

She smiled divinely, as it seemed to me, as she said these last words,
and the same smile followed me down stairs:  for she leaned over the
stair-head with one of the lamps in her hand, and directed me how to
draw the bolts.  I took one backward glance as I did so at the fair
stooping figure above me, the shining eyes, and tiny outstretched hand,
and then darting into the gloom I hurried on my way.

I was in a strange mood.  A few minutes before I had been at Pavannes'
door, at the end of our journey; on the verge of success.  I had been
within an ace, as I supposed at least, of executing my errand.  I had
held the cup of success in my hand. And it had slipped.  Now the
conflict had to be fought over again; the danger to be faced.  It would
have been no more than natural if I had felt the disappointment keenly:
if I had almost despaired.

But it was otherwise--far otherwise.  Never had my heart beat higher or
more proudly than as I now hurried through the streets, avoiding such
groups as were abroad in them, and intent only on observing the proper
turnings.  Never in any moment of triumph in after days, in love or
war, did anything like the exhilaration, the energy, the spirit, of
those minutes come back to me.  I had a woman's badge in my cap--for
the first time--the music of her voice in my ears.  I had a magic ring
on my finger:  a talisman on my arm.  My sword was at my side again.
All round me lay a misty city of adventures, of danger and romance,
full of the richest and most beautiful possibilities; a city of real
witchery, such as I had read of in stories, through which those fairy
gifts and my right hand should guide me safely.  I did not even regret
my brothers, or our separation.  I was the eldest. It was fitting that
the cream of the enterprise should be reserved for me, Anne de Caylus.
And to what might it not lead? In fancy I saw myself already a duke and
peer of France--already I held the baton.

Yet while I exulted boyishly, I did not forget what I was about. I kept
my eyes open, and soon remarked that the number of people passing to
and fro in the dark streets had much increased within the last half
hour.  The silence in which in groups or singly these figures stole by
me was very striking.  I heard no brawling, fighting or singing; yet if
it were too late for these things, why were so many people up and
about?  I began to count presently, and found that at least half of
those I met wore badges in their hats and on their arms, similar to
mine, and that they all moved with a businesslike air, as if bound for
some rendezvous.

I was not a fool, though I was young, and in some matters less quick
than Croisette.  The hints which had been dropped by so many had not
been lost on me.  "There is more afoot to-night than you know of!"
Madame d'O had said.  And having eyes as well as ears I fully believed
it.  Something was afoot.  Something was going to happen in Paris
before morning.  But what, I wondered. Could it be that a rebellion was
about to break out?  If so I was on the king's service, and all was
well.  I might even be going--and only eighteen--to make history!  Or
was it only a brawl on a great scale between two parties of nobles?  I
had heard of such things happening in Paris.  Then--well I did not see
how I could act in that case.  I must be guided by events.

I did not imagine anything else which it could be.  That is the truth,
though it may need explanation.  I was accustomed only to the milder
religious differences, the more evenly balanced parties of Quercy,
where the peace between the Catholics and Huguenots had been welcome to
all save a very few.  I could not gauge therefore the fanaticism of the
Parisian populace, and lost count of the factor, which made possible
that which was going to happen--was going to happen in Paris before
daylight as surely as the sun was going to rise!  I knew that the
Huguenot nobles were present in the city in great numbers, but it did
not occur to me that they could as a body be in danger.  They were many
and powerful, and as was said, in favour with the king.  They were
under the protection of the King of Navarre--France's brother-in-law of
a week, and the Prince of Conde; and though these princes were young,
Coligny the sagacious admiral was old, and not much the worse I had
learned for his wound.  He at least was high in royal favour, a trusted
counsellor.  Had not the king visited him on his sick-bed and sat by
him for an hour together?

Surely, I thought, if there were danger, these men would know of it.
And then the Huguenots' main enemy, Henri le Balafre, the splendid Duke
of Guise, "our great man," and "Lorraine," as the crowd called him--he,
it was rumoured, was in disgrace at court. In a word these things, to
say nothing of the peaceful and joyous occasion which had brought the
Huguenots to Paris, and which seemed to put treachery out of the
question, were more than enough to prevent me forecasting the event.

If for a moment, indeed, as I hurried along towards the river, anything
like the truth occurred to me, I put it from me.  I say with pride I
put it from me as a thing impossible.  For God forbid--one may speak
out the truth these forty years back--God forbid, say I, that all
Frenchmen should bear the blood guiltiness which came of other than
French brains, though French were the hands that did the work.

I was not greatly troubled by my forebodings therefore:  and the state
of exaltation to which Madame d'O's confidence had raised my spirits
lasted until one of the narrow streets by the Louvre brought me
suddenly within sight of the river.  Here faint moonlight bursting
momentarily through the clouds was shining on the placid surface of the
water.  The fresh air played upon, and cooled my temples.  And this
with the quiet scene so abruptly presented to me, gave check to my
thoughts, and somewhat sobered me.

At some distance to my left I could distinguish in the middle of the
river the pile of buildings which crowd the Ile de la Cite, and could
follow the nearer arm of the stream as it swept landwards of these,
closely hemmed in by houses, but unbroken as yet by the arches of the
Pont Neuf which I have lived to see built.  Not far from me on my
right--indeed within a stone's throw--the bulky mass of the Louvre rose
dark and shapeless against the sky.  Only a narrow open space--the
foreshore--separated me from the water; beyond which I could see an
irregular line of buildings, that no doubt formed the Faubourg St.
Germain.

I had been told that I should find stairs leading down to the water,
and boats moored at the foot of them, at this point. Accordingly I
walked quickly across the open space to a spot, where I made out a
couple of posts set up on the brink--doubtless to mark the landing
place.

I had not gone ten paces, however, out of the shadow, before I chanced
to look round, and discerned with an unpleasant eerie feeling three
figures detach themselves from it, and advance in a row behind me, so
as the better to cut off my retreat.  I was not to succeed in my
enterprise too easily then.  That was clear. Still I thought it better
to act as if I had not seen my followers, and collecting myself, I
walked as quickly as I could down to the steps.  The three were by that
time close upon me--within striking distance almost.  I turned abruptly
and confronted them.

"Who are you, and what do you want?"  I said, eyeing them warily, my
hand on my sword.

They did not answer, but separated more widely so as to form a
half-circle:  and one of them whistled.  On the instant a knot of men
started out of the line of houses, and came quickly across the strip of
light towards us.

The position seemed serious.  If I could have run indeed--but I glanced
round, and found escape in that fashion impossible. There were men
crouching on the steps behind me, between me and the river.  I had
fallen into a trap.  Indeed, there was nothing for it now but to do as
Madame had bidden me, and play the man boldly.  I had the words still
ringing in my ears.  I had enough of the excitement I had lately felt
still bounding in my veins to give nerve and daring.  I folded my arms
and drew myself up.

"Knaves!"  I said, with as much quiet contempt as I could muster, "you
mistake me.  You do not know whom you have to deal with. Get me a boat,
and let two of you row me across.  Hinder me, and your necks shall
answer for it--or your backs!"

A laugh and an oath of derision formed the only response, and before I
could add more, the larger group arrived, and joined the three.

"Who is it, Pierre?"  asked one of these in a matter-of-fact way, which
showed I had not fallen amongst mere thieves.

The speaker seemed to be the leader of the band.  He had a feather in
his bonnet, and I saw a steel corslet gleam under his cloak, when some
one held up a lanthorn to examine me the better. His trunk-hose were
striped with black, white, and green--the livery as I learned
afterwards of Monsieur the King's brother, the Duke of Anjou,
afterwards Henry the Third; then a close friend of the Duke of Guise,
and later his murderer.  The captain spoke with a foreign accent, and
his complexion was dark to swarthiness.  His eyes sparkled and flashed
like black beads.  It was easy to see that he was an Italian.

"A gallant young cock enough," the soldier who had whistled answered;
"and not quite of the breed we expected."  He held his lanthorn towards
me and pointed to the white badge on my sleeve. "It strikes me we have
caught a crow instead of a pigeon!"

"How comes this?"  the Italian asked harshly, addressing me. "Who are
you?  And why do you wish to cross the river at this time of night,
young sir?"

I acted on the inspiration of the moment.  "Play the man boldly!"
Madame had said.  I would:  and I did with a vengeance.  I sprang
forward and seizing the captain by the clasp of his cloak, shook him
violently, and flung him off with all my force, so that he reeled.
"Dog!"  I exclaimed, advancing, as if I would seize him again.  "Learn
how to speak to your betters!  Am I to be stopped by such sweepings as
you?  Hark ye, I am on the King's service!"

He fairly spluttered with rage.  "More like the devil's!"  he
exclaimed, pronouncing his words abominably, and fumbling vainly for
his weapon.  "King's service or no service you do not insult Andrea
Pallavicini!"

I could only vindicate my daring by greater daring, and I saw this even
as, death staring me in the face, my heart seemed to stop.  The man had
his mouth open and his hand raised to give an order which would
certainly have sent Anne de Caylus from the world, when I cried
passionately--it was my last chance, and I never wished to live more
strongly than at that moment--I cried passionately, "Andrea
Pallavicini, if such be your name, look at that!  Look at that!"  I
repeated, shaking my open hand with the ring on it before his face,
"and then hinder me if you dare! To-morrow if you have quarterings
enough, I will see to your quarrel!  Now send me on my way, or your
fate be on your own head!  Disobey--ay, do but hesitate--and I will
call on these very men of yours to cut you down!"

It was a bold throw, for I staked all on a talisman of which I did not
know the value!  To me it was the turn of a die, for I had had no
leisure to look at the ring, and knew no more than a babe whose it was.
But the venture was as happy as desperate.

Andrea Pallavicini's expression--no pleasant one at the best of
times--changed on the instant.  His face fell as he seized my hand, and
peered at the ring long and intently.  Then he cast a quick glance of
suspicion at his men, of hatred at me.  But I cared nothing for his
glance, or his hatred.  I saw already that he had made up his mind to
obey the charm:  and that for me was everything.  "If you had shown
that to me a little earlier, young sir, it would, maybe, have been
better for both of us," he said, a surly menace in his voice.  And
cursing his men for their stupidity he ordered two of them to unmoor a
boat.

Apparently the craft had been secured with more care than skill, for to
loosen it seemed to be a work of time.  Meanwhile I stood waiting in
the midst of the group, anxious and yet exultant; an object of
curiosity, and yet curious myself.  I heard the guards whisper
together, and caught such phrases as "It is the Duc d'Aumale."

"No, it is not D'Aumale.  It is nothing like him."

"Well, he has the Duke's ring, fool!"

"The Duke's?"

"Ay."

"Then it is all right, God bless him!"  This last was uttered with
extreme fervour.

I was conscious too of being the object of many respectful glances; and
had just bidden the men on the steps below me to be quick, when I
discovered with alarm three figures moving across the open space
towards us, and coming apparently from the same point from which
Pallavicini and his men had emerged.

In a moment I foresaw danger.  "Now be quick there!"  I cried again.
But scarcely had I spoken before I saw that it was impossible to get
afloat before these others came up, and I prepared to stand my ground
resolutely.

The first words, however, with which Pallavicini saluted the new-comers
scattered my fears.  "Well, what the foul fiend do you want?"  he
exclaimed rudely; and he rapped out half-a-dozen CORPOS before they
could answer him.  "What have you brought him here for, when I left him
in the guard-house?  Imbeciles!"

"Captain Pallavicini," interposed the midmost of the three, speaking
with patience--he was a man of about thirty, dressed with some
richness, though his clothes were now disordered as though by a
struggle--"I have induced these good men to bring me down--"

"Then," cried the captain, brutally interrupting him, "you have lost
your labour, Monsieur."

"You do not know me," replied the prisoner with sternness--a prisoner
he seemed to be.  "You do not understand that I am a friend of the
Prince of Conde, and that--"

He would have said more, but the Italian again cut him short.  "A fig
for the Prince of Conde!"  he cried; "I understand my duty. You may as
well take things easily.  You cannot cross, and you cannot go home, and
you cannot have any explanation; except that it is the King's will!
Explanation?"  he grumbled, in a lower tone, "you will get it soon
enough, I warrant!  Before you want it!"

"But there is a boat going to cross," said the other, controlling his
temper by an effort and speaking with dignity.  "You told me that by
the King's order no one could cross; and you arrested me because,
having urgent need to visit St. Germain, I persisted. Now what does
this mean, Captain Pallavicini?  Others are crossing.  I ask what this
means?"

"Whatever you please, M. de Pavannes," the Italian retorted
contemptuously.  "Explain it for yourself!"

I started as the name struck my ear, and at once cried out in surprise,
"M. de Pavannes!"  Had I heard aright?

Apparently I had, for the prisoner turned to me with a bow. "Yes, sir,"
he said with dignity, "I am M. de Pavannes.  I have not the honour of
knowing you, but you seem to be a gentleman." He cast a withering
glance at the captain as he said this. "Perhaps you will explain to me
why this violence has been done to me.  If you can, I shall consider it
a favour; if not, pardon me."

I did not answer him at once, for a good reason--that every faculty I
had was bent on a close scrutiny of the man himself. He was fair, and
of a ruddy complexion.  His beard was cut in the short pointed fashion
of the court; and in these respects he bore a kind of likeness, a
curious likeness, to Louis de Pavannes. But his figure was shorter and
stouter.  He was less martial in bearing, with more of the air of a
scholar than a soldier.  "You are related to M. Louis de Pavannes?"  I
said, my heart beginning to beat with an odd excitement.  I think I
foresaw already what was coming.

"I am Louis de Pavannes," he replied with impatience.

I stared at him in silence:  thinking--thinking--thinking.  And then I
said slowly, "You have a cousin of the same name?"

"I have."

"He fell prisoner to the Vicomte de Caylus at Moncontour?"

"He did," he answered curtly.  "But what of that, sir?"

Again I did not answer--at once.  The murder was out.  I remembered, in
the dim fashion in which one remembers such things after the event,
that I had heard Louis de Pavannes, when we first became acquainted
with him, mention this cousin of the same name; the head of a younger
branch.  But our Louis living in Provence and the other in Normandy,
the distance between their homes, and the troubles of the times had
loosened a tie which their common religion might have strengthened.
They had scarcely ever seen one another.  As Louis had spoken of his
namesake but once during his long stay with us, and I had not then
foreseen the connection to be formed between our families, it was no
wonder that in the course of months the chance word had passed out of
my head, and I had clean forgotten the subject of it. Here however, he
was before my eyes, and seeing him; I saw too what the discovery meant.
It meant a most joyful thing!  a most wonderful thing which I longed to
tell Croisette and Marie.  It meant that our Louis de Pavannes--my
cheek burned for my want of faith in him--was no villain after all, but
such a noble gentleman as we had always till this day thought him!  It
meant that he was no court gallant bent on breaking a country heart for
sport, but Kit's own true lover!  And--and it meant more--it meant that
he was yet in danger, and still ignorant of the vow that unchained
fiend Bezers had taken to have his life!  In pursuing his namesake we
had been led astray, how sadly I only knew now!  And had indeed lost
most precious time.

"Your wife, M. de Pavannes"--I began in haste, seeing the necessity of
explaining matters with the utmost quickness.  "Your wife is--"

"Ah, my wife!"  he cried interrupting me, with anxiety in his tone.
"What of her?  You have seen her!"

"I have.  She is safe at your house in the Rue de St. Merri."

"Thank Heaven for that!"  he replied fervently.  Before he could say
more Captain Andrea interrupted us.  I could see that his suspicions
were aroused afresh.  He pushed rudely between us, and addressing me
said, "Now, young sir, your boat is ready."

"My boat?"  I answered, while I rapidly considered the situation. Of
course I did not want to cross the river now.  No doubt Pavannes--this
Pavannes--could guide me to Louis' address.  "My boat?"

"Yes, it is waiting," the Italian replied, his black eyes roving from
one to the other of us.

"Then let it wait!"  I answered haughtily, speaking with an assumption
of anger.  "Plague upon you for interrupting us!  I shall not cross the
river now.  This gentleman can give me the information I want.  I shall
take him back with me."

"To whom?"

"To whom?  To those who sent me, sirrah!"

I thundered.  "You do not seem to be much in the Duke's confidence,
captain," I went on; "now take a word of advice from me!  There is
nothing:  so easily cast off as an over-officious servant!  He goes too
far--and he goes like an old glove!  An old glove," I repeated grimly,
sneering in his face, "which saves the hand and suffers itself.  Beware
of too much zeal, Captain Pallavicini!  It is a dangerous thing!"

He turned pale with anger at being thus treated by a beardless boy.
But he faltered all the same.  What I said was unpleasant, but the
bravo knew it was true.

I saw the impression I had made, and I turned to the soldiers standing
round.

"Bring here, my friends," I said, "M. de Pavannes' sword!"

One ran up to the guard house and brought it at once.  They were
townsfolk, burgher guards or such like, and for some reason betrayed so
evident a respect for me, that I soberly believe they would have turned
on their temporary leader at my bidding. Pavannes took his sword, and
placed it under his arm.  We both bowed ceremoniously to Pallavicini,
who scowled in response; and slowly, for I was afraid to show any signs
of haste, we walked across the moonlit space to the bottom of the
street by which I had come.  There the gloom swallowed us up at once.
Pavannes touched my sleeve and stopped in the darkness.

"I beg to be allowed to thank you for your aid," he said with emotion,
turning and facing me.  "Whom have I the honour of addressing?"

"M. Anne de Caylus, a friend of your cousin," I replied.

"Indeed?"  he said "well, I thank you most heartily," and we embraced
with warmth.

"But I could have done little," I answered modestly, "on your behalf,
if it had not been for this ring."

"And the virtue of the ring lies in--"

"In--I am sure I cannot say in what!"  I confessed.  And then, in the
sympathy which the scene had naturally created between us, I forgot one
portion of my lady's commands and I added impulsively, "All I know is
that Madame d'O gave it me; and that it has done all, and more than all
she said it would."

"Who gave it to you?"  he asked, grasping my arm so tightly as to hurt
me.

"Madame d'O," I repeated.  It was too late to draw back now.

"That woman!"  he ejaculated in a strange low whisper.  "Is it
possible?  That woman gave it you?"

I wandered what on earth he meant, surprise, scorn and dislike were so
blended in his tone.  It even seemed to me that he drew off from me
somewhat.  "Yes, M. de Pavannes," I replied, offended and indignant,
"It is so far possible that it is the truth; and more, I think you
would not so speak of this lady if you knew all; and that it was
through her your wife was to-day freed from those who were detaining
her, and taken safely home!"

"Ha!"  he cried eagerly.  "Then where has my wife been?"

"At the house of Mirepoix, the glover," I answered coldly, "in the Rue
Platriere.  Do you know him?  You do.  Well, she was kept there a
prisoner, until we helped her to escape an hour or so ago."

He did not seem to comprehend even then.  I could see little of his
face, but there was doubt and wonder in his tone when he spoke.
"Mirepoix the glover," he murmured.  "He is an honest man enough,
though a Catholic.  She was kept there!  Who kept her there?"

"The Abbess of the Ursulines seems to have been at the bottom of it," I
explained, fretting with impatience.  This wonder was misplaced, I
thought; and time was passing.  "Madame d'O found out where she was," I
continued, "and took her home, and then sent me to fetch you, hearing
you had crossed the river.  That is the story in brief."

"That woman sent you to fetch me?"  he repeated again.

"Yes," I answered angrily.  "She did, M. de Pavannes."

"Then," he said slowly, and with an air of solemn conviction which
could not but impress me, "there is a trap laid for me! She is the
worst, the most wicked, the vilest of women!  If she sent you, this is
a trap!  And my wife has fallen into it already!  Heaven help her--and
me--if it be so!"



CHAPTER VIII.

THE PARISIAN MATINS.

There are some statements for which it is impossible to be prepared;
statements so strong and so startling that it is impossible to answer
them except by action--by a blow.  And this of M. de Pavannes was one
of these.  If there had been any one present, I think I should have
given him the lie and drawn upon him.  But alone with him at midnight
in the shadow near the bottom of the Rue des Fosses, with no witnesses,
with every reason to feel friendly towards him, what was I to do?

As a fact, I did nothing.  I stood, silent and stupefied, waiting to
hear more.  He did not keep me long.

"She is my wife's sister," he continued grimly.  "But I have no reason
to shield her on that account!  Shield her?  Had you lived at court
only a month I might shield her all I could, M. de Caylus, it would
avail nothing.  Not Madame de Sauves is better known.  And I would not
if I could!  I know well, though my wife will not believe it, that
there is nothing so near Madame d'O's heart as to get rid of her sister
and me--of both of us--that she may succeed to Madeleine's inheritance!
Oh, yes, I had good grounds for being nervous yesterday, when my wife
did not return," he added excitedly.

"But there at least you wrong Madame d'O!"  I cried, shocked and
horrified by an accusation, which seemed so much more dreadful in the
silence and gloom--and withal so much less preposterous than it might
have seemed in the daylight.  "There you certainly wrong her!  For
shame!  M. de Pavannes."

He came a step nearer, and laying a hand on my sleeve peered into my
face.  "Did you see a priest with her?"  he asked slowly.  "A man
called the Coadjutor--a down-looking dog?"

I said--with a shiver of dread, a sudden revulsion of feeling, born of
his manner--that I had.  And I explained the part the priest had taken.

"Then," Pavannes rejoined, "I am right There IS a trap laid for me.
The Abbess of the Ursulines!  She abduct my wife?  Why, she is her
dearest friend, believe me.  It is impossible.  She would be more
likely to save her from danger than to--umph!  wait a minute."  I did:
I waited, dreading what he might discover, until he muttered, checking
himself--"Can that be it?  Can it be that the Abbess did know of some
danger threatening us, and would have put Madeleine in a safe retreat?
I wonder!"

And I wondered; and then--well, thoughts are like gunpowder.  The least
spark will fire a train.  His words were few, but they formed spark
enough to raise such a flare in my brain as for a moment blinded me,
and shook me so that I trembled.  The shock over, I was left face to
face with a possibility of wickedness such as I could never have
suspected of myself.  I remembered Mirepoix's distress and the priest's
eagerness.  I re-called the gruff warning Bezers--even Bezers, and
there was something very odd in Bezers giving a warning!--had given
Madame de Pavannes when he told her that she would be better where she
was.  I thought of the wakefulness which I had marked in the streets,
the silent hurrying to and fro, the signs of coming strife, and
contrasted these with the quietude and seeming safety of Mirepoix's
house; and I hastily asked Pavannes at what time he had been arrested.

"About an hour before midnight," he answered.

"Then you know nothing of what is happening?"  I replied quickly. "Why,
even while we are loitering here--but listen!"

And with all speed, stammering indeed in my haste and anxiety, I told
him what I had noticed in the streets, and the hints I had heard, and I
showed him the badges with which Madame had furnished me.

His manner when he had heard me out frightened me still more.  He drew
me on in a kind of fury to a house in the windows of which some lighted
candles had appeared not a minute before.

"The ring!"  he cried, "let me see the ring!  Whose is it?"

He held up my hand to this chance light and we looked at the ring.  It
was a heavy gold signet, with one curious characteristic:  it had two
facets.  On one of these was engraved the letter "H," and above it a
crown.  On the other was an eagle with outstretched wings.

Pavannes let my hand drop and leaned against the wall in sudden
despair.  "It is the Duke of Guise's," he muttered.  "It is the eagle
of Lorraine."

"Ha!"  said I softly, seeing light.  The Duke was the idol then, as
later, of the Parisian populace, and I understood now why the citizen
soldiers had shown me such respect.  They had taken me for the Duke's
envoy and confidant.

But I saw no farther.  Pavannes did, and murmured bitterly, "We may say
our prayers, we Huguenots.  That is our death-warrant. To-morrow night
there will not be one left in Paris, lad.  Guise has his father's death
to avenge, and these cursed Parisians will do his bidding like the
wolves they are!  The Baron de Rosny warned us of this, word for word.
I would to Heaven we had taken his advice!"

"Stay!"  I cried--he was going too fast for me--"stay!"  His monstrous
conception, though it marched some way with my own suspicions, outran
them far!  I saw no sufficient grounds for it. "The King--the king
would not permit such a thing, M. de Pavannes," I argued.

"Boy, you are blind!"  he rejoined impatiently, for now he saw all and
I nothing.  "Yonder was the Duke of Anjou's captain--Monsieur's
officer, the follower of France's brother, mark you! And HE--he obeyed
the Duke's ring!  The Duke has a free hand to-night, and he hates us.
And the river.  Why are we not to cross the river?  The King indeed!
The King has undone us.  He has sold us to his brother and the Guises.
VA CHASSER L'IDOLE" for the second time I heard the quaint phrase,
which I learned afterwards was an anagram of the King's name, Charles
de Valois, used by the Protestants as a password--"VA CHASSER L'IDOLE
has betrayed us!  I remember the very words he used to the Admiral,
'Now we have got you here we shall not let you go so easily!' Oh, the
traitor!  The wretched traitor!"

He leaned against the wall overcome by the horror of the conviction
which had burst upon him, and unnerved by the imminence of the peril.
At all times he was an unready man, I fancy, more fit, courage apart,
for the college than the field; and now he gave way to despair.
Perhaps the thought of his wife unmanned him.  Perhaps the excitement
through which he had already gone tended to stupefy him, or the
suddenness of the discovery.

At any rate, I was the first to gather my wits together, and my
earliest impulse was to tear into two parts a white handkerchief I had
in my pouch, and fasten one to his sleeve, the other in his hat, in
rough imitation of the badges I wore myself.

It will appear from this that I no longer trusted Madame d'O.  I was
not convinced, it is true, of her conscious guilt, still I did not
trust her entirely.  "Do not wear them on your return," she had said
and that was odd; although I could not yet believe that she was such a
siren as Father Pierre had warned us of, telling tales from old poets.
Yet I doubted, shuddering as I did so.  Her companionship with that
vile priest, her strange eagerness to secure Pavannes' return, her
mysterious directions to me, her anxiety to take her sister home--home,
where she would be exposed to danger, as being in a known Huguenot's
house--these things pointed to but one conclusion; still that one was
so horrible that I would not, even while I doubted and distrusted her,
I would not, I could not accept it.  I put it from me, and refused to
believe it, although during the rest of that night it kept coming back
to me and knocking for admission at my brain.

All this flashed through my mind while I was fixing on Pavannes'
badges.  Not that I lost time about it, for from the moment I grasped
the position as he conceived it, every minute we had wasted on
explanations seemed to me an hour.  I reproached myself for having
forgotten even for an instant that which had brought us to town--the
rescue of Kit's lover.  We had small chance now of reaching him in
time, misled as we had been by this miserable mistake in identity.  If
my companion's fears were well founded, Louis would fall in the general
massacre of the Huguenots, probably before we could reach him.  If
ill-founded, still we had small reason to hope.  Bezers' vengeance
would not wait.  I knew him too well to think it.  A Guise might spare
his foe, but the Vidame--the Vidame never!  We had warned Madame de
Pavannes it was true; but that abnormal exercise of benevolence could
only, I cynically thought, have the more exasperated the devil within
him, which now would be ravening like a dog disappointed of its
victuals.

I glanced up at the line of sky visible between the tall houses, and
lo!  the dawn was coming.  It wanted scarcely half-an-hour of daylight,
though down in the dark streets about us the night still reigned.  Yes,
the morning was coming, bright and hopeful, and the city was quiet.
There were no signs, no sounds of riot or disorder.  Surely, I thought,
surely Pavannes must be mistaken.  Either the plot had never existed,
that was most likely, or it had been abandoned, or perhaps--Crack!

A pistol shot!  Short, sharp, ominous it rang out on the instant, a
solitary sound in the night!  It was somewhere near us, and I stopped.
I had been speaking to my companion at the moment. "Where was it?"  I
cried, looking behind me.

"Close to us.  Near the Louvre," he answered, listening intently. "See!
See!  Ah, heavens!"  he continued in a voice of despair, "it was a
signal!"

It was.  One, two, three!  Before I could count so far, lights sprang
into brightness in the windows of nine out of ten houses in the short
street where we stood, as if lighted by a single hand.  Before too I
could count as many more, or ask him what this meant, before indeed, we
could speak or stir from the spot, or think what we should do, with a
hurried clang and clash, as if brought into motion by furious frenzied
hands, a great bell just above our heads began to boom and whirr!  It
hurled its notes into space, it suddenly filled all the silence.  It
dashed its harsh sounds down upon the trembling city, till the air
heaved, and the houses about us rocked.  It made in an instant a
pandemonium of the quiet night.

We turned and hurried instinctively from the place, crouching and
amazed, looking upwards with bent shoulders and scared faces. "What is
it?  What is it?"  I cried, half in resentment; half in terror.  It
deafened me.

"The bell of St. Germain l'Auxerrois!"  he shouted in answer. "The
Church of the Louvre.  It is as I said.  We are doomed!"

"Doomed?  No!"  I replied fiercely, for my courage seemed to rise again
on the wave of sound and excitement as if rebounding from the momentary
shock.  "Never!  We wear the devil's livery, and he will look after his
own.  Draw, man, and let him that stops us look to himself.  You know
the way.  Lead on!"  I cried savagely.

He caught the infection and drew his sword.  So we started boldly, and
the result justified my confidence.  We looked, no doubt, as like
murderers as any who were abroad that night. Moving in this desperate
guise we hastened up that street and into another--still pursued by the
din and clangour of the bell--and then a short distance along a third.
We were not stopped or addressed by anyone, though numbers, increasing
each moment as door after door opened, and we drew nearer to the heart
of the commotion, were hurrying in the same direction, side by side
with us; and though in front, where now and again lights gleamed on a
mass of weapons, or on white eager faces, filling some alley from wall
to wall, we heard the roar of voices rising and falling like the murmur
of an angry sea.

All was blur, hurry, confusion, tumult.  Yet I remember, as we pressed
onwards with the stream and part of it, certain sharp outlines.  I
caught here and there a glimpse of a pale scared face at a window, a
half-clad form at a door, of the big, wondering eyes of a child held up
to see us pass, of a Christ at a corner ruddy in the smoky glare of a
link, of a woman armed, and in man's clothes, who walked some distance
side by side with us, and led off a ribald song.  I retain a memory of
these things:  of brief bursts of light and long intervals of darkness,
and always, as we tramped forwards, my hand on Pavannes' sleeve, of an
ever-growing tumult in front--an ever-rising flood of noise.

At last we came to a standstill where a side street ran out of ours.
Into this the hurrying throng tried to wheel, and, unable to do so,
halted, and pressed about the head of the street, which was already
full to overflowing; and so sought with hungry eyes for places whence
they might look down it.  Pavannes and I struggled only to get through
the crowd--to get on; but the efforts of those behind partly aiding and
partly thwarting our own, presently forced us to a position whence we
could not avoid seeing what was afoot.

The street--this side street was ablaze with light.  From end to end
every gable, every hatchment was glowing, every window was flickering
in the glare of torches.  It was paved too with faces--human faces, yet
scarcely human--all looking one way, all looking upward; and the noise,
as from time to time this immense crowd groaned or howled in unison,
like a wild beast in its fury, was so appalling, that I clutched
Pavannes' arm and clung to him in momentary terror.  I do not wonder
now that I quailed, though sometimes I have heard that sound since.
For there is nothing in the world so dreadful as that brute beast we
call the CANAILLE, when the chain is off and its cowardly soul is
roused.

Near our end of the street a group of horsemen rising island-like from
the sea of heads, sat motionless in their saddles about a gateway.
They were silent, taking no notice of the rioting fiends shouting at
their girths, but watching in grim quiet what was passing within the
gates.  They were handsomely dressed, although some wore corslets over
their satin coats or lace above buff jerkins.  I could even at that
distance see the jewels gleam in the bonnet of one who seemed to be
their leader.  He was in the centre of the band, a very young man,
perhaps twenty or twenty-one, of most splendid presence, sitting his
horse superbly.  He wore a grey riding-coat, and was a head taller than
any of his companions.  There was pride in the very air with which his
horse bore him.

I did not need to ask Pavannes who he was.  I KNEW that he was the Duke
of Guise, and that the house before which he stood was Coligny's.  I
knew what was being done there.  And in the same moment I sickened with
horror and rage.  I had a vision of grey hairs and blood and fury
scarcely human, And I rebelled.  I battled with the rabble about me.  I
forced my way through them tooth and nail after Pavannes, intent only
on escaping, only on getting away from there.  And so we neither halted
nor looked back until we were clear of the crowd and had left the blaze
of light and the work doing by it some way behind us.

We found ourselves then in the mouth of an obscure alley which my
companion whispered would bring us to his house; and here we paused to
take breath and look back.  The sky was red behind us, the air full of
the clash and din of the tocsin, and the flood of sounds which poured
from every tower and steeple.  From the eastward came the rattle of
drums and random shots, and shrieks of "A BAS COLIGNY!"  "A BAS LES
HUGUENOTS!"  Meanwhile the city was rising as one man, pale at this
dread awakening.  From every window men and women, frightened by the
uproar, were craning their necks, asking or answering questions or
hurriedly calling for and kindling tapers.  But as yet the general
populace seemed to be taking no active part in the disorder.

Pavannes raised his hat an instant as we stood in the shadow of the
houses.  "The noblest man in France is dead," he said, softly and
reverently.  "God rest his soul!  They have had their way with him and
killed him like a dog.  He was an old man and they did not spare him!
A noble, and they have called in the CANAILLE to tear him.  But be
sure, my friend"--and as the speaker's tone changed and grew full and
proud, his form seemed to swell with it--"be sure the cruel shall not
live out half their days!  No. He that takes the knife shall perish by
the knife!  And go to his own place!  I shall not see it, but you will!"

His words made no great impression on me then.  My hardihood was
returning.  I was throbbing with fierce excitement, and tingling for
the fight.  But years afterwards, when the two who stood highest in the
group about Coligny's threshold died, the one at thirty-eight, the
other at thirty-five--when Henry of Guise and Henry of Valois died
within six months of one another by the assassin's knife--I remembered
Pavannes' augury.  And remembering it, I read the ways of Providence,
and saw that the very audacity of which Guise took advantage to entrap
Coligny led him too in his turn to trip smiling and bowing, a comfit
box in his hand and the kisses of his mistress damp on his lips, into a
king's closet--a king's closet at Blois!  Led him to lift the
curtain--ah!  to lift the curtain, what Frenchman does not know the
tale?--behind which stood the Admiral!

To return to our own fortunes; after a hurried glance we resumed our
way, and sped through the alley, holding a brief consultation as we
went.  Pavannes' first hasty instinct to seek shelter at home began to
lose its force, and he to consider whether his return would not
endanger his wife.  The mob might be expected to spare her, he argued.
Her death would not benefit any private foes if he escaped.  He was for
keeping away therefore.  But I would not agree to this.  The priest's
crew of desperadoes--assuming Pavannes' suspicions to be correct--would
wait some time, no doubt, to give the master of the house a chance to
return, but would certainly attack sooner or later out of greed, if
from no other motive.  Then the lady's fate would at the best be
uncertain.  I was anxious myself to rejoin my brothers, and take all
future chances, whether of saving our Louis, or escaping ourselves,
with them.  United we should be four good swords, and might at least
protect Madame de Pavannes to a place of safety, if no opportunity of
succouring Louis should present itself.  We had too the Duke's ring,
and this might be of service at a pinch. "No," I urged, "let us get
together.  We two will slip in at the front gate, and bolt and bar it,
and then we will all escape in a body at the back, while they are
forcing the gateway."

"There is no door at the back," he answered, shaking his head.

"There are windows?"

"They are too strongly barred.  We could not break out in the time," he
explained, with a groan.

I paused at that, crestfallen.  But danger quickened my wits.  In a
moment I had another plan, not so hopeful and more dangerous, yet worth
trying I thought, I told him of it, and he agreed to it.  As he nodded
assent we emerged into a street, and I saw--for the grey light of
morning was beginning to penetrate between the houses--that we were
only a few yards from the gateway, and the small door by which I had
seen my brothers enter.  Were they still in the house?  Were they safe?
I had been away an hour at least.

Anxious as I was about them, I looked round me very keenly as we
flitted across the road, and knocked gently at the door.  I thought it
so likely that we should be fallen upon here, that I stood on my guard
while we waited.  But we were not molested. The street, being at some
distance from the centre of the commotion, was still and empty, with no
signs of life apparent except the rows of heads poked through the
windows--all possessing eyes which watched us heedfully and in perfect
silence.  Yes, the street was quite empty:  except, ah!  except, for
that lurking figure, which, even as I espied it, shot round a distant
angle of the wall, and was lost to sight.

"There!"  I cried, reckless now who might hear me, "knock!  knock
louder!  never mind the noise.  The alarm is given.  A score of people
are watching us, and yonder spy has gone off to summon his friends."

The truth was my anger was rising.  I could bear no longer the silent
regards of all those eyes at the windows.  I writhed under them--cruel,
pitiless eyes they were.  I read in them a morbid curiosity, a patient
anticipation that drove me wild.  Those men and women gazing on us so
stonily knew my companion's rank and faith.  They had watched him
riding in and out daily, one of the sights of their street, gay and
gallant; and now with the same eyes they were watching greedily for the
butchers to come.  The very children took a fresh interest in him, as
one doomed and dying; and waited panting for the show to begin.  So I
read them.

"Knock!"  I repeated angrily, losing all patience.  Had I been foolish
in bringing him back to this part of the town where every soul knew
him?  "Knock; we must get in, whether or no.  They cannot all have left
the house!"

I kicked the door desperately, and my relief was great when it opened.
A servant with a pale face stood before me, his knees visibly shaking.
And behind him was Croisette.

I think we fell straightway into one another's arms.

"And Marie," I cried, "Marie?"

"Marie is within, and madame," he answered joyfully; "we are together
again and nothing matters, But oh, Anne, where have you been?  And what
is the matter?  Is it a great fire?  Or is the king dead?  Or what is
it?"

I told him.  I hastily poured out some of the things which had happened
to me, and some which I feared were in store for others. Naturally he
was surprised and shocked by the latter, though his fears had already
been aroused.  But his joy and relief, when he heard the mystery of
Louis de Pavannes' marriage explained, were so great that they
swallowed up all other feelings.  He could not say enough about it.  He
pictured Louis again and again as Kit's lover, as our old friend, our
companion; as true, staunch, brave without fear, without reproach:  and
it was long before his eyes ceased to sparkle, his tongue to run
merrily, the colour to mantle in his cheeks--long that is as time is
counted by minutes. But presently the remembrance of Louis' danger and
our own position returned more vividly.  Our plan for rescuing him had
failed--failed!

"No!  no!"  cried Croisette, stoutly.  He would not hear of it. He
would not have it at any price.  "No, we will not give up hope!  We
will go shoulder to shoulder and find him.  Louis is as brave as a lion
and as quick as a weasel.  We will find him in time yet.  We will go
when--I mean as soon as--"

He faltered, and paused.  His sudden silence as he looked round the
empty forecourt in which we stood was eloquent.  The cold light, faint
and uncertain yet, was stealing into the court, disclosing a row of
stables on either side, and a tiny porter's hutch by the gates, and
fronting us a noble house of four storys, tall, grey, grim-looking.

I assented; gloomily however.  "Yes," I said, "we will go when--"

And I too stopped.  The same thought was in my mind.  How could we
leave these people?  How could we leave madame in her danger and
distress?  How could we return her kindness by desertion?  We could
not.  No, not for Kit's sake.  Because after all Louis, our Louis, was
a man, and must take his chance.  He must take his chance.  But I
groaned.

So that was settled.  I had already explained our plan to Croisette:
and now as we waited he began to tell me a story, a long, confused
story about Madame d'O.  I thought he was talking for the sake of
talking--to keep up our spirits--and I did not attend much to him; so
that he had not reached the gist of it, or at least I had not grasped
it, when a noise without stayed his tongue.  It was the tramp of
footsteps, apparently of a large party in the street.  It forced him to
break off, and promptly drove us all to our posts.

But before we separated a slight figure, hardly noticeable in that dim,
uncertain light, passed me quickly, laying for an instant a soft hand
in mine as I stood waiting by the gates.  I have said I scarcely saw
the figure, though I did see the kind timid eyes, and the pale cheeks
under the hood; but I bent over the hand and kissed it, and felt, truth
to tell, no more regret nor doubt where our duty lay.  But stood,
waiting patiently.



CHAPTER IX.

THE HEAD OF ERASMUS.

Waiting, and waiting alone!  The gates were almost down now.  The gang
of ruffians without, reinforced each moment by volunteers eager for
plunder, rained blows unceasingly on hinge and socket; and still hotter
and faster through a dozen rifts in the timbers came the fire of their
threats and curses.  Many grew tired, but others replaced them.  Tools
broke, but they brought more and worked with savage energy.  They had
shown at first a measure of prudence; looking to be fired on, and to be
resisted by men, surprised, indeed, but desperate; and the bolder of
them only had advanced.  But now they pressed round unchecked, meeting
no resistance.  They would scarcely stand back to let the sledges have
swing; but hallooed and ran in on the creaking beams and beat them with
their fists, whenever the gates swayed under a blow.

One stout iron bar still held its place.  And this I watched as if
fascinated.  I was alone in the empty courtyard, standing a little
aside, sheltered by one of the stone pillars from which the gates hung.
Behind me the door of the house stood ajar. Candles, which the daylight
rendered garish, still burned in the rooms on the first floor, of which
the tall narrow windows were open.  On the wide stone sill of one of
these stood Croisette, a boyish figure, looking silently down at me,
his hand on the latticed shutter.  He looked pale, and I nodded and
smiled at him.  I felt rather anger than fear myself; remembering, as
the fiendish cries half-deafened me, old tales of the Jacquerie and its
doings, and how we had trodden it out.

Suddenly the din and tumult flashed to a louder note; as when hounds on
the scent give tongue at sight.  I turned quickly from the house,
recalled to a sense of the position and peril.  The iron bar was
yielding to the pressure.  Slowly the left wing of the gate was sinking
inwards.  Through the widening chasm I caught a glimpse of wild, grimy
faces and bloodshot eyes, and heard above the noise a sharp cry from
Croisette--a cry of terror.  Then I turned and ran, with a defiant
gesture and an answering yell, right across the forecourt and up the
steps to the door.

I ran the faster for the sharp report of a pistol behind me, and the
whirr of a ball past my ear.  But I was not scared by it: and as my
feet alighted with a bound on the topmost step, I glanced back.  The
dogs were halfway across the court.  I made a bungling attempt to shut
and lock the great door--failed in this; and heard behind me a roar of
coarse triumph.  I waited for no more. I darted up the oak staircase
four steps at a time, and rushed into the great drawing-room on my
left, banging the door behind me.

The once splendid room was in a state of strange disorder.  Some of the
rich tapestry had been hastily torn down.  One window was closed and
shuttered; no doubt Croisette had done it.  The other two were open--as
if there had not been time to close them--and the cold light which they
admitted contrasted in ghastly fashion with the yellow rays of candles
still burning in the sconces. The furniture had been huddled aside or
piled into a barricade, a CHEVAUX DE FRISE of chairs and tables
stretching across the width of the room, its interstices stuffed with,
and its weakness partly screened by, the torn-down hangings.  Behind
this frail defence their backs to a door which seemed to lead to an
inner room, stood Marie and Croisette, pale and defiant.  The former
had a long pike; the latter levelled a heavy, bell-mouthed arquebuse
across the back of a chair, and blew up his match as I entered.  Both
had in addition procured swords.  I darted like a rabbit through a
little tunnel left on purpose for me in the rampart, and took my stand
by them.

"Is all right?"  ejaculated Croisette turning to me nervously.

"All right, I think," I answered.  I was breathless.

"You are not hurt?"

"Not touched!"

I had just time then to draw my sword before the assailants streamed
into the room, a dozen ruffians, reeking and tattered, with flushed
faces and greedy, staring eyes.  Once inside, however, suddenly--so
suddenly that an idle spectator might have found the change
ludicrous--they came to a stop.  Their wild cries ceased, and tumbling
over one another with curses and oaths they halted, surveying us in
muddled surprise; seeing what was before them, and not liking it.
Their leader appeared to be a tall butcher with a pole-axe on his
half-naked shoulder; but there were among them two or three soldiers in
the royal livery and carrying pikes.  They had looked for victims only,
having met with no resistance at the gate, and the foremost recoiled
now on finding themselves confronted by the muzzle of the arquebuse and
the lighted match.

I seized the occasion.  I knew, indeed, that the pause presented our
only chance, and I sprang on a chair and waved my hand for silence.
The instinct of obedience for the moment asserted itself; there was a
stillness in the room.

"Beware!"  I cried loudly--as loudly and confidently as I could,
considering that there was a quaver at my heart as I looked on those
savage faces, which met and yet avoided my eye.  "Beware of what you
do!  We are Catholics one and all like yourselves, and good sons of the
Church.  Ay, and good subjects too!  VIVE LE ROI, gentlemen!  God save
the King!  I say."  And I struck the barricade with my sword until the
metal rang again.  "God save the King!"

"Cry VIVE LA MESSE!"  shouted one.

"Certainly, gentlemen!"  I replied, with politeness.  "With all my
heart.  VIVE LA MESSE!  VIVE LA MESSE!"

This took the butcher, who luckily was still sober, utterly aback.  He
had never thought of this.  He stared at us as if the ox he had been
about to fell had opened its mouth and spoken, and grievously at a
loss, he looked for help to his companions.

Later in the day, some Catholics were killed by the mob.  But their
deaths as far as could be learned afterwards were due to private feuds.
Save in such cases--and they were few--the cry of VIVE LA MESSE!
always obtained at least a respite:  more easily of course in the
earlier hours of the morning when the mob were scarce at ease in their
liberty to kill, while killing still seemed murder, and men were not
yet drunk with bloodshed.

I read the hesitation of the gang in their faces:  and when one asked
roughly who we were, I replied with greater boldness, "I am M. Anne de
Caylus, nephew to the Vicomte de Caylus, Governor, under the King, of
Bayonne and the Landes!"  This I said with what majesty I could.  "And
these" I continued--"are my brothers. You will harm us at your peril,
gentlemen.  The Vicomte, believe me, will avenge every hair of our
heads."

I can shut my eyes now and see the stupid wonder, the baulked ferocity
of those gaping faces.  Dull and savage as the men were they were
impressed; they saw reason indeed, and all seemed going well for us
when some one in the rear shouted, "Cursed whelps! Throw them over!"

I looked swiftly in the direction whence the voice came--the darkest
corner of the room the corner by the shuttered window.  I thought I
made out a slender figure, cloaked and masked--a woman's it might be
but I could not be certain and beside it a couple of sturdy fellows,
who kept apart from the herd and well behind their fugleman.

The speaker's courage arose no doubt from his position at the back of
the room, for the foremost of the assailants seemed less determined.
We were only three, and we must have gone down, barricade and all,
before a rush.  But three are three.  And an arquebuse--Croisette's
match burned splendidly--well loaded with slugs is an ugly weapon at
five paces, and makes nasty wounds, besides scattering its charge
famously.  This, a good many of them and the leaders in particular,
seemed to recognise.  We might certainly take two or three lives:  and
life is valuable to its owner when plunder is afoot.  Besides most of
them had common sense enough to remember that there were scores of
Huguenots--genuine heretics--to be robbed for the killing, so why go
out of the way, they reasoned, to cut a Catholic throat, and perhaps
get into trouble.  Why risk Montfaucon for a whim?  and offend a man of
influence like the Vicomte de Caylus, for nothing!

Unfortunately at this crisis their original design was recalled to
their minds by the same voice behind, crying out, "Pavannes! Where is
Pavannes?"

"Ay!"  shouted the butcher, grasping the idea, and at the same time
spitting on his hands and taking a fresh grip of the axe, "Show us the
heretic dog, and go!  Let us at him."

"M. de Pavannes," I said coolly--but I could not take my eyes off the
shining blade of that man's axe, it was so very broad and sharp--"is
not here!"

"That is a lie!  He is in that room behind you!"  the prudent gentleman
in the background called out.  "Give him up!"

"Ay, give him up!"  echoed the man of the pole-axe almost good
humouredly, "or it will be the worse for you.  Let us have at him and
get you gone!"

This with an air of much reason, while a growl as of a chained beast
ran through the crowd, mingled with cries of "A MORT LES HUGUENOTS!
VIVE LORRAINE!"--cries which seemed to show that all did not approve of
the indulgence offered us.

"Beware, gentlemen, beware," I urged, "I swear he is not here!  I swear
it, do you hear?"

A howl of impatience and then a sudden movement of the crowd as though
the rush were coming warned me to temporize no longer. "Stay!  Stay!"
I added hastily.  "One minute!  Hear me!  You are too many for us.
Will you swear to let us go safe and untouched, if we give you passage?"

A dozen voices shrieked assent.  But I looked at the butcher only.  He
seemed to be an honest man, out of his profession.

"Ay, I swear it!"  he cried with a nod.

"By the Mass?"

"By the Mass."

I twitched Croisette's sleeve, and he tore the fuse from his weapon,
and flung the gun--too heavy to be of use to us longer--to the ground.
It was done in a moment.  While the mob swept over the barricade, and
smashed the rich furniture of it in wanton malice, we filed aside, and
nimbly slipped under it one by one.  Then we hurried in single file to
the end of the room, no one taking much notice of us.  All were
pressing on, intent on their prey.  We gained the door as the butcher
struck his first blow on that which we had guarded--on that which we
had given up. We sprang down the stairs with bounding hearts, heard as
we reached the outer door the roar of many voices, but stayed not to
look behind--paused indeed for nothing.  Fear, to speak candidly, lent
us wings.  In three seconds we had leapt the prostrate gates, and were
in the street.  A cripple, two or three dogs, a knot of women looking
timidly yet curiously in, a horse tethered to the staple--we saw
nothing else.  No one stayed us.  No one raised a hand, and in another
minute we had turned a corner, and were out of sight of the house.

"They will take a gentleman's word another time," I said with a quiet
smile as I put up my sword.

"I would like to see her face at this moment," Croisette replied. "You
saw Madame d'O?"

I shook my head, not answering.  I was not sure, and I had a queer,
sickening dread of the subject.  If I had seen her, I had seen oh!  it
was too horrible, too unnatural!  Her own sister! Her own brother
in-law!

I hastened to change the subject.  "The Pavannes," I made shift to say,
"must have had five minutes' start."

"More," Croisette answered, "if Madame and he got away at once. If all
has gone well with them, and they have not been stopped in the streets
they should be at Mirepoix's by now.  They seemed to be pretty sure
that he would take them in."

"Ah!"  I sighed.  "What fools we were to bring madame from that place!
If we had not meddled with her affairs we might have reached Louis long
ago our Louis, I mean."

"True," Croisette answered softly, "but remember that then we should
not have saved the other Louis as I trust we have.  He would still be
in Pallavicini's hands.  Come, Anne, let us think it is all for the
best," he added, his face shining with a steady courage that shamed me.
"To the rescue!  Heaven will help us to be in time yet!"

"Ay, to the rescue!"  I replied, catching his spirit.  "First to the
right, I think, second to the left, first on the right again. That was
the direction given us, was it not?  The house opposite a book-shop
with the sign of the Head of Erasmus.  Forward, boys! We may do it yet."

But before I pursue our fortunes farther let me explain.  The room we
had guarded so jealously was empty!  The plan had been mine and I was
proud of it.  For once Croisette had fallen into his rightful place.
My flight from the gate, the vain attempt to close the house, the
barricade before the inner door--these were all designed to draw the
assailants to one spot.  Pavannes and his wife--the latter hastily
disguised as a boy--had hidden behind the door of the hutch by the
gates--the porter's hutch, and had slipped out and fled in the first
confusion of the attack.

Even the servants, as we learned afterwards, who had hidden themselves
in the lower parts of the house got away in the same manner, though
some of them--they were but few in all were stopped as Huguenots and
killed before the day ended.  I had the more reason to hope that
Pavannes and his wife would get clear off, inasmuch as I had given the
Duke's ring to him, thinking it might serve him in a strait, and
believing that we should have little to fear ourselves once clear of
his house; unless we should meet the Vidame indeed.

We did not meet him as it turned out; but before we had traversed a
quarter of the distance we had to go we found that fears based on
reason were not the only terrors we had to resist.  Pavannes' house,
where we had hitherto been, stood at some distance from the centre of
the blood-storm which was enwrapping unhappy Paris that morning.  It
was several hundred paces from the Rue de Bethisy where the Admiral
lived, and what with this comparative remoteness and the excitement of
our own little drama, we had not attended much to the fury of the
bells, the shots and cries and uproar which proclaimed the state of the
city.  We had not pictured the scenes which were happening so near.
Now in the streets the truth broke upon us, and drove the blood from
our cheeks.  A hundred yards, the turning of a corner, sufficed.  We
who but yesterday left the country, who only a week before were boys,
careless as other boys, not recking of death at all, were plunged now
into the midst of horrors I cannot describe.  And the awful contrast
between the sky above and the things about us! Even now the lark was
singing not far from us; the sunshine was striking the topmost storeys
of the houses; the fleecy clouds were passing overhead, the freshness
of a summer morning was--

Ah! where was it?  Not here in the narrow lanes surely, that echoed and
re-echoed with shrieks and curses and frantic prayers: in which bands
of furious men rushed up and down, and where archers of the guard and
the more cruel rabble were breaking in doors and windows, and hurrying
with bloody weapons from house to house, seeking, pursuing, and at last
killing in some horrid corner, some place of darkness--killing with
blow on blow dealt on writhing bodies!  Not here, surely, where each
minute a child, a woman died silently, a man snarling like a
wolf--happy if he had snatched his weapon and got his back to the wall:
where foul corpses dammed the very blood that ran down the kennel, and
children--little children--played with them!

I was at Cahors in 1580 in the great street fight; and there women were
killed, I was with Chatillon nine years later, when he rode through the
Faubourgs of Paris, with this very day and his father Coligny in his
mind, and gave no quarter.  I was at Courtas and Ivry, and more than
once have seen prisoners led out to be piked in batches--ay, and by
hundreds!  But war is war, and these were its victims, dying for the
most part under God's heaven with arms in their hands:  not men and
women fresh roused from their sleep.  I felt on those occasions no such
horror, I have never felt such burning pity and indignation as on the
morning I am describing, that long-past summer morning when I first saw
the sun shining on the streets of Paris.  Croisette clung to me, sick
and white, shutting his eyes and ears, and letting me guide him as I
would.  Marie strode along on the other side of him, his lips closed,
his eyes sinister.  Once a soldier of the guard whose blood-stained
hands betrayed the work he had done, came reeling--he was drunk, as
were many of the butchers--across our path, and I gave way a little.
Marie did not, but walked stolidly on as if he did not see him, as if
the way were clear, and there were no ugly thing in God's image
blocking it.

Only his hand went as if by accident to the haft of his dagger. The
archer--fortunately for himself and for us too--reeled clear of us.  We
escaped that danger.  But to see women killed and pass by--it was
horrible!  So horrible that if in those moments I had had the
wishing-cap, I would have asked but for five thousand riders, and leave
to charge with them through the streets of Paris!  I would have had the
days of the Jacquerie back again, and my men-at-arms behind me!

For ourselves, though the orgy was at its height when we passed, we
were not molested.  We were stopped indeed three times--once in each of
the streets we traversed--by different bands of murderers.  But as we
wore the same badges as themselves, and cried "VIVE LA MESSE!"  and
gave our names, we were allowed to proceed.  I can give no idea of the
confusion and uproar, and I scarcely believe myself now that we saw
some of the things we witnessed.  Once a man gaily dressed, and
splendidly mounted, dashed past us, waving his naked sword and crying
in a frenzied way "Bleed them!  Bleed them!  Bleed in May, as good
to-day!" and never ceased crying out the same words until he passed
beyond our hearing.  Once we came upon the bodies of a father and two
sons, which lay piled together in the kennel; partly stripped already.
The youngest boy could not have been more than thirteen, I mention this
group, not as surpassing others in pathos, but because it is well known
now that this boy, Jacques Nompar de Caumont, was not dead, but lives
to-day, my friend the Marshal de la Force.

This reminds me too of the single act of kindness we were able to
perform.  We found ourselves suddenly, on turning a corner, amid a gang
of seven or eight soldiers, who had stopped and surrounded a handsome
boy, apparently about fourteen.  He wore a scholar's gown, and had some
books under his arm, to which he clung firmly--though only perhaps by
instinct--notwithstanding the furious air of the men who were
threatening him with death.  They were loudly demanding his name, as we
paused opposite them.  He either could not or would not give it, but
said several times in his fright that he was going to the College of
Burgundy.  Was he a Catholic?  they cried.  He was silent.  With an
oath the man who had hold of his collar lifted up his pike, and
naturally the lad raised the books to guard his face.  A cry broke from
Croisette. We rushed forward to stay the blow.

"See!  see!"  he exclaimed loudly, his voice arresting the man's arm in
the very act of falling.  "He has a Mass Book!  He has a Mass Book!  He
is not a heretic!  He is a Catholic!"

The fellow lowered his weapon, and sullenly snatched the books. He
looked at them stupidly with bloodshot wandering eyes, the red cross on
the vellum bindings, the only thing he understood.  But it was enough
for him; he bid the boy begone, and released him with a cuff and an
oath.

Croisette was not satisfied with this, though I did not understand his
reason; only I saw him exchange a glance with the lad.  "Come, come!"
he said lightly.  "Give him his books!  You do not want them!"

But on that the men turned savagely upon us.  They did not thank us for
the part we had already taken; and this they thought was going too far.
They were half drunk and quarrelsome, and being two to one, and two
over, began to flourish their weapons in our faces.  Mischief would
certainly have been done, and very quickly, had not an unexpected ally
appeared on our side.

"Put up! put up!" this gentleman cried in a boisterous voice--he was
already in our midst.  "What is all this about?  What is the use of
fighting amongst ourselves, when there is many a bonny throat to cut,
and heaven to be gained by it!  put up, I say!"

"Who are you?"  they roared in chorus.

"The Duke of Guise!"  he answered coolly.  "Let the gentlemen go, and
be hanged to you, you rascals!"

The man's bearing was a stronger argument than his words, for I am sure
that a stouter or more reckless blade never swaggered in church or
street.  I knew him instantly, and even the crew of butchers seemed to
see in him their master.  They hung back a few curses at him, but
having nothing to gain they yielded.  They threw down the books with
contempt--showing thereby their sense of true religion; and trooped off
roaring, "TUES!  TUES!  Aux Huguenots!"  at the top of their voices.

The newcomer thus left with us was Bure--Blaise Bure--the same who only
yesterday, though it seemed months and months back, had lured us into
Bezers' power.  Since that moment we had not seen him.  Now he had
wiped off part of the debt, and we looked at him, uncertain whether to
reproach him or no.  He, however, was not one whit abashed, but
returned our regards with a not unkindly leer.

"I bear no malice, young gentlemen," he said impudently.

"No, I should think not," I answered.

"And besides, we are quits now," the knave continued.

"You are very kind," I said.

"To be sure.  You did me a good turn once," he answered, much to my
surprise.  He seemed to be in earnest now.  "You do not remember it,
young gentleman, but it was you and your brother here"--he pointed to
Croisette--"did it!  And by the Pope and the King of Spain I have not
forgotten it!"

"I have," I said.

"What!  You have forgotten spitting that fellow at Caylus ten days ago?
CA!  SA!  You remember.  And very cleanly done, too! A pretty stroke!
Well, M. Anne, that was a clever fellow, a very clever fellow.  He
thought so and I thought so, and what was more to the purpose the most
noble Raoul de Bezers thought so too. You understand!"

He leered at me and I did understand.  I understood that unwittingly I
had rid Blaise Bure of a rival.  This accounted for the respectful,
almost the kindly way in which he had--well, deceived us.

"That is all," he said.  "If you want as much done for you, let me
know.  For the present, gentlemen, farewell!"

He cocked his hat fiercely, and went off at speed the way we had
ourselves been going; humming as he went,

  "Ce petit homme tant joli,
   Qui toujours cause et toujours rit,
   Qui toujours baise sa mignonne
   Dieu gard' de mal ce petit homme!"

His reckless song came back to us on the summer breeze.  We watched him
make a playful pass at a corpse which some one had propped in ghastly
fashion against a door--and miss it--and go on whistling the same
air--and then a corner hid him from view.

We lingered only a moment ourselves; merely to speak to the boy we had
befriended.

"Show the books if anyone challenges you," said Croisette to him
shrewdly.  Croisette was so much of a boy himself, with his fair hair
like a halo about his white, excited face, that the picture of the two,
one advising the other, seemed to me a strangely pretty one.  "Show the
books and point to the cross on them.  And Heaven send you safe to your
college."

"I would like to know your name, if you please," said the boy. His
coolness and dignity struck me as admirable under the circumstances.
"I am Maximilian de Bethune, son of the Baron de Rosny."

"Then," said Croisette briskly, "one good turn has deserved another.
Your father, yesterday, at Etampes--no it was the day before, but we
have not been in bed--warned us--"

He broke off suddenly; then cried, "Run!  run!"

The boy needed no second warning indeed.  He was off like the wind down
the street, for we had seen and so had he, the stealthy approach of two
or three prowling rascals on the look out for a victim.  They caught
sight of him and were strongly inclined to follow him; but we were
their match in numbers.  The street was otherwise empty at the moment:
and we showed them three excellent reasons why they should give him a
clear start.

His after adventures are well-known:  for he, too, lives.  He was
stopped twice after he left us.  In each case he escaped by showing his
book of offices.  On reaching the college the porter refused to admit
him, and he remained for some time in the open street exposed to
constant danger of losing his life, and knowing not what to do.  At
length he induced the gatekeeper, by the present of some small pieces
of money, to call the principal of the college, and this man humanely
concealed him for three days. The massacre being then at an end, two
armed men in his father's pay sought him out and restored him to his
friends.  So near was France to losing her greatest minister, the Duke
de Sully.

To return to ourselves.  The lad out of sight, we instantly resumed our
purpose, and trying to shut our eyes and ears to the cruelty, and
ribaldry, and uproar through which we had still to pass, we counted our
turnings with a desperate exactness, intent only on one thing--to reach
Louis de Pavannes, to reach the house opposite to the Head of Erasmus,
as quickly as we could.  We presently entered a long, narrow street.
At the end of it the river was visible gleaming and sparkling in the
sunlight.  The street was quiet; quiet and empty.  There was no living
soul to be seen from end to end of it, only a prowling dog.  The noise
of the tumult raging in other parts was softened here by distance and
the intervening houses.  We seemed to be able to breathe more freely.

"This should be our street," said Croisette.

I nodded.  At the same moment I espied, half-way down it, the sign we
needed and pointed to it, But ah!  were we in time?  Or too late?  That
was the question.  By a single impulse we broke into a run, and shot
down the roadway at speed.  A few yards short of the Head of Erasmus we
came, one by one, Croisette first, to a full stop.  A full stop!

The house opposite the bookseller's was sacked!  gutted from top to
bottom.  It was a tall house, immediately fronting the street, and
every window in it was broken.  The door hung forlornly on one hinge,
glaring cracks in its surface showing where the axe had splintered it.
Fragments of glass and ware, hung out and shattered in sheer
wantonness, strewed the steps:  and down one corner of the latter a
dark red stream trickled--to curdle by and by in the gutter.  Whence
came the stream?  Alas!  there was something more to be seen yet,
something our eyes instinctively sought last of all.  The body of a man.

It lay on the threshold, the head hanging back, the wide glazed eyes
looking up to the summer sky whence the sweltering heat would soon pour
down upon it.  We looked shuddering at the face. It was that of a
servant, a valet who had been with Louis at Caylus.  We recognised him
at once for we had known and liked him.  He had carried our guns on the
hills a dozen times, and told us stories of the war.  The blood crawled
slowly from him. He was dead.

Croisette began to shake all over.  He clutched one of the pillars,
which bore up the porch, and pressed his face against its cold surface,
hiding his eyes from the sight.  The worst had come.  In our hearts I
think we had always fancied some accident would save our friend, some
stranger warn him.

"Oh, poor, poor Kit!"  Croisette cried, bursting suddenly into violent
sobs.  "Oh, Kit!  Kit!"



CHAPTER X.

HAU, HAU, HUGUENOTS!

His late Majesty, Henry the Fourth, I remember--than whom no braver man
wore sword, who loved danger indeed for its own sake, and courted it as
a mistress--could never sleep on the night before an action.  I have
heard him say himself that it was so before the fight at Arques.
Croisette partook of this nature too, being high-strung and apt to be
easily over-wrought, but never until the necessity for exertion had
passed away:  while Marie and I, though not a whit stouter at a pinch,
were slower to feel and less easy to move--more Germanic in fact.

I name this here partly lest it should be thought after what I have
just told of Croisette that there was anything of the woman about
him--save the tenderness; and partly to show that we acted at this
crisis each after his manner.  While Croisette turned pale and
trembled, and hid his eyes, I stood dazed, looking from the desolate
house to the face stiffening in the sunshine, and back again;
wondering, though I had seen scores of dead faces since daybreak, and a
plenitude of suffering in all dreadful shapes, how Providence could let
this happen to us.  To us!  In his instincts man is as selfish as any
animal that lives.

I saw nothing indeed of the dead face and dead house after the first
convincing glance.  I saw instead with hot, hot eyes the old castle at
home, the green fields about the brook, and the grey hills rising from
them; and the terrace, and Kit coming to meet us, Kit with white face
and parted lips and avid eyes that questioned us!  And we with no
comfort to give her, no lover to bring back to her!

A faint noise behind as of a sign creaking in the wind, roused me from
this most painful reverie.  I turned round, not quickly or in surprise
or fear.  Rather in the same dull wonder.  The upper part of the
bookseller's door was ajar.  It was that I had heard opened.  An old
woman was peering out at us.

As our eyes met, she made a slight movement to close the door again.
But I did not stir, and seeming to be reassured by a second glance, she
nodded to me in a stealthy fashion.  I drew a step nearer, listlessly.
"Pst!  Pst!"  she whispered.  Her wrinkled old face, which was like a
Normandy apple long kept, was soft with pity as she looked at
Croisette.  "Pst!"

"Well!"  I said, mechanically.

"Is he taken?"  she muttered.

"Who taken?"  I asked stupidly.

She nodded towards the forsaken house, and answered, "The young lord
who lodged there?  Ah!  sirs," she continued, "he looked gay and
handsome, if you'll believe me, as he came from the king's court yester
even!  As bonny a sight in his satin coat, and his ribbons, as my eyes
ever saw!  And to think that they should be hunting him like a rat
to-day!"

The woman's words were few and simple.  But what a change they made in
my world!  How my heart awoke from its stupor, and leapt up with a new
joy and a new-born hope!  "Did he get away?"  I cried eagerly.  "Did he
escape, mother, then?"

"Ay, that he did!"  she replied quickly.  "That poor fellow, yonder--he
lies quiet enough now God forgive him his heresy, say I!--kept the door
manfully while the gentleman got on the roof, and ran right down the
street on the tops of the houses, with them firing and hooting at him:
for all the world as if he had been a squirrel and they a pack of boys
with stones!"

"And he escaped?"

"Escaped!"  she answered more slowly, shaking her old head in doubt.
"I do not know about that I fear they have got him by now, gentlemen.
I have been shivering and shaking up stairs with my husband--he is in
bed, good man, and the safest place for him--the saints have mercy upon
us!  But I heard them go with their shouting and gunpowder right along
to the river, and I doubt they will take him between this and the
CHATELET!  I doubt they will."

"How long ago was it, dame?"  I cried.

"Oh!  may be half an hour.  Perhaps you are friends of his?"  she added
questioningly.

But I did not stay to answer her.  I shook Croisette, who had not heard
a word of this, by the shoulder. "There is a chance that he has
escaped!"  I cried in his ear.  "Escaped, do you hear?"  And I told him
hastily what she had said.

It was fine, indeed, and a sight, to see the blood rush to his cheeks,
and the tears dry in his eyes, and energy and decision spring to life
in every nerve and muscle of his face, "Then there is hope?"  he cried,
grasping my arm.  "Hope, Anne!  Come!  Come! Do not let us lose another
instant.  If he be alive let us join him!"

The old woman tried to detain us, but in vain.  Nay, pitying us, and
fearing, I think, that we were rushing on our deaths, she cast aside
her caution, and called after us aloud.  We took no heed, running after
Croisette, who had not waited for our answer, as fast as young limbs
could carry us down the street.  The exhaustion we had felt a moment
before when all seemed lost be it remembered that we had not been to
bed or tasted food for many hours--fell from us on the instant, and was
clean gone and forgotten in the joy of this respite.  Louis was living
and for the moment had escaped.

Escaped!  But for how long?  We soon had our answer.  The moment we
turned the corner by the river-side, the murmur of a multitude not loud
but continuous, struck our ears, even as the breeze off the water swept
our cheeks.  Across the river lay the thousand roofs of the Ile de la
Cite, all sparkling in the sunshine.  But we swept to the right,
thinking little of THAT sight, and checked our speed on finding
ourselves on the skirts of the crowd. Before us was a bridge--the Pont
au Change, I think--and at its head on our side of the water stood the
CHATELET, with its hoary turrets and battlements.  Between us and the
latter, and backed only by the river, was a great open space
half-filled with people, mostly silent and watchful, come together as
to a show, and betraying, at present at least, no desire to take an
active part in what was going on.

We hurriedly plunged into the throng, and soon caught the clue to the
quietness and the lack of movement which seemed to prevail, and which
at first sight had puzzled us.  For a moment the absence of the
dreadful symptoms we had come to know so well--the flying and pursuing,
the random blows, the shrieks and curses and batterings on doors, the
tipsy yells, had reassured us.  But the relief was short-lived.  The
people before us were under control. A tighter grip seemed to close
upon our hearts as we discerned this, for we knew that the wild fury of
the populace, like the rush of a bull, might have given some chance of
escape--in this case as in others.  But this cold-blooded ordered
search left none.

Every face about us was turned in the same direction; away from the
river and towards a block of old houses which stood opposite to it.
The space immediately in front of these was empty, the people being
kept back by a score or so of archers of the guard set at intervals,
and by as many horsemen, who kept riding up and down, belabouring the
bolder spirits with the flat of their swords, and so preserving a line.
At each extremity of this--more noticeably on our left where the line
curved round the angle of the buildings--stood a handful of riders,
seven in a group perhaps.  And alone in the middle of the space so kept
clear, walking his horse up and down and gazing at the houses rode a
man of great stature, booted and armed, the feather nodding in his
bonnet.  I could not see his face, but I had no need to see it. I knew
him, and groaned aloud.  It was Bezers!

I understood the scene better now.  The horsemen, stern, bearded
Switzers for the most part, who eyed the rabble about them with grim
disdain, and were by no means chary of their blows, were all in his
colours and armed to the teeth.  The order and discipline were of his
making:  the revenge of his seeking.  A grasp as of steel had settled
upon our friend, and I felt that his last chance was gone.  Louis de
Pavannes might as well be lying on his threshold with his dead servant
by his side, as be in hiding within that ring of ordered swords.

It was with despairing eyes we looked at the old wooden houses. They
seemed to be bowing themselves towards us, their upper stories
projected so far, they were so decrepit.  Their roofs were a wilderness
of gutters and crooked gables, of tottering chimneys and wooden
pinnacles and rotting beams, Amongst these I judged Kit's lover was
hiding.  Well, it was a good place for hide and seek--with any other
player than DEATH.  In the ground floors of the houses there were no
windows and no doors; by reason, I learned afterwards, of the frequent
flooding of the river.  But a long wooden gallery raised on struts ran
along the front, rather more than the height of a man from the ground,
and access to this was gained by a wooden staircase at each end. Above
this first gallery was a second, and above that a line of windows set
between the gables.  The block--it may have run for seventy or eighty
yards along the shore--contained four houses, each with a door opening
on to the lower gallery.  I saw indeed that but for the Vidame's
precautions Louis might well have escaped.  Had the mob once poured
helter-skelter into that labyrinth of rooms and passages he might with
luck have mingled with them, unheeded and unrecognized, and effected
his escape when they retreated.

But now there were sentries on each gallery and more on the roof.
Whenever one of the latter moved or seemed to be looking inward--where
a search party, I understood, were at work--indeed, if he did but turn
his head, a thrill ran through the crowd and a murmur arose, which once
or twice swelled to a savage roar such as earlier had made me tremble.
When this happened the impulse came, it seemed to me, from the farther
end of the line.  There the rougher elements were collected, and there
I more than once saw Bezers' troopers in conflict with the mob.  In
that quarter too a savage chant was presently struck up, the whole
gathering joining in and yelling with an indescribably appalling effect:

  "Hau!  Hau!  Huguenots!
   Faites place aux Papegots!"

in derision of the old song said to be popular amongst the Protestants.
But in the Huguenot version the last words were of course transposed.

We had worked our way by this time to the front of the line, and
looking into one another's eyes, mutely asked a question; but not even
Croisette had an answer ready.  There could be no answer but one.  What
could we do?  Nothing.  We were too late.  Too late again!  And yet how
dreadful it was to stand still among the cruel, thoughtless mob and see
our friend, the touch of whose hand we knew so well, done to death for
their sport!  Done to death as the old woman had said like any rat, not
a soul save ourselves pitying him!  Not a soul to turn sick at his cry
of agony, or shudder at the glance of his dying eyes.  It was dreadful
indeed.

"Ah, well," muttered a woman beside me to her companion--there were
many women in the crowd--"it is down with the Huguenots, say I!  It is
Lorraine is the fine man!  But after all yon is a bonny fellow and a
proper, Margot!  I saw him leap from roof to roof over Love Lane, as if
the blessed saints had carried him. And him a heretic!"

"It is the black art," the other answered, crossing herself.

"Maybe it is!  But he will need it all to give that big man the slip
to-day," replied the first speaker comfortably.

"That devil!"  Margot exclaimed, pointing with a stealthy gesture of
hate at the Vidame.  And then in a fierce whisper, with inarticulate
threats, she told a story of him, which made me shudder.  "He did!  And
she in religion too!"  she concluded. "May our Lady of Loretto reward
him."

The tale might be true for aught I knew, horrible as it was!  I had
heard similar ones attributing things almost as fiendish to him, times
and again; from that poor fellow lying dead on Pavannes' doorstep for
one, and from others besides.  As the Vidame in his pacing to and fro
turned towards us, I gazed at him fascinated by his grim visage and
that story.  His eye rested on the crowd about us, and I trembled, lest
even at that distance he should recognise us.

And he did!  I had forgotten his keenness of sight.  His face flashed
suddenly into a grim smile.  The tail of his eye resting upon us, and
seeming to forbid us to move, he gave some orders. The colour fled from
my face.  To escape indeed was impossible, for we were hemmed in by the
press and could scarcely stir a limb.  Yet I did make one effort.

"Croisette!"  I muttered he was the rearmost--"stoop down.  He may not
have seen you.  Stoop down, lad!"

But St. Croix was obstinate and would not stoop.  Nay, when one of the
mounted men came, and roughly ordered us into the open, it was
Croisette who pushing past us stepped out first with a lordly air.  I,
following him, saw that his lips were firmly compressed and that there
was an eager light in his eyes.  As we emerged, the crowd in our wake
broke the line, and tried to pursue us; either hostilely or through
eagerness to see what it meant.  But a dozen blows of the long pikes
drove them back, howling and cursing to their places.

I expected to be taken to Bezers; and what would follow I could not
tell.  But he did always it seemed what we least expected, for he only
scowled at us now, a grim mockery on his lip, and cried, "See that they
do not escape again!  But do them no harm, sirrah, until I have the
batch of them!"

He turned one way, and I another, my heart swelling with rage. Would he
dare to harm us?  Would even the Vidame dare to murder a Caylus' nephew
openly and in cold blood?  I did not think so. And yet--and yet--

Croisette interrupted the train of my thoughts.  I found that he was
not following me.  He had sprung away, and in a dozen strides reached
the Vidame's stirrup, and was clasping his knee when I turned.  I could
not hear at the distance at which I stood, what he said, and the
horseman to whom Bezers had committed us spurred between us.  But I
heard the Vidame's answer.

"No!  no!  no!"  he cried with a ring of restrained fury in his voice.
"Let my plans alone!  What do you know of them?  And if you speak to me
again, M. St. Croix--I think that is your name, boy--I will--no, I will
not kill you.  That might please you, you are stubborn, I can see.  But
I will have you stripped and lashed like the meanest of my scullions!
Now go, and take care!"

Impatience, hate and wild passion flamed in his face for the
moment--transfiguring it.  Croisette came back to us slowly,
white-lipped and quiet.  "Never mind," I said bitterly.  "The third
time may bring luck."

Not that I felt much indignation at the Vidame's insult, or any anger
with the lad for incurring it; as I had felt on that other occasion.
Life and death seemed to be everything on this morning.  Words had
ceased to please and annoy, for what are words to the sheep in the
shambles?  One man's life and one woman's happiness outside ourselves
we thought only of these now. And some day I reflected Croisette might
remember even with pleasure that he had, as a drowning man clutching at
straws, stooped to a last prayer for them.

We were placed in the middle of a knot of troopers who closed the line
to the right.  And presently Marie touched me.  He was gazing intently
at the sentry on the roof of the third house from us; the farthest but
one.  The man's back was to the parapet, and he was gesticulating
wildly.

"He sees him!"  Marie muttered.

I nodded almost in apathy.  But this passed away, and I started
involuntarily and shuddered, as a savage roar, breaking the silence,
rang along the front of the mob like a rolling volley of firearms.
What was it?  A man posted at a window on the upper gallery had dropped
his pike's point, and was levelling it at some one inside:  we could
see no more.

But those in front of the window could; they saw too much for the
Vidame's precautions, as a moment showed.  He had not laid his account
with the frenzy of a rabble, the passions of a mob which had tasted
blood.  I saw the line at its farther end waver suddenly and toss to
and fro.  Then a hundred hands went up, and confused angry cries rose
with them.  The troopers struck about them, giving back slowly as they
did so.  But their efforts were in vain.  With a scream of triumph a
wild torrent of people broke through between them, leaving them
stranded; and rushed in a headlong cataract towards the steps.  Bezers
was close to us at the time.  "S'death!"  he cried, swearing oaths
which even his sovereign could scarce have equalled.  "They will snatch
him from me yet, the hell-hounds!"

He whirled his horse round and spurred him in a dozen bounds to the
stairs at our end of the gallery.  There he leaped from him, dropping
the bridle recklessly; and bounding up three steps at a time, he ran
along the gallery.  Half-a-dozen of the troopers about us stayed only
to fling their reins to one of their number, and then followed, their
great boots clattering on the planks.

My breath came fast and short, for I felt it was a crisis.  It was a
race between the two parties, or rather between the Vidame and the
leaders of the mob.  The latter had the shorter way to go.  But on the
narrow steps they were carried off their feet by the press behind them,
and fell over and hampered one another and lost time.  The Vidame, free
from this drawback, was some way along the gallery before they had set
foot on it.

How I prayed--amid a scene of the wildest uproar and excitement--that
the mob might be first!  Let there be only a short conflict between
Bezers' men and the people, and in the confusion Pavannes might yet
escape.  Hope awoke in the turmoil.  Above the yells of the crowd a
score of deep voices about me thundered "a Wolf!  a Wolf!"  And I too,
lost my head, and drew my sword, and screamed at the top of my voice,
"a Caylus!  a Caylus!"  with the maddest.

Thousands of eyes besides mine were strained on the foremost figures on
either side.  They met as it chanced precisely at the door of the
house.  The mob leader was a slender man, I saw; a priest apparently,
though now he was girt with unpriestly weapons, his skirts were tucked
up, and his head was bare.  So much my first glance showed me.  It was
at the second look it was when I saw the blood forsake his pale
lowering face and leave it whiter than ever, when horror sprang along
with recognition to his eyes, when borne along by the crowd behind he
saw his position and who was before him--it was only then when his mean
figure shrank, and he quailed and would have turned but could not, that
I recognized the Coadjutor.

I was silent now, my mouth agape.  There are seconds which are minutes;
ay, and many minutes.  A man may die, a man may come into life in such
a second.  In one of these, it seemed to me, those two men paused, face
to face; though in fact a pause was for one of them impossible.  He was
between--and I think he knew it--the devil and the deep sea.  Yet he
seemed to pause, while all, even that yelling crowd below, held their
breath.  The next moment, glaring askance at one another like two dogs
unevenly coupled, he and Bezers shot shoulder to shoulder into the
doorway, and in another jot of time would have been out of sight. But
then, in that instant, I saw something happen.  The Vidame's hand
flashed up above the priest's head, and the cross-hilt of his sheathed
sword crashed down with awful force, and still more awful passion, on
the other's tonsure!  The wretch went down like a log, without a word,
without a cry!  Amid a roar of rage from a thousand throats, a roar
that might have shaken the stoutest heart, and blanched the swarthiest
cheek, Bezers disappeared within!

It was then I saw the power of discipline and custom.  Few as were the
troopers who had followed him--a mere handful--they fell without
hesitation on the foremost of the crowd, who were already in confusion,
stumbling and falling over their leader's body; and hurled them back
pell-mell along the gallery.  The throng below had no firearms, and
could give no aid at the moment; the stage was narrow; in two minutes
the Vidame's people had swept it clear of the crowd and were in
possession of it.  A tall fellow took up the priest's body, dead or
alive, I do not know which, and flung it as if it had been a sack of
corn over the rail.  It fell with a heavy thud on the ground.  I heard
a piercing scream that rose above that babel--one shrill scream!  and
the mob closed round and hid the thing.

If the rascals had had the wit to make at once for the right-hand
stairs, where we stood with two or three of Bezers' men who had kept
their saddles, I think they might easily have disposed of us,
encumbered as we were, by the horses; and then they could have attacked
the handful on the gallery on both flanks.  But the mob had no leaders,
and no plan of operations.  They seized indeed two or three of the
scattered troopers, and tearing them from their horses, wreaked their
passion upon them horribly.  But most of the Switzers escaped, thanks
to the attention the mob paid to the houses and what was going forward
on the galleries; and these, extricating themselves joined us one by
one, so that gradually a little ring of stern faces gathered about the
stair-foot.  A moment's hesitation, and seeing no help for it, we
ranged ourselves with them; and, unchecked as unbidden, sprang on three
of the led horses.

All this passed more quickly than I can relate it:  so that before our
feet were well in the stirrups a partial silence, then a mightier roar
of anger at once proclaimed and hailed the re-appearance of the Vidame.
Bigoted beyond belief were the mob of Paris of that day, cruel,
vengeful, and always athirst for blood; and this man had killed not
only their leader but a priest.  He had committed sacrilege!  What
would they do?  I could just, by stooping forward, command a side view
of the gallery, and the scene passing there was such that I forgot in
it our own peril.

For surely in all his reckless life Bezers had never been so
emphatically the man for the situation--had never shown to such
advantage as at this moment when he stood confronting the sea of faces,
the sneer on his lip, a smile in his eyes; and looked down unblenching,
a figure of scorn, on the men who were literally agape for his life.
The calm defiance of his steadfast look fascinated even me.  Wonder and
admiration for the time took the place of dislike.  I could scarcely
believe that there was not some atom of good in this man so fearless.
And no face but one no face I think in the world, but one--could have
drawn my eyes from him.  But that one face was beside him.  I clutched
Marie's arm, and pointed to the bareheaded figure at Bezers' right hand.

It was Louis himself:  our Louis de Pavannes, But he was changed indeed
from the gay cavalier I remembered, and whom I had last seen riding
down the street at Caylus, smiling back at us, and waving his adieux to
his mistress!  Beside the Vidame he had the air of being slight, even
short.  The face which I had known so bright and winning, was now white
and set.  His fair, curling hair--scarce darker than Croisette's--hung
dank, bedabbled with blood which flowed from a wound in his head.  His
sword was gone; his dress was torn and disordered and covered with
dust.  His lips moved.  But he held up his head, he bore himself
bravely with it all; so bravely, that I choked, and my heart seemed
bursting as I looked at him standing there forlorn and now unarmed.  I
knew that Kit seeing him thus would gladly have died with him; and I
thanked God she did not see him.  Yet there was a quietness in his
fortitude which made a great difference between his air and that of
Bezers.  He lacked, as became one looking unarmed on certain death, the
sneer and smile of the giant beside him.

What was the Vidame about to do?  I shuddered as I asked myself. Not
surrender him, not fling him bodily to the people?  No not that:  I
felt sure he would let no others share his vengeance that his pride
would not suffer that.  And even while I wondered the doubt was solved.
I saw Bezers raise his hand in a peculiar fashion.  Simultaneously a
cry rang sharply out above the tumult, and down in headlong charge
towards the farther steps came the band of horsemen, who had got clear
of the crowd on that side. They were but ten or twelve, but under his
eye they charged, as if they had been a thousand.  The rabble shrank
from the collision, and fled aside.  Quick as thought the riders
swerved; and changing their course, galloped through the looser part of
the throng, and in a trice drew rein side by side with us, a laugh and
a jeer on their reckless lips.

It was neatly done:  and while it was being done the Vidame and his
knot of men, with those who had been searching the building, hurried
down the gallery towards us, their rear cleared for the moment by the
troopers' feint.  The dismounted men came bundling down the steps,
their eyes aglow with the war-fire, and got horses as they could.
Among them I lost sight of Louis, but perceived him presently, pale and
bewildered, mounted behind a trooper.  A man sprang up before each of
us too, greeting our appearance merely by a grunt of surprise.  For it
was no time to ask or answer.  The mob was recovering itself, and each
moment brought it reinforcements, while its fury was augmented by the
trick we had played it, and the prospect of our escape.

We were under forty, all told; and some men were riding double. Bezers'
eye glanced hastily over his array, and lit on us three. He turned and
gave some order to his lieutenant.  The fellow spurred his horse, a
splendid grey, as powerful as his master's, alongside of Croisette,
threw his arm round the lad, and dragged him dexterously on to his own
crupper.  I did not understand the action, but I saw Croisette settle
himself behind Blaise Bure--for he it was--and supposed no harm was
intended.  The next moment we had surged forward, and were swaying to
and fro in the midst of the crowd.

What ensued I cannot tell.  The outlook, so far as I was concerned, was
limited to wildly plunging horses--we were in the centre of the band
and riders swaying in the saddle--with a glimpse here and there of a
fringe of white scowling faces and tossing arms.  Once, a lane opening,
I saw the Vidame's charger--he was in the van--stumble and fall among
the crowd and heard a great shout go up.  But Bezers by a mighty effort
lifted it to its legs again.  And once too, a minute later, those
riding on my right, swerved outwards, and I saw something I never
afterwards forgot.

It was the body of the Coadjutor, lying face upwards, the eyes open and
the teeth bared in a last spasm.  Prostrate on it lay a woman, a young
woman, with hair like red gold falling about her neck, and skin like
milk.  I did not know whether she was alive or dead; but I noticed that
one arm stuck out stiffly and the crowd flying before the sudden impact
of the horses must have passed over her, even if she had escaped the
iron hoofs which followed.  Still in the fleeting glance I had of her
as my horse bounded aside, I saw no wound or disfigurement.  Her one
arm was cast about the priest's breast; her face was hidden on it.  But
for all that, I knew her--knew her, shuddering for the woman whose
badges I was even now wearing, whose gift I bore at my side; and I
remembered the priest's vaunt of a few hours before, made in her
presence, "There is no man in Paris shall thwart me to-night!"

It had been a vain boast indeed!  No hand in all that host of thousands
was more feeble than his now:  for good or ill!  No brain more dull, no
voice less heeded.  A righteous retribution indeed had overtaken him.
He had died by the sword he had drawn--died, a priest, by violence!
The cross he had renounced had crushed him.  And all his schemes and
thoughts, and no doubt they had been many, had perished with him.  It
had come to this, only this, the sum of the whole matter, that there
was one wicked man the less in Paris--one lump of breathless clay the
more.

For her--the woman on his breast--what man can judge a woman, knowing
her?  And not knowing her, how much less?  For the present I put her
out of my mind, feeling for the moment faint and cold.

We were clear of the crowd, and clattering unmolested down a paved
street before I fully recovered from the shock which this sight had
caused me.  Wonder whither we were going took its place.  To Bezers'
house?  My heart sank at the prospect if that were so.  Before I
thought of an alternative, a gateway flanked by huge round towers
appeared before us, and we pulled up suddenly, a confused jostling mass
in the narrow way; while some words passed between the Vidame and the
Captain of the Guard.  A pause of several minutes followed; and then
the gates rolled slowly open, and two by two we passed under the arch.
Those gates might have belonged to a fortress or a prison, a dungeon or
a palace, for all I knew.

They led, however, to none of these, but to an open space, dirty and
littered with rubbish, marked by a hundred ruts and tracks, and fringed
with disorderly cabins and make-shift booths.  And beyond this--oh, ye
gods!  the joy of it--beyond this, which we crossed at a rapid trot,
lay the open country!

The transition and relief were so wonderful that I shall never forget
them.  I gazed on the wide landscape before me, lying quiet and
peaceful in the sunlight, and could scarce believe in my happiness.  I
drew the fresh air into my lungs, I threw up my sheathed sword and
caught it again in a frenzy of delight, while the gloomy men about me
smiled at my enthusiasm.  I felt the horse beneath me move once more
like a thing of life.  No enchanter with his wand, not Merlin nor
Virgil, could have made a greater change in my world, than had the
captain of the gate with his simple key!  Or so it seemed to me in the
first moments of freedom, and escape--of removal from those loathsome
streets.

I looked back at Paris--at the cloud of smoke which hung over the
towers and roofs; and it seemed to me the canopy of hell itself. I
fancied that my head still rang with the cries and screams and curses,
the sounds of death.  In very fact, I could hear the dull reports of
firearms near the Louvre, and the jangle of the bells. Country-folk
were congregated at the cross-roads, and in the villages, listening and
gazing; asking timid questions of the more good-natured among us, and
showing that the rumour of the dreadful work doing in the town had
somehow spread abroad.  And this though I learned afterwards that the
keys of the city had been taken the night before to the king, and that,
except a party with the Duke of Guise, who had left at eight in pursuit
of Montgomery and some of the Protestants--lodgers, happily for
themselves, in the Faubourg St. Germain--no one had left the town
before ourselves.

While I am speaking of our departure from Paris, I may say what I have
to say of the dreadful excesses of those days, ay, and of the following
days; excesses of which France is now ashamed, and for which she
blushed even before the accession of his late Majesty.  I am sometimes
asked, as one who witnessed them, what I think, and I answer that it
was not our country which was to blame.  A something besides Queen
Catharine de' Medici had been brought from Italy forty years before, a
something invisible but very powerful; a spirit of cruelty and
treachery.  In Italy it had done small harm.  But grafted on French
daring and recklessness, and the rougher and more soldierly manners of
the north, this spirit of intrigue proved capable of very dreadful
things.  For a time, until it wore itself out, it was the curse of
France.  Two Dukes of Guise, Francis and Henry, a cardinal of Guise,
the Prince of Conde, Admiral Coligny, King Henry the Third all these
the foremost men of their day--died by assassination within little more
than a quarter of a century, to say nothing of the Prince of Orange,
and King Henry the Great.

Then mark--a most curious thing--the extreme youth of those who were in
this business.  France, subject to the Queen-Mother, of course, was
ruled at the time by boys scarce out of their tutors' hands.  They were
mere lads, hot-blooded, reckless nobles, ready for any wild brawl,
without forethought or prudence.  Of the four Frenchmen who it is
thought took the leading parts, one, the king, was twenty-two;
Monsieur, his brother, was only twenty; the Duke of Guise was
twenty-one.  Only the Marshal de Tavannes was of mature age.  For the
other conspirators, for the Queen-Mother, for her advisers Retz and
Nevers and Birague, they were Italians; and Italy may answer for them
if Florence, Mantua and Milan care to raise the glove.

To return to our journey.  A league from the town we halted at a large
inn, and some of us dismounted.  Horses were brought out to fill the
places of those lost or left behind, and Bure had food served to us.
We were famished and exhausted, and ate it ravenously, as if we could
never have enough.

The Vidame sat his horse apart, served by his page, I stole a glance at
him, and it struck me that even on his iron nature the events of the
night had made some impression.  I read, or thought I read, in his
countenance, signs of emotions not quite in accordance with what I knew
of him--emotions strange and varied. I could almost have sworn that as
he looked at us a flicker of kindliness lit up his stern and cruel
gloom; I could almost have sworn he smiled with a curious sadness.  As
for Louis, riding with a squad who stood in a different part of the
yard, he did not see us; had not yet seen us at all.  His side face,
turned towards me, was pale and sad, his manner preoccupied, his mien
rather sorrowful than downcast.  He was thinking, I judged, as much of
the many brave men who had yesterday been his friends--companions at
board and play-table--as of his own fate.  When we presently, at a
signal from Bure, took to the road again, I asked no permission, but
thrusting my horse forward, rode to his side as he passed through the
gateway.



CHAPTER XI.

A NIGHT OF SORROW.

"Louis!  Louis!"

He turned with a start at the sound of my voice, joy and
bewilderment--and no wonder--in his countenance.  He had not supposed
us to be within a hundred leagues of him.  And lo!  here we were, knee
to knee, hand meeting hand in a long grasp, while his eyes, to which
tears sprang unbidden, dwelt on my face as though they could read in it
the features of his sweetheart. Some one had furnished him with a hat,
and enabled him to put his dress in order, and wash his wound, which
was very slight, and these changes had improved his appearance; so that
the shadow of grief and despondency passing for a moment from him in
the joy of seeing me, he looked once more his former self:  as he had
looked in the old days at Caylus on his return from hawking, or from
some boyish escapade among the hills.  Only, alas!  he wore no sword.

"And now tell me all," he cried, after his first exclamation of wonder
had found vent.  "How on earth do you come here?  Here, of all places,
and by my side?  Is all well at Caylus?  Surely Mademoiselle is not--"

"Mademoiselle is well!  perfectly well!  And thinking of you, I swear!"
I answered passionately.  "For us," I went on, eager for the moment to
escape that subject--how could I talk of it in the daylight and under
strange eyes?--"Marie and Croisette are behind.  We left Caylus eight
days ago.  We reached Paris yesterday evening.  We have not been to
bed!  We have passed, Louis, such a night as I never--"

He stopped me with a gesture.  "Hush!"  he said, raising his hand.
"Don't speak of it, Anne!"  and I saw that the fate of his friends was
still too recent, the horror of his awakening to those dreadful sights
and sounds was still too vivid for him to bear reference to them.  Yet
after riding for a time in silence--though his lips moved--he asked me
again what had brought us up.

"We came to warn you--of him," I answered, pointing to the solitary,
moody figure of the Vidame, who was riding ahead of the party.  "He--he
said that Kit should never marry you, and boasted of what he would do
to you, and frightened her.  So, learning he was going to Paris, we
followed him--to put you on your guard, you know."  And I briefly
sketched our adventures, and the strange circumstances and mistakes
which had delayed us hour after hour, through all that strange night,
until the time had gone by when we could do good.

His eyes glistened and his colour rose as I told the story.  He wrung
my hand warmly, and looked back to smile at Marie and Croisette.  "It
was like you!"  he ejaculated with emotion.  "It was like her cousins!
Brave, brave lads!  The Vicomte will live to be proud of you!  Some day
you will all do great things!  I say it!"

"But oh, Louis!"  I exclaimed sorrowfully, though my heart was bounding
with pride at his words, "if we had only been in time! If we had only
come to you two hours earlier!"

"You would have spoken to little purpose then, I fear," he replied,
shaking his head.  "We were given over as a prey to the enemy.
Warnings?  We had warnings in plenty.  De Rosny warned us, and we
scoffed at him.  The king's eye warned us, and we trusted him.  But--"
and Louis' form dilated and his hand rose as he went on, and I thought
of his cousin's prediction--"it will never be so again in France, Anne!
Never!  No man will after this trust another!  There will be no honour,
no faith, no quarter, and no peace!  And for the Valois who has done
this, the sword will never depart from his house!  I believe it!  I do
believe it!"

How truly he spoke we know now.  For two-and-twenty years after that
twenty-fourth of August, 1572, the sword was scarcely laid aside in
France for a single month.  In the streets of Paris, at Arques, and
Coutras, and Ivry, blood flowed like water that the blood of the St.
Bartholomew might be forgotten--that blood which, by the grace of God,
Navarre saw fall from the dice box on the eve of the massacre.  The
last of the Valois passed to the vaults of St. Denis:  and a greater
king, the first of all Frenchmen, alive or dead, the bravest, gayest,
wisest of the land, succeeded him:  yet even he had to fall by the
knife, in a moment most unhappy for his country, before France,
horror-stricken, put away the treachery and evil from her.

Talking with Louis as we rode, it was not unnatural--nay, it was the
natural result of the situation--that I should avoid one subject.  Yet
that subject was the uppermost in my thoughts. What were the Vidame's
intentions?  What was the meaning of this strange journey?  What was to
be Louis' fate?  I shrank with good reason from asking him these
questions.  There could be so little room for hope, even after that
smile which I had seen Bezers smile, that I dared not dwell upon them.
I should but torture him and myself.

So it was he who first spoke about it.  Not at that time, but after
sunset, when the dusk had fallen upon us, and found us still plodding
southward with tired horses; a link outwardly like other links in the
long chain of riders, toiling onwards.  Then he said suddenly, "Do you
know whither we are going, Anne?"

I started, and found myself struggling with a strange confusion before
I could reply.  "Home," I suggested at random.

"Home?  No.  And yet nearly home.  To Cahors," he answered with an odd
quietude.  "Your home, my boy, I shall never see again, Nor Kit!  Nor
my own Kit!"  It was the first time I had heard him call her by the
fond name we used ourselves.  And the pathos in his tone as of the
past, not the present, as of pure memory--I was very thankful that I
could not in the dusk see his face--shook my self-control.  I wept.
"Nay, my lad," he went on, speaking softly and leaning from his saddle
so that he could lay his hand on my shoulder "we are all men together.
We must be brave.  Tears cannot help us, so we should leave them to
the--women."

I cried more passionately at that.  Indeed his own voice quavered over
the last word.  But in a moment he was talking to me coolly and
quietly.  I had muttered something to the effect that the Vidame would
not dare--it would be too public.

"There is no question of daring in it," he replied.  "And the more
public it is, the better he will like it.  They have dared to take
thousands of lives since yesterday.  There is no one to call him to
account since the king--our king forsooth!--has declared every Huguenot
an outlaw, to be killed wherever he be met with.  No, when Bezers
disarmed me yonder," he pointed as he spoke to his wound, "I looked of
course for instant death.  Anne! I saw blood in his eyes!  But he did
not strike."

"Why not?"  I asked in suspense.

"I can only guess," Louis answered with a sigh.  "He told me that my
life was in his hands, but that he should take it at his own time.
Further that if I would not give my word to go with him without trying
to escape, he would throw me to those howling dogs outside.  I gave my
word.  We are on the road together.  And oh, Anne!  yesterday, only
yesterday, at this time I was riding home with Teligny from the Louvre,
where we had been playing at paume with the king!  And the world--the
world was very fair."

"I saw you, or rather Croisette did," I muttered as his sorrow--not for
himself, but his friends--forced him to stop.  "Yet how, Louis, do you
know that we are going to Cahors?"

"He told me, as we passed through the gates, that he was appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of Quercy to carry out the edict against the
religion.  Do you not see, Anne?"  my companion added bitterly, "to
kill me at once were too small a revenge for him! He must torture
me--or rather he would if he could--by the pains of anticipation.

"Besides, my execution will so finely open his bed of justice. Bah!"
and Pavannes raised his head proudly, "I fear him not!  I fear him not
a jot!"

For a moment he forgot Kit, the loss of his friends, his own doom.  He
snapped his fingers in derision of his foe.

But my heart sank miserably.  The Vidame's rage I remembered had been
directed rather against my cousin than her lover; and now by the light
of his threats I read Bezers' purpose more clearly than Louis could.
His aim was to punish the woman who had played with him.  To do so he
was bringing her lover from Paris that he might execute him--AFTER
GIVING HER NOTICE!  That was it:  after giving her notice, it might be
in her very presence!  He would lure her to Cahors, and then--

I shuddered.  I well might feel that a precipice was opening at my
feet.  There was something in the plan so devilish, yet so accordant
with those stories I had heard of the Wolf, that I felt no doubt of my
insight.  I read his evil mind, and saw in a moment why he had troubled
himself with us.  He hoped to draw Mademoiselle to Cahors by our means.

Of course I said nothing of this to Louis.  I hid my feelings as well
as I could.  But I vowed a great vow that at the eleventh hour we would
baulk the Vidame.  Surely if all else failed we could kill him, and,
though we died ourselves, spare Kit this ordeal.  My tears were dried
up as by a fire.  My heart burned with a great and noble rage:  or so
it seemed to me!

I do not think that there was ever any journey so strange as this one
of ours.  We met with the same incidents which had pleased us on the
road to Paris.  But their novelty was gone.  Gone too were the cosy
chats with old rogues of landlords and good-natured dames.  We were
travelling now in such force that our coming was rather a terror to the
innkeeper than a boon.  How much the Lieutenant-Governor of Quercy,
going down to his province, requisitioned in the king's name; and for
how much he paid, we could only judge from the gloomy looks which
followed us as we rode away each morning.  Such looks were not solely
due I fear to the news from Paris, although for some time we were the
first bearers of the tidings.

Presently, on the third day of our journey I think, couriers from the
Court passed us:  and henceforth forestalled us.  One of these
messengers--who I learned from the talk about me was bound for Cahors
with letters for the Lieutenant-Governor and the Count-Bishop--the
Vidame interviewed and stopped.  How it was managed I do not know, but
I fear the Count-Bishop never got his letters, which I fancy would have
given him some joint authority. Certainly we left the messenger--a
prudent fellow with a care for his skin--in comfortable quarters at
Limoges, whence I do not doubt he presently returned to Paris at his
leisure.

The strangeness of the journey however arose from none of these things,
but from the relations of our party to one another. After the first day
we four rode together, unmolested, so long as we kept near the centre
of the straggling cavalcade.  The Vidame always rode alone, and in
front, brooding with bent head and sombre face over his revenge, as I
supposed.  He would ride in this fashion, speaking to no one and giving
no orders, for a day together.  At times I came near to pitying him.
He had loved Kit in his masterful way, the way of one not wont to be
thwarted, and he had lost her--lost her, whatever might happen.  He
would get nothing after all by his revenge.  Nothing but ashes in the
mouth.  And so I saw in softer moments something inexpressibly
melancholy in that solitary giant-figure pacing always alone.

He seldom spoke to us.  More rarely to Louis.  When he did, the
harshness of his voice and his cruel eyes betrayed the gloomy hatred in
which he held him.  At meals he ate at one end of the table:  we four
at the other, as three of us had done on that first evening in Paris.
And sometimes the covert looks, the grim sneer he shot at his
rival--his prisoner--made me shiver even in the sunshine.  Sometimes,
on the other hand, when I took him unawares, I found an expression on
his face I could not read.

I told Croisette, but warily, my suspicions of his purpose.  He heard
me, less astounded to all appearance than I had expected. Presently I
learned the reason.  He had his own view.  "Do you not think it
possible, Anne?"  he suggested timidly--we were of course alone at the
time--"that he thinks to make Louis resign Mademoiselle?"

"Resign her!"  I exclaimed obtusely.  "How?"

"By giving him a choice--you understand?"

I did understand I saw it in a moment.  I had been dull not to see it
before.  Bezers might put it in this way:  let M. de Pavannes resign
his mistress and live, or die and lose her.

"I see," I answered.  "But Louis would not give her up.  Not to him!"

"He would lose her either way," Croisette answered in a low tone. "That
is not however the worst of it.  Louis is in his power. Suppose he
thinks to make Kit the arbiter, Anne, and puts Louis up to ransom,
setting Kit for the price?  And gives her the option of accepting
himself, and saving Louis' life; or refusing, and leaving Louis to die?"

"St. Croix!"  I exclaimed fiercely.  "He would not be so base!" And yet
was not even this better than the blind vengeance I had myself
attributed to him?

"Perhaps not," Croisette answered, while he gazed onwards through the
twilight.  We were at the time the foremost of the party save the
Vidame; and there was nothing to interrupt our view of his gigantic
figure as he moved on alone before us with bowed shoulders.  "Perhaps
not," Croisette repeated thoughtfully. "Sometimes I think we do not
understand him; and that after all there may be worse people in the
world than Bezers."

I looked hard at the lad, for that was not what I had meant. "Worse?"
I said.  "I do not think so.  Hardly!"

"Yes, worse," he replied, shaking his head.  "Do you remember lying
under the curtain in the box-bed at Mirepoix's?"

"Of course I do!  Do you think I shall ever forget it?"

"And Madame d'O coming in?"

"With the Coadjutor?"  I said with a shudder.  "Yes."

"No, the second time," he answered, "when she came back alone. It was
pretty dark, you remember, and Madame de Pavannes was at the window,
and her sister did not see her?"

"Well, well, I remember," I said impatiently.  I knew from the tone of
his voice that he had something to tell me about Madame d'O, and I was
not anxious to hear it.  I shrank, as a wounded man shrinks from the
cautery, from hearing anything about that woman; herself so beautiful,
yet moving in an atmosphere of suspicion and horror.  Was it shame, or
fear, or some chivalrous feeling having its origin in that moment when
I had fancied myself her knight?  I am not sure, for I had not made up
my mind even now whether I ought to pity or detest her; whether she had
made a tool of me, or I had been false to her.

"She came up to the bed, you remember, Anne?"  Croisette went on. "You
were next to her.  She saw you indistinctly, and took you for her
sister.  And then I sprang from the bed."

"I know you did!"  I exclaimed sharply.  All this time I had forgotten
that grievance.  "You nearly frightened her out of her wits, St. Croix.
I cannot think what possessed you--why you did it?"

"To save your life, Anne," he answered solemnly, "and her from a crime!
an unutterable, an unnatural crime.  She had come back to I can hardly
tell it you--to murder her sister.  You start.  You do not believe me.
It sounds too horrible.  But I could see better than you could.  She
was exactly between you and the light.  I saw the knife raised.  I saw
her wicked face!  If I had not startled her as I did, she would have
stabbed you.  She dropped the knife on the floor, and I picked it up
and have it. See!"

I looked furtively, and turned away again, shivering.  "Why," I
muttered, "why did she do it?"

"She had failed you know to get her sister back to Pavannes' house,
where she would have fallen an easy victim.  Bezers, who knew Madame
d'O, prevented that.  Then that fiend slipped back with her knife;
thinking that in the common butchery the crime would be overlooked, and
never investigated, and that Mirepoix would be silent!"

I said nothing.  I was stunned.  Yet I believed the story.  When I went
over the facts in my mind I found that a dozen things, overlooked at
the time and almost forgotten in the hurry of events, sprang up to
confirm it.  M. de Pavannes'--the other M. de Pavannes'--suspicions had
been well founded.  Worse than Bezers was she?  Ay!  worse a hundred
times.  As much worse as treachery ever is than violence; as the
pitiless fraud of the serpent is baser than the rage of the wolf.

"I thought," Croisette added softly, not looking at me, "when I
discovered that you had gone off with her, that I should never see you
again, Anne.  I gave you up for lost.  The happiest moment of my life I
think was when I saw you come back."

"Croisette," I whispered piteously, my cheeks burning, "let us never
speak of her again."

And we never did--for years.  But how strange is life.  She and the
wicked man with whom her fate seemed bound up had just crossed our
lives when their own were at the darkest.  They clashed with us, and,
strangers and boys as we were, we ruined them.  I have often asked
myself what would have happened to me had I met her at some earlier and
less stormy period--in the brilliance of her beauty.  And I find but
one answer.  I should bitterly have rued the day.  Providence was good
to me.  Such men and such women, we may believe have ceased to exist
now.  They flourished in those miserable days of war and divisions, and
passed away with them like the foul night-birds of the battle-field.

To return to our journey.  In the morning sunshine one could not but be
cheerful, and think good things possible.  The worst trial I had came
with each sunset.  For then--we generally rode late into the
evening--Louis sought my side to talk to me of his sweetheart.  And how
he would talk of her!  How many thousand messages he gave me for her!
How often he recalled old days among the hills, with each laugh and
jest and incident, when we five had been as children!  Until I would
wonder passionately, the tears running down my face in the darkness,
how he could--how he could talk of her in that quiet voice which
betrayed no rebellion against fate, no cursing of Providence!  How he
could plan for her and think of her when she should be alone!

Now I understand it.  He was still labouring under the shock of his
friends' murder.  He was still partially stunned.  Death seemed natural
and familiar to him, as to one who had seen his allies and companions
perish without warning or preparation. Death had come to be normal to
him, life the exception; as I have known it seem to a child brought
face to face with a corpse for the first time.

One afternoon a strange thing happened.  We could see the Auvergne
hills at no great distance on our left--the Puy de Dome above them--and
we four were riding together.  We had fallen--an unusual thing--to the
rear of the party.  Our road at the moment was a mere track running
across moorland, sprinkled here and there with gorse and brushwood.
The main company had straggled on out of sight.  There were but half a
dozen riders to be seen an eighth of a league before us, a couple
almost as far behind. I looked every way with a sudden surging of the
heart.  For the first time the possibility of flight occurred to me.
The rough Auvergne hills were within reach.  Supposing we could get a
lead of a quarter of a league, we could hardly be caught before
darkness came and covered us.  Why should we not put spurs to our
horses and ride off?

"Impossible!"  said Pavannes quietly, when I spoke.

"Why?"  I asked with warmth.

"Firstly," he replied, "because I have given my word to go with the
Vidame to Cahors."

My face flushed hotly.  But I cried, "What of that?  You were taken by
treachery!  Your safe conduct was disregarded.  Why should you be
scrupulous?  Your enemies are not.  This is folly?"

"I think not.  Nay," Louis answered, shaking his head, "you would not
do it yourself in my place."

"I think I should," I stammered awkwardly.

"No, you would not, lad," he said smiling.  "I know you too well. But
if I would do it, it is impossible."  He turned in the saddle and,
shading his eyes with his hand from the level rays of the sun, looked
back intently.  "It is as I thought," he continued. "One of those men
is riding grey Margot, which Bure said yesterday was the fastest mare
in the troop.  And the man on her is a light weight.  The other fellow
has that Norman bay horse we were looking at this morning.  It is a
trap laid by Bezers, Anne. If we turned aside a dozen yards, those two
would be after us like the wind."

"Do you mean," I cried, "that Bezers has drawn his men forward on
purpose?"

"Precisely;" was Louis's answer.  "That is the fact.  Nothing would
please him better than to take my honour first, and my life afterwards.
But, thank God, only the one is in his power."

And when I came to look at the horsemen, immediately before us, they
confirmed Louis's view.  They were the best mounted of the party:  all
men of light weight too.  One or other of them was constantly looking
back.  As night fell they closed in upon us with their usual care.
When Bure joined us there was a gleam of intelligence in his bold eyes,
a flash of conscious trickery.  He knew that we had found him out, and
cared nothing for it.

And the others cared nothing.  But the thought that if left to myself I
should have fallen into the Vidame's cunning trap filled me with new
hatred towards him; such hatred and such fear--for there was
humiliation mingled with them--as I had scarcely felt before.  I
brooded over this, barely noticing what passed in our company for
hours--nay, not until the next day when, towards evening, the cry arose
round me that we were within sight of Cahors.  Yes, there it lay below
us, in its shallow basin, surrounded by gentle hills.  The domes of the
cathedral, the towers of the Vallandre Bridge, the bend of the Lot,
where its stream embraces the town--I knew them all.  Our long journey
was over.

And I had but one idea.  I had some time before communicated to
Croisette the desperate design I had formed--to fall upon Bezers and
kill him in the midst of his men in the last resort.  Now the time had
come if the thing was ever to be done:  if we had not left it too long
already.  And I looked about me.  There was some confusion and jostling
as we halted on the brow of the hill, while two men were despatched
ahead to announce the governor's arrival, and Bure, with half a dozen
spears, rode out as an advanced guard.

The road where we stood was narrow, a shallow cutting winding down the
declivity of the hills.  The horses were tired, It was a bad time and
place for my design, and only the coming night was in my favour.  But I
was desperate.

Yet before I moved or gave a signal which nothing could recall, I
scanned the landscape eagerly, scrutinizing in turn the small, rich
plain below us, warmed by the last rays of the sun, the bare hills here
glowing, there dark, the scattered wood-clumps and spinneys that filled
the angles of the river, even the dusky line of helm-oaks that crowned
the ridge beyond--Caylus way.  So near our own country there might be
help!  If the messenger whom we had despatched to the Vicomte before
leaving home had reached him, our uncle might have returned, and even
be in Cahors to meet us.

But no party appeared in sight:  and I saw no place where an ambush
could be lying.  I remembered that no tidings of our present plight or
of what had happened could have reached the Vicomte.  The hope faded
out of life as soon as despair had given it birth.  We must fend for
ourselves and for Kit.

That was my justification.  I leaned from my saddle towards
Croisette--I was riding by his side--and muttered, as I felt my horse's
head and settled myself firmly in the stirrups, "You remember what I
said?  Are you ready?"

He looked at me in a startled way, with a face showing white in the
shadow:  and from me to the one solitary figure seated like a pillar a
score of paces in front with no one between us and it. "There need be
but two of us," I muttered, loosening my sword. "Shall it be you or
Marie?  The others must leap their horses out of the road in the
confusion, cross the river at the Arembal Ford if they are not
overtaken, and make for Caylus."

He hesitated.  I do not know whether it had anything to do with his
hesitation that at that moment the cathedral bell in the town below us
began to ring slowly for Vespers.  Yes, he hesitated. He--a Caylus.
Turning to him again, I repeated my question impatiently.  "Which shall
it be?  A moment, and we shall be moving on, and it will be too late."

He laid his hand hurriedly on my bridle, and began a rambling answer.
Rambling as it was I gathered his meaning.  It was enough for me!  I
cut him short with one word of fiery indignation, and turned to Marie
and spoke quickly.  "Will you, then?"  I said.

But Marie shook his head in perplexity, and answering little, said the
same.  So it happened a second time.

Strange!  Yet strange as it seemed, I was not greatly surprised. Under
other circumstances I should have been beside myself with anger at the
defection.  Now I felt as if I had half expected it, and without
further words of reproach I dropped my head and gave it up.  I passed
again into the stupor of endurance.  The Vidame was too strong for me.
It was useless to fight against him.  We were under the spell.  When
the troop moved forward, I went with them, silent and apathetic.

We passed through the gate of Cahors, and no doubt the scene was worthy
of note; but I had only a listless eye for it--much such an eye as a
man about to be broken on the wheel must have for that curious
instrument, supposing him never to have seen it before.  The whole
population had come out to line the streets through which we rode, and
stood gazing, with scarcely veiled looks of apprehension, at the
procession of troopers and the stern face of the new governor.

We dismounted passively in the courtyard of the castle, and were for
going in together, when Bure intervened.  "M. de Pavannes," he said,
pushing rather rudely between us, "will sup alone to-night.  For you,
gentlemen, this way, if you please."

I went without remonstrance.  What was the use?  I was conscious that
the Vidame from the top of the stairs leading to the grand entrance was
watching us with a wolfish glare in his eyes.  I went quietly.  But I
heard Croisette urging something with passionate energy.

We were led through a low doorway to a room on the ground floor; a
place very like a cell.  Were we took our meal in silence. When it was
over I flung myself on one of the beds prepared for us, shrinking from
my companions rather in misery than in resentment.

No explanation had passed between us.  Still I knew that the other two
from time to time eyed me doubtfully.  I feigned therefore to be
asleep, but I heard Bure enter to bid us good-night--and see that we
had not escaped.  And I was conscious too of the question Croisette put
to him, "Does M. de Pavannes lie alone to-night, Bure?"

"Not entirely," the captain answered with gloomy meaning.  Indeed he
seemed in bad spirits himself, or tired.  "The Vidame is anxious for
his soul's welfare, and sends a priest to him."

They sprang to their feet at that.  But the light and its bearer, who
so far recovered himself as to chuckle at his master's pious thought,
had disappeared.  They were left to pace the room, and reproach
themselves and curse the Vidame in an agony of late repentance.  Not
even Marie could find a loop-hole of escape from here.  The door was
double-locked; the windows so barred that a cat could scarcely pass
through them; the walls were of solid masonry.

Meanwhile I lay and feigned to sleep, and lay feigning through long,
long hours; though my heart like theirs throbbed in response to the
dull hammering that presently began without, and not far from us, and
lasted until daybreak.  From our windows, set low and facing a wall, we
could see nothing.  But we could guess what the noise meant, the dull,
earthy thuds when posts were set in the ground, the brisk, wooden
clattering when one plank was laid to another.  We could not see the
progress of the work, or hear the voices of the workmen, or catch the
glare of their lights.  But we knew what they were doing.  They were
raising the scaffold.



CHAPTER XII.

JOY IN THE MORNING.

I was too weary with riding to go entirely without sleep.  And moreover
it is anxiety and the tremor of excitement which make the pillow
sleepless, not, heaven be thanked, sorrow.  God made man to lie awake
and hope:  but never to lie awake and grieve. An hour or two before
daybreak I fell asleep, utterly worn out. When I awoke, the sun was
high, and shining slantwise on our window.  The room was gay with the
morning rays, and soft with the morning freshness, and I lay a while,
my cheek on my hand, drinking in the cheerful influence as I had done
many and many a day in our room at Caylus.  It was the touch of Marie's
hand, laid timidly on my arm, which roused me with a shock to
consciousness.  The truth broke upon me.  I remembered where we were,
and what was before us.  "Will you get up, Anne?" Croisette said.  "The
Vidame has sent for us."

I got to my feet, and buckled on my sword.  Croisette was leaning
against the wall, pale and downcast.  Bure filled the open doorway, his
feathered cap in his hand, a queer smile on his face.  "You are a good
sleeper, young gentleman," he said.  "You should have a good
conscience."

"Better than yours, no doubt!"  I retorted, "or your master's."

He shrugged his shoulders, and, bidding us by a sign to follow him, led
the way through several gloomy passages.  At the end of these, a flight
of stone steps leading upwards seemed to promise something better; and
true enough, the door at the top being opened, the murmur of a crowd
reached our ears, with a burst of sunlight and warmth.  We were in a
lofty room, with walls in some places painted, and elsewhere hung with
tapestry; well lighted by three old pointed windows reaching to the
rush-covered floor. The room was large, set here and there with stands
of arms, and had a dais with a raised carved chair at one end.  The
ceiling was of blue, with gold stars set about it.  Seeing this, I
remembered the place.  I had been in it once, years ago, when I had
attended the Vicomte on a state visit to the governor.  Ah! that the
Vicomte were here now!

I advanced to the middle window, which was open.  Then I started back,
for outside was the scaffold built level with the floor, and
rush-covered like it!  Two or three people were lounging on it.  My
eyes sought Louis among the group, but in vain.  He was not there:  and
while I looked for him, I heard a noise behind me, and he came in,
guarded by four soldiers with pikes.

His face was pale and grave, but perfectly composed.  There was a
wistful look in his eyes indeed, as if he were thinking of something or
some one far away--Kit's face on the sunny hills of Quercy where he had
ridden with her, perhaps; a look which seemed to say that the doings
here were nothing to him, and the parting was yonder where she was.
But his bearing was calm and collected, his step firm and fearless.
When he saw us, indeed his face lightened a moment and he greeted us
cheerfully, even acknowledging Bure's salutation with dignity and good
temper. Croisette sprang towards him impulsively, and cried his
name--Croisette ever the first to speak.  But before Louis could grasp
his hand, the door at the bottom of the hall was swung open, and the
Vidame came hurriedly in.

He was alone.  He glanced round, his forbidding face, which was
somewhat flushed as if by haste, wearing a scowl.  Then he saw us, and,
nodding haughtily, strode up the floor, his spurs clanking heavily on
the boards.  We gave us no greeting, but by a short word dismissed Bure
and the soldiers to the lower end of the room.  And then he stood and
looked at us four, but principally at his rival; and looked, and looked
with eyes of smouldering hate.  And there was a silence, a long
silence, while the murmur of the crowd came almost cheerfully through
the window, and the sparrows under the eaves chirped and twittered, and
the heart that throbbed least painfully was, I do believe, Louis de
Pavannes'!

At last Bezers broke the silence.

"M. de Pavannes!"  he began, speaking hoarsely, yet concealing all
passion under a cynical smile and a mock politeness, "M. de Pavannes, I
hold the king's commission to put to death all the Huguenots within my
province of Quercy.  Have you anything to say, I beg, why I should not
begin with you?  Or do you wish to return to the Church?"

Louis shrugged his shoulders as in contempt, and held his peace, I saw
his captor's great hands twitch convulsively at this, but still the
Vidame mastered himself, and when he spoke again he spoke slowly.
"Very well," he continued, taking no heed of us, the silent witnesses
of this strange struggle between the two men, but eyeing Louis only.
"You have wronged me more than any man alive.  Alive or dead!  or dead!
You have thwarted me, M. de Pavannes, and taken from me the woman I
loved.  Six days ago I might have killed you.  I had it in my power.  I
had but to leave you to the rabble, remember, and you would have been
rotting at Montfaucon to-day, M. de Pavannes."

"That is true," said Louis quietly.  "Why so many words?"

But the Vidame went on as if he had not heard.  "I did not leave you to
them," he resumed, "and yet I hate you--more than I ever hated any man
yet, and I am not apt to forgive.  But now the time has come, sir, for
my revenge!  The oath I swore to your mistress a fortnight ago I will
keep to the letter.  I--Silence, babe!" he thundered, turning suddenly,
"or I will keep my word with you too!"

Croisette had muttered something, and this had drawn on him the glare
of Bezers' eyes.  But the threat was effectual.  Croisette was silent.
The two were left henceforth to one another.

Yet the Vidame seemed to be put out by the interruption. Muttering a
string of oaths he strode from us to the window and back again.  The
cool cynicism, with which he was wont to veil his anger and impose on
other men, while it heightened the effect of his ruthless deeds, in
part fell from him.  He showed himself as he was--masterful, and
violent, hating, with all the strength of a turbulent nature which had
never known a check.  I quailed before him myself.  I confess it.

"Listen!"  he continued harshly, coming back and taking his place in
front of us at last, his manner more violent than before the
interruption.  "I might have left you to die in that hell yonder! And I
did not leave you.  I had but to hold my hand and you would have been
torn to pieces!  The wolf, however, does not hunt with the rats, and a
Bezers wants no help in his vengeance from king or CANAILLE!  When I
hunt my enemy down I will hunt him alone, do you hear?  And as there is
a heaven above me"--he paused a moment--"if I ever meet you face to
face again, M. de Pavannes, I will kill you where you stand!"

He paused, and the murmur of the crowd without came to my ears; but
mingled with and heightened by some confusion in my thoughts. I
struggled feebly with this, seeing a rush of colour to Croisette's
face, a lightening in his eyes as if a veil had been raised from before
them.  Some confusion--for I thought I grasped the Vidame's meaning;
yet there he was still glowering on his victim with the same grim
visage, still speaking in the same rough tone.  "Listen, M. de
Pavannes," he continued, rising to his full height and waving his hand
with a certain majesty towards the window--no one had spoken.  "The
doors are open! Your mistress is at Caylus.  The road is clear, go to
her; go to her, and tell her that I have saved your life, and that I
give it to you not out of love, but out of hate!  If you had flinched I
would have killed you, for so you would have suffered most, M. de
Pavannes.  As it is, take your life--a gift!  and suffer as I should if
I were saved and spared by my enemy!"

Slowly the full sense of his words came home to me.  Slowly; not in its
full completeness indeed until I heard Louis in broken phrases, phrases
half proud and half humble, thanking him for his generosity.  Even then
I almost lost the true and wondrous meaning of the thing when I heard
his answer.  For he cut Pavannes short with bitter caustic gibes,
spurned his proffered gratitude with insults, and replied to his
acknowledgments with threats.

"Go!  go!"  he continued to cry violently.  "Have I brought you so far
safely that you will cheat me of my vengeance at the last, and provoke
me to kill you?  Away!  and take these blind puppies with you!  Reckon
me as much your enemy now as ever!  And if I meet you, be sure you will
meet a foe!  Begone, M. de Pavannes, begone!"

"But, M. de Bezers," Louis persisted, "hear me.  It takes two to--"

"Begone!  begone!  before we do one another a mischief!"  cried the
Vidame furiously.  "Every word you say in that strain is an injury to
me.  It robs me of my vengeance.  Go!  in God's name!"

And we went; for there was no change, no promise of softening in his
malignant aspect as he spoke; nor any as he stood and watched us draw
off slowly from him.  We went one by one, each lingering after the
other, striving, out of a natural desire to thank him, to break through
that stern reserve.  But grim and unrelenting, a picture of scorn to
the last, he saw us go.

My latest memory of that strange man--still fresh after a lapse of two
and fifty years--is of a huge form towering in the gloom below the
state canopy, the sunlight which poured in through the windows and
flooded us, falling short of him; of a pair of fierce cross eyes, that
seemed to glow as they covered us; of a lip that curled as in the
enjoyment of some cruel jest.  And so I--and I think each of us four
saw the last of Raoul de Mar, Vidame de Bezers, in this life.

He was a man whom we cannot judge by to-day's standard; for he was such
an one in his vices and his virtues as the present day does not know;
one who in his time did immense evil--and if his friends be believed,
little good.  But the evil is forgotten; the good lives.  And if all
that good save one act were buried with him, this one act alone, the
act of a French gentleman, would be told of him--ay!  and will be
told--as long as the kingdom of France, and the gracious memory of the
late king, shall endure.

*      *      *      *      *

I see again by the simple process of shutting my eyes, the little party
of five--for Jean, our servant, had rejoined us--who on that summer day
rode over the hills to Caylus, threading the mazes of the holm-oaks,
and galloping down the rides, and hallooing the hare from her form, but
never pursuing her; arousing the nestling farmhouses from their sleepy
stillness by joyous shout and laugh, and sniffing, as we climbed the
hill-side again, the scent of the ferns that died crushed under our
horses' hoofs--died only that they might add one little pleasure more
to the happiness God had given us.  Rare and sweet indeed are those few
days in life, when it seems that all creation lives only that we may
have pleasure in it, and thank God for it.  It is well that we should
make the most of them, as we surely did of that day.

It was nightfall when we reached the edge of the uplands, and looked
down on Caylus.  The last rays of the sun lingered with us, but the
valley below was dark; so dark that even the rock about which our homes
clustered would have been invisible save for the half-dozen lights that
were beginning to twinkle into being on its summit.  A silence fell
upon us as we slowly wended our way down the well-known path.

All day long we had ridden in great joy; if thoughtless, yet innocent;
if selfish, yet thankful; and always blithely, with a great exultation
and relief at heart, a great rejoicing for our own sakes and for Kit's.

Now with the nightfall and the darkness, now when we were near our
home, and on the eve of giving joy to another, we grew silent.  There
arose other thoughts--thoughts of all that had happened since we had
last ascended that track; and so our minds turned naturally back to him
to whom we owed our happiness--to the giant left behind in his pride
and power and his loneliness. The others could think of him with full
hearts, yet without shame.  But I reddened, reflecting how it would
have been with us if I had had my way; if I had resorted in my
shortsightedness to one last violent, cowardly deed, and killed him, as
I had twice wished to do.

Pavannes would then have been lost almost certainly.  Only the Vidame
with his powerful troop--we never knew whether he had gathered them for
that purpose or merely with an eye to his government--could have saved
him.  And few men however powerful--perhaps Bezers only of all men in
Paris would have dared to snatch him from the mob when once it had
sighted him.  I dwell on this now that my grandchildren may take
warning by it, though never will they see such days as I have seen.

And so we clattered up the steep street of Caylus with a pleasant
melancholy upon us, and passed, not without a more serious thought, the
gloomy, frowning portals, all barred and shuttered, of the House of the
Wolf, and under the very window, sombre and vacant, from which Bezers
had incited the rabble in their attack on Pavannes' courier.  We had
gone by day, and we came back by night.  But we had gone trembling, and
we came back in joy.

We did not need to ring the great bell.  Jean's cry, "Ho!  Gate there!
Open for my lords!"  had scarcely passed his lips before we were
admitted.  And ere we could mount the ramp, one person outran those who
came forth to see what the matter was; one outran Madame Claude, outran
old Gil, outran the hurrying servants, and the welcome of the house.  I
saw a slender figure all in white break away from the little crowd and
dart towards us, disclosing as it reached me a face that seemed still
whiter than its robes, and yet a face that seemed all eyes--eyes that
asked the question the lips could not frame.

I stood aside with a low bow, my hat in my hand; and said simply--it
was the great effect of my life--"VOILA Monsieur!"

And then I saw the sun rise in a woman's face.

*      *      *      *      *

The Vidame de Bezers died as he had lived.  He was still Governor of
Cahors when Henry the Great attacked it on the night of the 17th of
June, 1580.  Taken by surprise and wounded in the first confusion of
the assault, he still defended himself and his charge with desperate
courage, fighting from street to street, and house to house for five
nights and as many days.  While he lived Henry's destiny and the fate
of France trembled in the balance.  But he fell at length, his brain
pierced by the ball of an arquebuse, and died an hour before sunset on
the 22nd of June. The garrison immediately surrendered.

Marie and I were present in this action on the side of the King of
Navarre, and at the request of that prince hastened to pay such honours
to the body of the Vidame as were due to his renown and might serve to
evince our gratitude.  A year later his remains were removed from
Cahors, and laid where they now rest in his own Abbey Church of Bezers,
under a monument which very briefly tells of his stormy life and his
valour.  No matter.  He has small need of a monument whose name lives
in the history of his country, and whose epitaph is written in the
lives of men.

NOTE.--THE CHARACTER AND CONDUCT OF VIDAME DE BEZERS, AS THEY APPEAR IN
THE ABOVE MEMOIR FIND A PARALLEL IN AN ACCOUNT GIVEN BY DE THOU OF ONE
OF THE MOST REMARKABLE INCIDENTS IN THE MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW:
"AMID SUCH EXAMPLES," HE WRITES, "OF THE FEROCITY OF THE CITY, A THING
HAPPENED WORTHY TO BE RELATED, AND WHICH MAY PERHAPS IN SOME DEGREE
WEIGH AGAINST THESE ATROCITIES. THERE WAS A DEADLY HATRED, WHICH UP TO
THIS TIME THE INTERVENTION OF THEIR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBOURS HAD FAILED
TO APPEASE, BETWEEN TWO MEN--VEZINS, THE LIEUTENANT OF HONORATUS OF
SAVOY, MARSHAL VILLARS, A MAN NOTABLE AMONG THE NOBILITY OF THE
PROVINCE FOR HIS VALOUR, BUT OBNOXIOUS TO MANY OWING TO HIS BRUTAL
DISPOSITION (ferina natura), AND REGNIER, A YOUNG MAN OF LIKE RANK AND
VIGOUR, BUT OF MILDER CHARACTER.  WHEN REGNIER THEN, IN THE MIDDLE OF
THAT GREAT UPROAR, DEATH MEETING HIS EYE EVERYWHERE, WAS MAKING UP HIS
MIND TO THE WORST, HIS DOOR WAS SUDDENLY BURST OPEN, AND VEZINS, WITH
TWO OTHER MEN, STOOD BEFORE HIM SWORD IN HAND.  UPON THIS REGNIER,
ASSURED OF DEATH, KNELT DOWN AND ASKED MERCY OF HEAVEN:  BUT VEZINS IN
A HARSH VOICE BID HIM RISE FROM HIS PRAYERS AND MOUNT A PALFREY ALREADY
STANDING READY IN THE STREET FOR HIM.  SO HE LED REGNIER--UNCERTAIN FOR
THE TIME WHITHER HE WAS BEING TAKEN--OUT OF THE CITY, AND PUT HIM ON
HIS HONOUR TO GO WITH HIM WITHOUT TRYING TO ESCAPE.  AND TOGETHER,
WITHOUT PAUSING IN THEIR JOURNEY, THE TWO TRAVELLED ALL THE WAY TO
GUIENNE.  DURING THIS TIME VEZINS HONOURED REGNIER WITH VERY LITTLE
CONVERSATION; BUT SO FAR CARED FOR HIM THAT FOOD WAS PREPARED FOR HIM
AT THE INNS BY HIS SERVANTS:  AND SO THEY CAME TO QUERCY AND THE CASTLE
OF REGNIER.  THERE VEZINS TURNED TO HIM AND SAID, "YOU KNOW HOW I HAVE
FOR A LONG TIME BACK SOUGHT TO AVENGE MYSELF ON YOU, AND HOW EASILY I
MIGHT NOW HAVE DONE IT TO THE FULL, HAD I BEEN WILLING TO USE THIS
OPPORTUNITY.  BUT SHAME WOULD NOT SUFFER IT; AND BESIDES, YOUR COURAGE
SEEMED WORTHY TO BE SET AGAINST MINE ON EVEN TERMS.  TAKE THEREFORE THE
LIFE WHICH YOU OWE TO MY KINDNESS."  WITH MUCH MORE WHICH THE CURIOUS
WILL FIND IN THE 2ND (FOLIO) VOLUME OF DE THOU.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The House of the Wolf, by Stanley Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF ***

***** This file should be named 2041.txt or 2041.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/4/2041/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
